<<<PAGE=1>>>
251
CHAPTER 11
From Research to Policy Action: 
Communicating Research for Public  
Policy Making
E. Remi Aiyede
IntroductIon
The growing concern that scientific research and the academic community 
in general do not meaningfully engage the world of public policy is not 
entirely new. The “two communities” construct is widely used to describe 
the sharp disconnect between the worlds of academia and policy (Newman 
et al. 2015). This construct generally depicts the existence of an underuti-
lization or, in most cases, non-utilization of scientific research in the policy 
making process. Although policy makers recognize that scientific research 
has the potential to largely inform and transform policy outcomes and is 
in fact an essential determinant of effective government decision making, 
wide communication gap continues to exist between both worlds.
There is a growing interest in connecting scientific research, with its 
rigour of methodology and finesse of analysis, to the world that it is 
expected to influence and change. It is indeed crucial to expand research 
E. R. Aiyede (*) 
Department of Political Science, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria
e-mail: aiyede.e@dlc.ui.edu.ng
© The Author(s) 2023
E. R. Aiyede, B. Muganda (eds.), Public Policy and Research in 
Africa, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99724-3_11
<<<PAGE=2>>>
252
findings beyond the boundaries of the academic community to reach pol-
icy makers as they intervene through their daily activities to solve societal 
problems. Furthermore, evidence from policy makers in various parts of 
the world shows that the quality of research does not automatically guar -
antee that it will make its way to the appropriate stakeholders and generate 
positive impact. Promoting the utilization of scientific research and sup -
porting evidence-informed decision making at the political level requires a 
better understanding of the enablers. What are the major challenges that 
militate against collaboration and knowledge transfer from scientific 
research to policy making process? How can policy makers maximize the 
underutilized potentials in scientific research? What tools of communica -
tion are appropriate to make research accessible to various stakeholders?
A MoveMent for PolIcy-engAged reseArch
Across the world the concern about evidence-informed policy making has 
gained traction. A few governments, like those of the United Kingdom 
and the United States, and non-state organizations like the International 
Rescue Committee and the Hewlett Foundation, have placed premium on 
policy-engaged research. They have invested efforts in moving relevant 
findings from research institutions and academic outlets to the policy pro-
cess. Also, the Centre for Global Development and a few foundations have 
promoted the development of research through engagement with stake -
holders and translating the outputs from research into forms that could 
reach a wider audience, especially stakeholders and strategic policy actors. 
Indeed, White (2019) considered the current state of the engagement as 
an evidence revolution. He identified four waves of the evidence revolu -
tion. He traced the first wave to the results agenda of the 1990s that came 
with the New Public Management or managerial movement in public 
administration. The emphasis was on outcome as against the previous 
focus on inputs. This was followed by efforts to develop indicators to mea-
sure performance. In the international development community, it wit -
nessed the adoption of the Millennium Development Goals, later 
succeeded by the Sustainable Development Goals and the widespread use 
of the “Results Framework”. The limitations of the results framework as a 
measure of agency performance were that goals set by agencies were often 
too broad and affected by multiple factors for clear attribution.
The second wave was defined by the rise of the use of randomized con-
trol trials (RCTs) in impact evaluation and the emergence of the 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=3>>>
253
International Initiative for Impact Evaluation. The results from the bur -
geoning RCTs showed that interventions often do not work. They are 
often less than 20% in effect, with exception from some experiences in 
Africa. Wary of the duplication of dubious interventions that studies have 
shown to have no effects, some organizations such as the Department for 
International Development (DFID) and the Bill Melinda Gates Foundation 
demand a statement of evidence from rigorous studies to support new 
proposals. Furthermore, to establish buy-in, preference was given to a 
larger set of literature rather than a small number of studies. This led to 
the emergence and popularity of systematic literature reviews.
Systematic reviews marked the third wave of the evidence revolution. 
Systematic reviews for all their values posed problems of discoverability 
and accessibility by policy makers because they are long technical docu -
ments. There was need to translate lessons and ideas from these reviews 
for use by policy makers. He described the production of systematic 
reviews for use in the policy process as knowledge brokerage and knowl -
edge translation.
He therefore named the fourth wave the brokering wave, defined by 
the emergence of “researchers whose incentive is to produce systematic 
reviews relevant for policy and practice”. These researchers are engaged in 
knowledge brokerage, by providing evidence as responses to the needs of 
government for informed decision making. Apart from doing reviews, 
these researchers connect with government agencies that need evidence to 
discuss priorities, available evidence and interpret them for decision mak -
ing. They represent the part of an emerging evidence architecture that can 
institutionalize the use of evidence in policy making. He then described 
the dimensions of an emerging evidence architecture that will institution-
alize the use of evidence in the policy process. Important parts of this 
architecture included legislation requiring evidence-based policy like the 
United States 2018 Evidence-based Policy Making Act, data bases that 
contain studies and reviews, evidence mapping and maps, evidence plat -
forms for user-friendly products, evidence portals, guidelines and check -
lists. The evolving architecture has benefitted from the what works 
movement. The goals of the evidence movement can be advanced if the 
international development community invest in the evidence architecture 
beyond knowledge brokerage. He emphasized the need to undertake 
Evidence Ecosystem Assessment, Evidence gaps mapping and evidence-  
based budgeting. Finally, new technologies such as machine learning, big 
data and Artificial Intelligence constitute important factors in building the 
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=4>>>
254
evidence architecture, according to White (2019). These technologies can 
facilitate systematic reviews, speed and accuracy of evidence synthesis. 
These mean that more investment on what works is required.
deMAnd And suPPly sIde chAllenges In the use 
of scIentIfIc reseArch In the PolIcy MAkIng Process
Despite the claim of an evidence revolution in the international develop -
ment policy process, it is generally agreed that the use of evidence is not a 
settled matter in many countries. Indeed, the claim of an evolving archi -
tecture shows very clearly that there are major grounds yet to be covered 
even in the developed world. How many countries have legislations that 
require evidence-based policy making? In how many countries of the 
world can we point to an emerging evidence architecture? In Africa, a few 
countries have only begun to buy into establishing national evaluation 
policies and national evaluation systems. These mean that many African 
countries are still grappling with the results frameworks. As is often the 
case, many of the policies relating to monitoring and evaluation have been 
driven by donors and international development agencies such as the 
DFID. Thus, any engagement with research communication and the use 
of evidence in policy making must focus on both the demand and supply 
side. White’s ideas of the evidence architecture provide insight into what 
is emerging and future possibilities.
Studies on challenges of research communication and the use of evi -
dence in policy have focused on three dimensions in bridging the gap 
between the world of research and policy (Wimberley and Morris 2007). 
The first dimension is focused on academics. The second is on practitio -
ners and policy actors. The third is the intermediaries who broker within 
the policy process to promote interaction between the suppliers of research 
outputs and practitioners or actors who utilize research results for decision 
making. Thus, studies on research uptake for policy relate to both research-
ers who supply evidence and practitioners who use evidence in decision 
and policy making within the dynamic contexts of policy making processes 
around the world. Such studies also address various ways interventions can 
be made to smoothen and sustain the connections, to address the chal -
lenges of achieving evidence-informed policy making (Oliver and Cairney 
2019). Some of these challenges are similar across the policy world, while 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=5>>>
255
others are contextual challenges, deriving from the nature of specific pol -
icy contexts (Wowk et al. 2017, Phoenix et al. 2019).
While the academic environment is a marketplace of contending ideas, 
the policy process is a place of contending values and interests. These 
mean that the researcher who wants to take her/his ideas to the policy 
process must recognize that her/his ideas would face scrutiny. Thus, the 
quality of research is considered very important and has consequences for 
the goal of influencing policy. Secondly, it cannot be assumed that policy 
makers are impervious to research ideas (Newman et al. 2015). Scholars 
must consider the various policy networks and communities, and the 
effective ways to engage them. In this regard, there are several prescrip -
tions on offer to academics who want to make an impact on the policy 
process. A lot of the literature on research communication have focused 
on the supply side. Cairney and Oliver ( 2020) provide a survey of such 
prescriptions derived from concerns about breaking barrier and overcom-
ing obstacles to communication between researchers and practitioners and 
advancing collaboration, recognizing that academic research is not tradi -
tionally designed to feed the policy process. These include the following:
• Researchers should produce high-quality research.
• They should evolve an effective means of communicating research 
with the goal of making it easier for policy makers to access research. 
This relates to presentation of the content of research outputs: the 
elimination of academic and disciplinary jargons, use of simple, read-
able and accessible language, aimed for the general and not the igno-
rant or specialist reader, and the use techniques and forms that can fit 
into and catch the attention of policy makers.
• Engagement with the policy process. Researchers are urged to con -
nect with practitioners, be accessible to policy makers, take advan -
tage of windows of opportunity, and use intermediaries or 
knowledge brokers.
• Pay attention to the context and process of policy and the key actors 
in the process.
• Scholars must be entrepreneurial or active in the policy process, seek 
collaboration and build relationships.
• Academics should co-produce knowledge with practitioners; this is 
considered one of the best guarantees of the use of evidence in the 
policy process.
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=6>>>
256
It is however recognized that there are ethical dilemmas and practical 
challenges around these prescriptions faced by individual researchers in 
higher education. Indeed, there are several reasons why concern about 
policy relevance may not to be a priority for these researchers. Time, effort 
and resources are involved in trying to implement these prescriptions. 
Everyone cannot be excited by the possibilities and opportunities to  
make an impact in solving real-world problems. Besides, the probability of 
making such an impact is often remote as noted from the experience with 
the results framework even in developed countries (Cairney and 
Kwiatkowski 2017; Egbetokun et al. 2020).
From the perspectives of policy context, policy theory provides us with 
several ideas about the policy process that requires reflection concerning 
our expectation of promoting the use of evidence (Cairney and Oliver 
2020). Academic institutions do not provide incentives for those inter -
ested in making an impact. In many universities, promotion is not tied to 
relevance and impact of research. Promotion is tied to publishing in pro -
fessional and specialized journals of the various disciplines, through which 
academics communicate with one another, the scientific community. 
However, breaking out of the ivory tower and reaching out to practitio -
ners may even require specific training or reorientation and few universi -
ties invest in such an enterprise. The policy conscious academic would 
have to go the extra mile of finding ways and means of implementing such 
prescriptions without institutional incentive.
Policy makers are usually faced with issues that offer a limited time for 
decision making while scientists take years to publish research findings and 
they examine issues over a long period of time. There may be a misfit of 
priorities between scientists and policy makers. The value of communicat-
ing one’s research findings with policy makers to produce accessible 
reports within a short time is not as valuable as securing funding for new 
research and publishing it in high-status journals with a long-time lag 
(Cairney 2016). Besides, there is a risk of failure to impact regardless of 
the efforts invested by the individual. This is because the payoff to engage-
ment may be affected by choices already made and reinforced over time 
within the policy process.
In developing country contexts, there is a challenge of access to the 
policy process that is already saturated with agenda-laden ideas promoted 
by powerful western institutions backed by resources. In other words, the 
challenge of the academic in a developing context is complicated by an 
unequal access to the policy process. In many African countries, donors 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=7>>>
257
and international institutions have a hold in the policy process that may 
stand in the way of alternative ideas. Such organizations often support 
their policy preferences with funding that make it impossible for policy 
makers to resist. In many instances, international policy initiatives have 
supplanted national policy making (see Mkandawire 1997).
In general, it must be recognized that not all researchers would become 
interested in making a difference in the world regardless of the available 
incentive to do so. Some would be interested in extending the frontiers of 
knowledge with the hope that those interested in impacting would pick up 
their ideas for use in the policy process. Pielke (2007) provides a typology 
of policy orientations among scientists regarding influencing public policy: 
the pure scientist, the issue advocate, the science arbiter and the honest 
broker. These draw on the typology of research, in terms of the nature and 
purpose of research. For instance, a distinction is often made between 
basic and applied research. Basic research is not focused on intervention 
while applied research targets practice.
The research activities of the pure scientist have no consideration for 
use or utility of research outputs for decision makers. The importance 
attached to research is the original contribution to the repository of 
knowledge. It is the responsibility of those who want to use the knowl -
edge to search for it. They can then draw on the knowledge to clarify and 
solve issues of public interests. Thus, the pure scientist remains removed 
from the messiness of policy and politics. This position is particularly 
appealing if it is recognized that evidence is not the only factor to be con-
sidered in public decision making. As noted earlier, in many universities, 
scholars do not have to demonstrate the impact of their work for promo -
tion. Many scholars are quite content with their roles as scientists and feel 
not burden to impact the policy process.
On the other hand, the issue advocate is concerned about a political or 
ideological position and deploys research to advance a cause. The issue 
advocate is a programmatic scholar or scholar activist who aligns with an 
interest group or movement seeking to advance policy and politics. For 
scholars in this orientation, science must be engaged with policy and seek 
to participate in the decision-making process. This orientation relates with 
scholars who question the neutrality of science, the argument that values 
and preferences of the scientist come to play in the choice of issues and 
priorities of research which we find in critical theory, standpoint episte -
mologies and similar schools. For such scholars, scientists should be 
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=8>>>
258
concerned about changing the world and bring scientific knowledge to 
serve the cause of justice and the public interest.
The third orientation is the science arbiter, who seeks to stay away from 
explicit considerations of policy and politics but recognizes that as experts 
or technocrats in society, he or she should provide advice when called 
upon by decision makers. Decision makers are sometimes confronted with 
specific questions that require expert judgement. Although the question 
originates from a debate among decision makers who are faced with prac-
tical issues, they require expert knowledge. Questions that can be resolved 
by science have to be taken to the experts. In this context, the scientist 
plays no role of an advocate, but that of an adjudicator, who may be on an 
assessment panel or advisory committee, providing policy makers objec -
tive scientific results, assessments or findings.
The fourth type, the honest broker, seeks to pursue the expansion of 
policy alternatives that can inform decision making by clarifying choices 
available to decision makers. The aim is to integrate scientific knowledge 
with stakeholder concerns in the form of alternative possible courses of 
action. It is recognized that there may be conflict of values among stake -
holders and uncertainty in science. But a diversity of perspectives can help 
place scientific understandings in the context of a wide range of interests. 
Thus, the scholar concerned about influencing policy must recognize that 
he or she is part of a community of scholars as well recognize the difficul-
ties of interacting with the policy community with its challenges and 
opportunities.
It is critical that scientists bring their research findings to bear on the 
policy process. In many instances, research findings have led to the devel-
opment of policy agenda and the prioritization of certain issues and effec-
tive solutions. It is central to the policy sciences that research is focused on 
issues that are relevant to policy and decision making. Public policy schol-
ars necessarily seek to address policy issues. This is shown in the level of 
engagement with the policy actors within the research process, from the 
conception, execution of research and the implementation of its policy 
recommendations.
Contemporary social science methodology affirms the need for research 
to play a vital role in transforming society by advancing socially relevant 
research findings. Ojebode et al. (2018) in a study conducted among 400 
social science and humanities researchers found that whereas researchers 
held different views about the type of researcher Africa needed the most, 
most of them agreed that Africa did not need pure scientists as much as 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=9>>>
259
other types (honest brokers and issue advocates) based on Pielke’s (2007) 
categorization of researchers.
Public policy scholars conduct research to understand and improve 
public policy, to advance knowledge in a variety of policy issues and to 
conduct public policy research for government, business, think tanks and 
other research organizations. They are expected to actively seek to influ -
ence public policy making. This is because public policy as field of study is 
problem-solving oriented and seeks to provide intervention to address 
concrete human problems. Such scholars seek to provide expert knowl -
edge in the form of evidence to inform policy making. To do this effec -
tively, they must understand where and how public policy practitioners’ 
and policy makers get scientific information.
It is equally important to have a clear idea who the policy makers are 
regarding specific policy issues. Policy makers could include anyone from 
the president or leader of government, the legislators, the senior public 
servants, judges or even ordinary citizens. We include ordinary citizens 
because they sometimes play key roles as implementers, catalysts or benefi-
ciaries of public policy. Hence, knowledge is required for them to be effec-
tive players. For instance, during the covid-19 pandemic the general 
populace was the target of policies to stem the spread of the virus. They 
were expected to sit at home, wear nose masks and regularly wash their 
hands. They need to be informed and convinced about the scientific basis 
of this requirement to achieve voluntary compliance. Without this infor -
mation available to the public, achieving significant compliance would 
have been impossible given the level of resistance experienced all over 
the world.
In general, the news media is a major source of information for policy 
makers. Politicians who are elected to make public policy on behalf of their 
constituencies pay attention to the news. The media sets the agenda by 
reporting what is of interest to the various communities. Politicians pay 
attention to what matters to their constituents. The news media include 
newspapers and magazines, the broadcast platforms of television and 
radio, and social media such as twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube 
and WhatsApp of which they get regular alerts. These media are ubiqui -
tous and are influential sources of information.
In addition to the media, government agencies and departments pro -
duce reports and white papers to guide policy makers. Governments have 
think-tanks, regulatory agencies that monitor developments in such areas 
as environmental protection, drug administration, sanitation, etc. They 
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=10>>>
260
also set up commissions to investigate issues such as the Panel of Inquiry 
frequently used in Nigeria, or the various Committees, (such as the Davis 
Tax Committee in South Africa) and Commissions of inquiry used across 
Africa. These bodies provide reports as source of policy decision making 
for both parliament and the executive arm of government.
Another source of information is the various public hearings organized 
by the legislature or any of its committees. These hearings provide oppor-
tunity for individuals and groups to present written memoranda or speak 
on issues of concern or focus on such hearing events.
These mean that policy researchers must use these opportunities to 
communicate research findings. It is becoming the norm that outputs 
from research are translated into forms that are accessible to policy mak -
ers. These included policy briefs, press releases or opinion pieces, blogs 
and twits. These can be circulated through traditional or social media. The 
assumption is that the barriers to evidence-informed policy from the per -
spective of the policy makers can be classified into three:
 1. Available evidence may not be used if policy makers are not aware of 
their existence and if the research evidence is not in a format that is 
accessible to policy maker. When policy makers do not have access 
to timely, quality and relevant research evidence, they resort to other 
sources of information beyond research. They may not be able to 
comprehend and identify the key messages from research outputs, 
not to talk of using the evidence from research outputs, including 
systematic reviews, if they are detailed and couched in technical lan-
guage for their decision making. Policy makers may be overwhelmed 
by the vast amount of information they need to go through to deal 
with a particular case. Thus, research outputs must be presented in 
easily accessible format to facilitate their use.
 2. Even when research evidence is presented in accessible format and 
policy makers are aware of its existence, they may resist the use of 
evidence if the sub-cultures of policy making grant little importance 
to evidence- informed solutions. Some of them may prioritize their 
own opinion when research findings go against their expectations or 
against current policy. Thus, methods to disseminate evidence must 
be done in a way that policy makers will be open to receive and con-
sider. There is need to recognize that policy makers tend to interpret 
new information based on their past attitudes and beliefs, much like 
the general population. Research evidence may be disregarded if it 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=11>>>
261
goes contrary to the political environment or ideological orientation 
of the prevailing government.
 3. Research needs to be sensitive to different contexts and the com -
petitive environment of policy making. Several factors are implicated 
in the use or non-use of evidence in policy making. These factors 
include political and institutional factors such as the level of state 
centralization and democratization, the influence of external organi-
zations and donors, the organization of bureaucracies and the social 
norms and values. This implies that policy makers make choices 
between different priorities while taking into consideration the lim-
ited resources available. When policy makers engage scientific 
research, they make judgements that balances different opinions, as 
well as claims and counterclaims from interest groups, including sci-
entists. Policy makers do not necessarily hold the same value orien -
tations with scientists on the drive to produce scientific knowledge. 
They do not see scientific knowledge as less biased than other forms 
of knowledge such as community and cultural knowledge 
(Cairney 2016)
The various platforms listed above for the dissemination of research 
evidence are useful to achieve uptake because they enable research findings 
to be more accessible to non-scientific audiences and policy makers. A 
blog writing is easily accessed and digested by a broad audience who can 
understand and perhaps apply the key messages from the research output. 
In addition, a blog creates the opportunity for a more conversational 
interaction with the audience than an academic publication. By using 
techniques such as good keyword identification, it is more likely to rank 
more highly in search engines, increasing the visibility and uptake of blog 
post. Converting the research output into a blog post enables the 
researcher to present academic papers, including the title used, in a way 
that engage with the audience. By converting a research paper to a blog, 
researchers achieve the positive flow-on effect of research outputs, distill -
ing and presenting some of the key messages for a defined audience. They 
can also amplify those messages to create a convincing story.
Policy briefs are an information-packaging documents used to support 
evidence-informed policy making. The name policy brief may also be used 
interchangeably with the technical note, policy note, evidence brief, evi -
dence summary, research snapshot, etc. (Dagenais and Ridde 2018). A 
policy brief is easier to handle by policy makers than systematic reviews 
because they are precise documents, taking into consideration the time 
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=12>>>
262
scales and simplicity required by a non-technical audience. The policy brief 
may be used to clarify and improve the understanding of a problem or a 
situation, to confirm or justify a decision or a choice, which has already 
been made (Arnautu, Diana and Christian Dagenais 2021). The policy 
brief presents the evidence in a manner that is easily identified, interpreted 
and considered to better inform the parties involved in a policy issue.
There are tools for transforming technical writing, that is the output 
from scientific research in easy, straightforward manner. They enable the 
presentation of the main points or key messages of a scientific research. 
These include the inverted pyramid and the message box. The inverted 
pyramid is a story-telling tool usually used in news reporting (Fig.  11.1). 
The inverted pyramid style presents information in a descending order of 
importance with the most crucial details presented first. This enables read-
ers to get the most important information so that they can decide quickly 
whether to continue or stop reading the story (Scalan 2003).
Similarly, the message box helps to explain what the research output is 
about and why it matters to the policy maker or the journalist (Fig. 11.2). 
It can be used to prepare for interviews with the media, frame a policy 
brief or press release, structure a presentation or an opinion piece. The 
The most important information: 
who, what, when, where, why, 
how?
Additional details: 
important and unique 
deytails that the reader can 
do without
Least important 
information: 
more general 
infomatuon, 
background 
information
Fig. 11.1 The inverted pyramid
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=13>>>
263
Problem
Solutions
So what?Benefits Issue
Fig. 11.2 The 
message box
message box can also serve as a tool to clarify the main issues of a research, 
the relevance of the research to the specific audience, and for condensing 
content of the research work into five to six sentences stating the problem, 
potential solutions and how the research relates to the concerns of the 
audience (Baron 2010: 108). The resulting set of concise messages can be 
disseminated using channels appropriate for the end user, ranging from 
social media, to newspapers, to policy briefings and events.
These tools enable research outputs to be presented in a concise, easy 
to examine, understandable, user-friendly forms. They enable research 
outputs to be tailored and targeted to specific audiences with simple and 
clear messages focused on required information and recommendations. 
Usually, such presentations contain a link to the original journal article 
or source.
Research dissemination in contemporary times can be carried out in 
different ways, from long reports to policy briefs, message boxes, blog 
posts, social media posts, presentations and many more. Other means of 
disseminating research may take the form of engagement events by stake-
holders to review the content and process of research. These include 
events in the form of round tables, town hall meetings, workshops, etc., 
involving exchanges and interactions among scholars, advocates and pol -
icy makers. They also include media interviews, writing blog features and 
data visualization, and social media content creation. However, determin-
ing the appropriate tool of communicating research is dependent on who 
the policy makers are and the kind of research being conducted. 
Communicating research work can adopt a multi-layered approach.
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=14>>>
264
There is no scarcity of ideas how to engage the policy process. Several 
scholars have drawn ideas from their experiences in engagement with the 
policy process, others draw on the experiences of brokers or tease out ideas 
from policy theory and psychology. Engagements relates directly to the 
methodology of research. If research is directed at meeting broad policy 
objectives, then engagement with policy makers should be incorporated 
right from the inception of the research. Engagement facilitates the effec-
tive definition of questions to address the concerns of policy makers. When 
policy makers are engaged in the formulation of research questions, the 
research becomes more policy relevant. Evidence-based research is only 
relevant to policy making if it addresses the key policies at hand, is appli -
cable to a local context and is constructed to meet policy needs. To 
enhance the possibility of a policy-engaged research, scientists must be 
open and willing to engage policy makers in the research process.
conclusIon
For social science research to be relevant for policy making, researchers 
and policy makers must understand their relevance and roles in the knowl-
edge production process. Both parties need a shared understanding of the 
significance of these roles in policy making and implementation. Africa’s 
urgent problems require the expertise of policy-engaged researchers who 
would engage policy actors and politics. Engagement and effective com -
munication of research would benefit society.
Efforts must be made by research communities to create engagement 
platforms between scientists and researchers. These platforms will ensure 
that policy makers are carried along at each step of the research process, 
thereby moving away from the common methods of engagement that 
reduces policy makers and other non-scientists to mere subjects of scien -
tific research. A close interaction with policy makers on choice of method, 
design of instruments and major aspects of the research work stimulates an 
atmosphere of co-knowledge production between both worlds.
Although research communication involves distilling the key findings 
of high-quality research and presenting them in a format that non- scientists 
and policy makers can understand, interpret and use for decision making, 
the relevance of research will not be improved by mere speculations of 
policy needs and improvement in tools of communication. Effective com-
munication involves developing relationships with stakeholders in the 
research process. The existence of good-quality research is not sufficient 
 E. R. AIYEDE
<<<PAGE=15>>>
265
for evidence-informed policy making, a difficult task that requires inter -
ventions from both the demand and supply sides of policy-relevant 
research. Knowledge brokerage should be encouraged to facilitate the use 
of evidence in the policy processes of African governments by regional 
bodies like the African Union that has demonstrated capacity to promote 
policy diffusion across the continent.
references
Arnautu, Diana, and Christian Dagenais. 2021. Use and Effectiveness of Policy 
Briefs as a Knowledge Transfer Tool: A Scoping Review. Humanities and Social 
Sciences Communications  8: 211. (2021). https://doi.org/10.1057/
s41599- 021- 00885- 9.
Baron, Nancy. 2010. Escape from the Ivory Tower: A Guide to Making Your Science 
Matter. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Cairney, P. 2016. The Politics of Evidence-Based Policy Making . London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Cairney, Paul, and Richard Kwiatkowski. 2017. How to Communicate Effectively 
with Policymakers: Combine insights from Psychology and Policy Studies. 
Palgrave Communication 3 (7): 1–7.
Cairney, Paul, and Kathryn Oliver. 2020. How Should Academics Engage in 
Policymaking to Achieve Impact. Political Studies Review 18 (2): 228–244.
Dagenais, C., and V. Ridde. 2018. Policy Brief (PB) as a Knowledge Transfer Tool: 
To “make a splash”, Your PB Must First Be Read. Gaceta Sanitaria  32 
(3): 203–205.
Egbetokun, A., A. Olofinyehun, Aderonke R. Ayo-Lawal, and M. Sanni. 2020. 
Doing Research in Nigeria Country Report Assessing Science Research System in 
a Global Perspective . National Centre for Technology Management and the 
Global Development Network.
Mkandawire, T. 1997. The Social Sciences in Africa: Breaking Local Barriers and 
Negotiating International Presence. African Studies Review 40 (2): 15–36.
Newman, Joshua, Andrian Cherney, and Brian W. Head. 2015. Do Policy Makers 
Use Academic Research Reexamining the Two Communities Theory of 
Research Utilisation. Public Administration Review 76 (1): 24–32.
Ojebode, Ayobami, Babatunde Raphael Ojebuyi, Oyewole Adekunle Oladapo, 
and Obasanjo Joseph Oyedele. 2018. Mono-Method Research Approach and 
Scholar–Policy Disengagement in Nigerian Communication Research, in 
369–383. In The Palgrave Handbook of Media and Communication Research in 
Africa, ed. Bruce Mutsvairo. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
11 FROM RESEARCH TO POLICY ACTION: COMMUNICATING RESEARCH…
<<<PAGE=16>>>
266
Oliver, K., and P. Cairney. 2019. The Dos and Don’ts of Influencing Policy: A 
Systematic Review of Advice to Academics. Palgrave Communications  5 
(21): 1–11.
Phoenix, Jessica H., Lucy G. Atkinson, and Hannah Baker. 2019. Creating and 
Communicating Social Research for Policymakers in Government. Palgrave 
Communication 5 (98): 1–11.
Pielke, Jr., R.A. 2007. The Honest Broker: Making Sense of Science in Policy and 
Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scalan, C. 2003. Birth of the Inverted Pyramid: A Child of Technology, Commerce 
and History, Poynter. https://www.poynter.org/reporting- editing/2003/
birth- of- the- inverted- pyramid- a- child- of- technology- commerce- and- history/.
White, Howard. 2019. The Twenty-First Century Experimenting Society: The 
Four Waves of the Evidence Revolution. Palgrave Communication 5 (4): 1–7.
Wimberley, Ronald C., and Libby V. Morris. 2007. Communicating Research to 
Policymakers. American Sociologist 38: 288–293.
Wowk, Katerya, Larry Mckinney, Frank Muller-Karger, Russell Moll, Susan Avery, 
Elva Escobar-Briones, David Yoskowitz, and Richard McLaughliun. 2017. 
Evolving Academic Culture to Meet Societal Needs. Palgrave Communication 
3 (35): 1–7.
Open Access   This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction 
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence and 
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to 
the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the 
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy -
right holder.
 E. R. AIYEDE