<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273175949
Exploring Organizational Alignment-Employee Engagement Linkages and
Impact on Individual Performance: A Conceptual Model
Article  in   Human Resource Development Review · February 2015
DOI: 10.1177/1534484314549455
CITATIONS
138
READS
12,858
2 authors:
Meera Alagaraja
University of Louisville
60 PUBLICATIONS   1,189 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Brad Shuck
University of Louisville
93 PUBLICATIONS   5,523 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Meera Alagaraja on 02 October 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Human Resource Development Review
2015, Vol. 14(1) 17  –37
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/1534484314549455
hrd.sagepub.com
Theory and Conceptual Articles
Exploring Organizational 
Alignment-Employee 
Engagement Linkages 
and Impact on Individual 
Performance: A Conceptual 
Model
Meera Alagaraja 1 and Brad Shuck 1
Abstract
We explore existing perspectives of organizational alignment and employee 
engagement from the literature to better understand the alignment-engagement 
linkages to individual performance. This is an underexplored area of inquiry in 
human resource development (HRD). Our analysis of the alignment and engagement 
literatures resulted in the development of an exploratory conceptual model. The 
conceptual model elaborates on the organizational alignment–employee engagement 
linkages and their impact on individual performance. These interconnections 
emphasize the importance of developing internally consistent HRD interventions 
or programs that align individual skills and knowledge with job characteristics and 
organizational systems and routines. Furthermore, the model highlights the dynamic 
nature of the alignment-engagement linkages both as a source and context which 
facilitates individual performance, and influences the extent to which employees 
exhibit essential as well as discretionary behaviors. We elaborate on the implications 
for HRD theory, research, and practice.
Keywords
organizational alignment, employee engagement, individual performance
1University of Louisville, KY, USA
Corresponding Author:
Meera Alagaraja, Organizational Leadership and Learning Program, Department of Leadership, 
Foundations & Human Resource Education, University of Louisville, 347, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. 
Email: meera.alagaraja@louisville.edu
549455 HRD XX X 10.1177/1534484314549455Human Resource Development Review Alagaraja and Shuck
research-article 2015
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=3>>>
18  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
Or ganizational alignment offers a multidimensional view of the intricate complexities 
of internal networks, processes, and connections to the external environment. For 
example, alignment identifies opportunities for creating synergy between different 
functions, processes, products, and customer groups (Powell, 1992). Alignment also 
highlights the importance of recognizing the existing fit between goals and objectives 
with individuals, work teams, departments, and the whole organization. Scholars 
describe alignment as fit (Porter, 1981), integration (Weill & Broadbent, 1998), bridge 
(Ciborra, 1997), fusion (Smaczny, 2001), and linkage (Henderson & Venkatraman, 
1989). Weiser (2000) proposed alignment as “heading in the same direction” (p. 90). 
These perspectives emphasize linkages within the organization, and describe how dif -
ferent departments and individual employees work toward the achievement of shared 
organizational goals. The employee–department fit or employee–organization fit 
offers an opportunity for examining the alignment of individual roles and responsibili -
ties, embedded workplace structures, and current work practices to the broader goals 
and purposes of the organization. We adopt this perspective to explore organizational 
alignment and its potential linkages to employee engagement.
Employee engagement has been defined in the Human Resource Development 
(HRD) literature as the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral energy an employee directs 
toward positive organizational outcomes (Shuck & Wollard, 2010). Operationalized as 
a positive, psychological state of motivation (Parker & Griffin, 2011), engagement is 
believed to operate within the three interconnected psychological facets inherent with 
the Shuck and Wollard (2010) definition (cognitive energies, emotional energies, and 
behavioral energies) and supported by the broader field of management (see, for exam -
ple, Rich, LePine, & Crawford, 2010). Most distal to an understanding of engagement 
is the experience of the individual employee, thus positioning engagement as an indi -
vidual-level variable that influences and is also influenced by external and broader 
forces such as organizational alignment. Although there is a general acceptance in HRD 
on the importance of organizational alignment and employee engagement as separate 
areas of inquiry, the literature is quite vague about how the two conceptual areas are 
linked. Moreover, almost no literature, either within HRD or outside the field, has 
examined these two variables in any combination or explorative way. We identify this 
as a critical gap in the existing literature and argue for further exploration of the organi -
zational alignment and employee engagement linkages. Notwithstanding, we hoped to 
better understand the interplay between organizational alignment and employee engage -
ment as interdependent systems of an organization state.
Statement of Purpose
The purpose of our work was to explore existing perspectives of organizational align -
ment and employee engagement to better understand what factors might be associated 
with enhancing individual performance. To do this, we integrated two bodies of litera -
ture to better understand the performance consequences of organizational alignment 
on employee engagement. Linking alignment and employee engagement offered a 
better understanding of the potential value of HRD in enhancing employee 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  19
performance through training and development, organization development, and 
change efforts. Furthermore, the specific influence of alignment and linkage to perfor -
mance at the individual level is a relatively new area of exploration in HRD.
Within both fields of HRD and management, there is a continuing body of emerg -
ing research on employee engagement. For example, several scholars have suggested 
engagement as a positive psychological state, rather than as trait (e.g., Macey & 
Schneider, 2008; Parker & Griffin, 2011) or as a specific behavioral outcome (e.g., 
Parker & Griffin, 2011; Shuck & Reio, 2013). Engagement has been further positioned 
as an active psychological state that emerges within those conditions that promote the 
nurturing of the experience itself (e.g., the engagement of condition; Shuck & Rose, 
2013; Zigarmi, Nimon, & Shuck, 2013). This parallels other research in HRD that has 
explored the topic in depth (e.g., Chalofsky & Krishna, 2009; Rurkkhum & Bartlett, 
2012; Song, Kolb, Lee, & Kim, 2012).
In support of this framework, several streams of work have surfaced within HRD 
on engagement that press the boundaries of the field. Of particular note is the special 
issue of Advances in Developing Human Resources  on meaning and purpose 
(Chalofsky & Cavallaro, 2013). Within this issue, several authors explored the refram -
ing of meaning and purpose as a lens for HRD. Following suit, Shuck and Rose (2013) 
explored the reframing of meaning and purpose within the construct of engagement as 
means to examine the boundaries, missions, and purposes of the emerging HRD field. 
Moreover, Shuck, Ghosh, Zigarmi, and Nimon (2013) have explored the nomological 
network of engagement, suggesting theoretical distinction between engagement and 
the work attitudes (i.e., job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and job involve -
ment)—weighing in on the debate of engagement as old wine in a new bottle.  More 
recently, several articles appeared in the flagship empirical journal for the HRD field, 
Human Resource Development Quarterly , exploring the specific challenges (Saks & 
Gruman, 2014) and opportunities (Sarti, 2014; Shuck, Twyford, Reio, & Shuck, 2014) 
in the application of engagement to the practice of HRD.
Within a limited sampling of research, it seems clear that scholarly activity on 
employee engagement in HRD is on the rise. Moreover, and broadly speaking, one 
theme within the existing literature is that engagement seems good for both organiza -
tions and individuals because it generally promotes positive performance and the 
broadening of employee resources such as creativity and innovation (Shuck & Reio, 
2013; Song et  al., 2012). Noticeably missing, however, is any research in HRD, con -
ceptual or empirical, focused on the relation between organizational alignment and 
employee engagement.
Within the alignment literature, several broad themes focus on the alignment of func -
tional strategies with the organization such as information technology (IT), manufactur -
ing, and marketing strategies (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967; Powell, 1992). The 
strategy–alignment fit is an important aspect of the organization; however, few studies 
examine the overarching similarities and differences that support and or hinder alignment 
and the resulting effect on individual performance. More importantly, the alignment lit -
erature has received scant attention from scholars in the management sciences with the 
exception of few scholars (e.g., Bergeron, Raymond, & Rivard, 2004; Campbell, Kay, & 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=5>>>
20  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
Avison, 2005; Kathuria, Joshi, & Porth, 2007) in the last 10 years! Thus, even though 
broad themes in the alignment literature advocate different perspectives on fit, the collec -
tive insights regarding alignment suggest there is much work to be done if we are to 
develop cumulative knowledge of how alignment can be linked to performance at the 
individual level. To manage the scope of the research inquiry, we sharpened our focus on 
the linkages of alignment and individual performance as it overlapped with employee 
engagement. This linkage offered an important and useful way of renewing scholarly 
interest in organizational alignment and updating the extant alignment literature with the 
relatively fresh and new findings emerging from the engagement literature.
Notwithstanding, organizational alignment has received limited interest in the 
HRD literature with the exception of a few seminal studies (e.g., Alagaraja, 2013b; 
Anderson, 2009; Sender, 1997). Consequently, there is extant value in exploring the 
topic for HRD. HRD focuses on individual knowledge, skills, and abilities as they 
relate to training and development, career development, and organization develop -
ment (Swanson, 2009). Linking the two conceptual areas of organizational alignment 
and employee engagement will add value to HRD and enhance our current under -
standing of the critical organizational and individual factors that affect employee per -
formance. As such, through the relatively new and emerging lens of engagement, we 
argue for increased focus on organizational alignment to better highlight the potential 
enablers and or barriers to performance that employees can face in organizations based 
on the extent of alignment of (a) their skills, knowledge, and attributes with (b) job 
characteristics, criteria, and responsibilities, as well as (c) organizational systems, rou -
tines, and procedure. Thus, the alignment–engagement linkages offer implications for 
HRD professionals and organizational decision makers in terms of developing policies 
and practices that can maximize individual contributions in the workplace as well as 
optimize performance at the level of the organization (Alagaraja, 2014).
Research Questions
Three main research questions ultimately guided our work:
Research Question 1:  How is alignment understood and defined in the literature? 
In what ways does alignment enhance individual performance?
Research Question 2:  In what ways does employee engagement affect individual 
performance?
Research Question 3:  How do organizational alignment and employee engage -
ment support employee performance?
From these questions, we integrate existing perspectives of organizational alignment 
and employee engagement from the literature and develop a conceptual framework 
linking alignment, individual performance, and employee engagement. This article first 
reviews the alignment literature, identifying different perspectives of alignment that 
address individual performance and are therefore, of particular relevance to HRD. We 
then shift focus to the employee engagement literature and elaborate on the conceptual 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  21
and empirical linkages with individual performance. Finally , we explore the employee 
engagement–organizational alignment linkages and their consequent impact on indi -
vidual performance. In what follows, we review organizational alignment literature and 
explore potential linkages to employee performance
Organizational Alignment
The notion of alignment as a valuable skill and scarce resource positions alignment as 
a dynamic capability for the organization (Powell, 1992). Alignment brings attention 
to both internal and external attributes of the organization (Burn, 1996) with clear 
performance consequences (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967; Powell, 1992). This linkage to 
performance is important as it suggests alignment as a deliberate approach toward 
enhancing organizational outcomes. Powell’s (1992) conceptualization of alignment 
suggests that the “extent of alignment results from skill rather than luck” (p. 119). This 
perspective is especially useful for organizational leaders as it posits an institutional 
orientation of alignment. Furthermore, this perspective positions alignment as a 
resource that has a “higher order of integrative capacity” (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967, 
p. 245), which characterizes high-performing organizations.
Defining Organizational Alignment
We draw from several definitions to identify the conceptual development of organiza -
tional alignment as an important area of inquiry. Alignment is defined as a process by 
which key organizational components—strategy, culture, processes, people, leader -
ship, and systems are linked to best accomplish the needs of the organization (Tosti & 
Jackson, 2000). Alignment also emerges from the many interactions between the 
external environment, internal organizational processes, and structure where “count -
less strategic decisions cumulatively reflect the organization’s behavior, and perfor -
mance at any given time” (Miles, Snow, Meyer, & Coleman, 1978; Mintzberg, 1978). 
According to Kathuria et  al. (2007, p. 504), alignment “requires a shared understand -
ing of organizational goals” and objectives by managers at various levels and within 
various units of the organizational hierarchy. Other scholars have described alignment 
as an adaptive dynamic capability, an integrative capacity that is a “source of sustain -
able competitive advantage” (Powell, 1992, p. 121) to help organizations achieve their 
strategic potential. We define alignment as an adaptive, dynamic resource capability 
achieved by developing a shared understanding of interdependent systems, practices, 
and routines of the organization. Organizations that take time to align their business 
processes (e.g., through optimization and continuous improvement) are more likely to 
achieve organizational goals (Gulledge & Sommer, 2002).
Organizational Alignment and Individual Performance
Several studies utilize alignment as an enabling factor for organizational performance. 
For example, Avison, Jones, Powell, and Wilson (2004) validated a strategic alignment 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=7>>>
22  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
model examining the integration of information technology (IT) strategy to business 
performance. Bergeron et  al. (2004) described ideal patterns of strategic alignment and 
business performance. Burn and Szeto (1999) compared critical success factors for 
alignment. Campbell, Kay, and Avison (2005) used causal model building to analyze 
IT and business alignment. Through performance measurement systems, firms lever -
age alignment of strategy and organizational learning to achieve competitive advan -
tage. The organizational alignment literature appears to largely focus on 
organizational-level performance. Whereas much of the past research on alignment 
has shown the impact on organizational performance (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967; 
Miles et  al., 1978; Powell, 1992), here we examine whether individual performance is 
at all influenced by organizational alignment. Specifically, we ask whether alignment 
affects employees’ perceptions and levels of engagement on tasks and work-related 
routines. This is an underexplored topic.
The organizational alignment literature recognizes different forms of alignment, 
which can more or less affect individual performance. For example, coordinating 
improvement efforts across the organization, or gaining agreement on key policies and 
practices within each function (Kathuria et  al., 2007, p. 505) can facilitate employee 
performance although the exact nature of this relationship is ill defined. For example, 
Gratton and Truss (2003) proposed linking Human Resource Management (HRM) 
strategy to business strategy as a way toward developing HR policies that “consis -
tently relate to one another” (p. 75). HRM practices act as “alignment mechanisms” 
that translate the strategic purpose and direction of the organization into administrative 
practices and operational decision making (Venkatraman, Henderson, & Oldach, 
1993). Although there is general agreement that well-aligned HR policies can motivate 
employees across the organization (Gratton & Truss, 2003), it is not easy to determine 
their exact linkage to employee performance.
We turn to employees’ roles and job responsibilities and examine how the extent of 
their integration with departmental processes can imply greater alignment with orga -
nizational goals and business performance (Powell, 1992). On the one hand, alignment 
of job specifications, procedures, and criteria with individual skills and knowledge can 
enhance employee performance (Hale, 2007). Removal of barriers between depart -
ments can also facilitate cooperation as well as improve employee performance 
(Alagaraja & Egan, 2013). It is imperative that organizational systems, procedures, 
and routines are tightly aligned and linked with job specifications, responsibilities and 
criteria so as to support the optimization of employee performance (Rummler & 
Brache, 1995; Swanson, 1995). From a HRD perspective, we identify the importance 
of aligning organizational and job characteristics with individual employee behaviors 
and performance. From our standpoint, alignment of organizational-level systems 
(e.g., organizational design), procedures (e.g., reward structures), and routines (e.g., 
existing cultural norms) influence the design of jobs, role specifications, and perfor -
mance criteria of individual employees (Alagaraja, 2013c). This is the extent to which 
alignment offers a contextual explanation of the different factors that impact employ -
ees’ performance or behaviors in an organization. In fact, the organizational alignment 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  23
literature fails to develop explicit linkages of the or ganization and job-level factors 
with individual operating behaviors (or performance).
Attention to employee engagement can generate a better understanding of how and 
when alignment can positively or adversely affect employee behaviors and emotions 
which can facilitate increased capacity for individual performance. We also contend 
that when employees and managers are engaged and thus, resultantly are deeply com -
mitted toward achieving business goals, organizations are more likely to enhance 
overall performance. Before describing the theoretical and empirical developments of 
employee engagement, it is important to define how we operationalize employee per -
formance in our context. Within our exploration, we defined employee performance as 
individual operating behaviors that lead to the achievement of organizational goals. In 
what follows, we elaborate on the conceptual development of employee engagement 
in both theory and research.
Employee Engagement
Several frameworks exist for examining the construct of employee engagement 
(Shuck, 2011). Of popular interest, Rich et  al. (2010) proposed a three-dimensional 
model of engagement— cognitive–emotional–behavioral —that captured relevant, 
context sensitive cues regarding an employee’s interpretation of their organizational 
climate. Most recently, Shuck et  al. (2014) expanded on this three-dimensional 
framework from an HRD context and paralleled the definitional offering of Shuck 
and Wollard (2010). As such, we drew from Shuck et  al. (2014) to better align defi -
nitional and conceptual support for our exploration as well as to establish parallel 
agreement across fields of study—a common issue when exploring the experience of 
employee engagement. In the following, each psychological facet of the model is 
discussed in brief.
Cognitive Engagement
Shuck et  al. (2014) suggested that cognitive engagement, the most rational level of 
engagement, likely jump starts the unfolding phenomenon and early psychological 
state of engagement. This dimension is believed to develop from an employee’s unique 
perspectives of their work and the context in which their work is occurring (i.e., align -
ment, appraisal). Grounded conceptually in Kahn’s (1990) seminal work on personal 
engagement, cognitive engagement is shaped by and interpreted through, the lens of 
work that is meaningful, safe (physically, emotionally, and psychologically), and 
available (access to and command of resources; Kahn, 1990; Rich et  al., 2010). This 
process, a kind of cognitive–affective appraisal (Shuck & Reio, 2013), places a value 
on a given situation that is grounded in the unique interpretations of that time and 
place. Cognitively engaged employees share a coupled purpose with their organiza -
tion, they understand that purpose, and they are willing to consider making a personal 
investment of the resources they have influence over.
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=9>>>
24  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
Emotional Engagement
Emotional engagement concerns the point of investment and willingness of an 
employee to involve those personal resources. The emotional investment of engage -
ment rises from the emotive bond generated when employees, on a very personal 
level, have made the decision to cognitively engage, share a common purpose with 
their organization, and are willing to give of themselves. Simply stated, when employ -
ees share, identify, and take on a common purpose with the organization’s vision and 
mission, they give of their knowledge, skills, and abilities. Employees at this level 
often identify emotionally with a particular task, goal, or project at the moment of 
engagement (e.g., pride, belief, and excitement). This offering of resources can involve 
tangible and intangible items but almost always is driven by a sense of urgency, focus, 
and intensity. For example, an employee willing to invest discretionary knowledge 
toward a task is often “engaged” with a sense of determined focus and intense concen -
tration. This employee identifies with, and has made the personal decision to invest in 
productive, organizationally aligned behavior (Mathieu & Zajac, 1990); yet, this 
behavior is not yet overtly or behaviorally manifested. Using this framework, the 
appraisal (i.e., a cognition of feeling) spurs emotional investment; consequenly, emo -
tional investment spurs intention (i.e., a pledge to act) toward behavior.
Behavioral Engagement
Behavioral engagement is the overt natural reaction to a positive cognitive appraisal 
(i.e., cognitive engagement) and a willingness to invest personal resources; behavioral 
engagement is the ultimate practice of organizational alignment in the form of an 
intention to act. Understood as the individual manifestation of cognitive and emotional 
engagement, behavioral engagement is often confused as the only form of engage -
ment, because it is the only form that has an outcome which can be externally wit -
nessed (i.e., performance). Powerful cognitive and emotive forces, however, precede 
behavioral engagement (e.g., the intention to act favorably in alignment with the orga -
nization and direct intensity and the directionality of intentionality).
Employee Engagement and Individual Performance
Employee engagement research has been focused almost exclusively toward measur -
ing performance on specific, discrete job-related responsibilities within the domain of 
individual performance. As such, there are voluminous studies that link engagement to 
performance. For example, one of the most cited research studies on engagement by 
Harter, Schmidt, and Hayes (2002) provided evidence that employee engagement had 
a positive relation to customer satisfaction ( r = .33), turnover ( r = −.36), safety ( r = 
−.32), productivity ( r = .20), and profitability ( r = .17). Rich et  al. (2010) went further, 
providing estimates of the relations between engagement and two important outcomes, 
task performance and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB). Results suggested 
that engagement (defined by Rich et  al. as job engagement ) shared a statistically 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  25
significant relation with both kinds of outcomes (β = .25, p < .05 and β = 27, p < .05, 
respectively). In support, recent meta-analytic work by Christian, Garza, and Slaughter 
(2011) echoed Rich et  al. (2010) suggesting that engagement shared a statistically 
significant relation to task performance ( M ρ = .43, N  = 4,770) and contextual perfor -
mance ( M ρ = .34, N  = 3,382). Grounded within this work, it seems plausible that 
employers should reasonably expect engaged employees to perform better than those 
employees who are not engaged.
More entangled in the jingle jangle of engagement, researchers have provided evi -
dence of the relation between engagement and more static, mature measures of indi -
vidual performance (Shuck et  al., 2013). For example, empirical evidence has 
suggested statistically significant relations between job involvement and engagement 
(r = .35, Hallberg & Schaufeli, 2006; r = .30, Kühnel, Sonnentag, & Westman, 2009; 
r = .47, Rich et  al., 2010), organizational commitment and engagement ( r = .46, 
Hallberg & Schaufeli, 2006; r = .73, Albrecht, 2012; M ρ = .59, N  = 91, Christian et  al., 
201 1), and job satisfaction and engagement ( M ρ = .53, N  = 91, Christian et  al., 2011;  
r = .52, r = .57, Saks, 2006). Thus, in addition to examining relations between the 
performance outcomes of engagement, we can also expect that engaged employees 
would also be more likely report higher levels of satisfaction, more organizational 
commitment, and identify more closely with their work roles. By suggesting this rela -
tion however, we are by no means suggesting redundancy in measurement but rather 
demonstrating the space in which engagement develops and thrives (for further details 
on this nomological network, see Shuck et  al., 2013 and Zigarmi et  al., 2013) within 
the conditions of alignment at the organizational level and within expected areas of 
job-related outcomes.
Focusing more toward leveraging the rich knowledge in our own field, Song et  al. 
(2012) were the first to examine implicit knowledge creation as a facet of engagement 
within HRD. Findings from their work suggested that employees’ work engagement 
was a statistically significant, partially mediating construct explaining the structural 
paths between transformational leadership and organizational knowledge creation  
(∆ R2 = 0.30; comparison of path decomposition: ∆Statistical Process Control = 0.30 
and chi-square differences between their two models: ∆χ 2 = 7.9). Moreover, Shuck, 
Reio, and Rocco (2011) provided evidence that affective commitment and two of 
Kahn’s dimensions of engagement (i.e., meaningfulness and availability), as measured 
by the May, Gilson, and Harter (2004) scale, were found to be predictors of intention to 
turnover (β = −.21, p < .001, β = −.19, p < .05). As a follow-up from this work, Shuck 
and Herd (2012) proposed a conceptual model of leadership and engagement that 
explored the theoretical relations between needs, motivation, and employee engage -
ment. In a more HRD-centric context, Rurkkhum and Bartlett (2012) empirically exam -
ined the relation between OCB, perception of HRD practices, and employee engagement. 
Results revealed statistically significant relations between engagement and civic virtue 
(∆ R2 = .31, β = .28, p < .001), altruism (∆ R2 = .25, β = .27), conscientiousness (∆ R2 = 
.13, β = .37), sportsmanship (∆ R2 = .15, β = .21), and courtesy (∆ R2 = .04, β = .09).
The HRD field continues to develop a robust literature base around the connection 
between employee engagement and individual performance. What continues to plague 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=11>>>
26  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
the field in terms of engagement, however , is the identification of specific points of 
leverage that nurture the conditions under which the psychological and affective phe -
nomenon of engagement actually emerge. Most organizations desire higher levels of 
engagement; few, however, have any strategy for developing such an outcome. 
Schaufeli (2012) lamented that understanding those conditions that nurture a culture 
of engagement could be a significant starting point—and presently, is woefully an 
underdeveloped area of study. Interestingly, those conditions that indicate such a cul -
ture of engagement, overlap with our operationalization of organizational alignment as 
antecedent-like settings that nurture higher levels of individual performance.
Exploring Organizational Alignment and Employee 
Engagement Linkages
The employee engagement literature stream has emphasized the cognitive, behavioral, 
and emotional schema of employees as a mechanism for interpreting the organization 
structure, culture, and environment. Thus, engagement can distinctly influence 
employee performance behaviors that ultimately affect organizational success (e.g., 
market share, sales or revenue per employee, customer satisfaction) as a salient out -
come indicator for how alignment is appraised, experienced, and ultimately acted on 
within the organization.
In the context of alignment, engagement occurs when there is psychological agree -
ment between individual and organizational goals (Macey, Schneider, Barbera, & 
Young, 2009; i.e., “heading in the same direction,” p. 90). This sense of engagement 
coupled within organizational alignment develops from the fostering of a positive 
organizational culture and from continuously monitoring each component of the orga -
nization’s strategy that includes both the strategy being executed and the strategy 
being experienced. For example, employees’ might look for indications that a process 
is collaborative and cooperative or, indications of command and control. Both denote 
expected outcomes (i.e., keep your head down, do your work, and don’t speak up—it’s 
not safe to do so). Culture in this sense is the lens an employee uses to make judgments 
about the meaningfulness and safety of the workplace (Shuck et  al. 2011). Engagement 
occurs only when an organization’s processes and practices are aligned with their 
espoused goals in a meaningful and safe environment; it seems unlikely to expect any 
other outcome.
In full display, behaviorally engaged employees align their efforts toward identified 
organizational objectives that move the organization in a positive direction. The previ -
ous processes of internalizing organizational propose and goals provide dividends in 
the form of positive organizational outcomes. For example, researchers (Christian 
et  al., 2011; Macey et  al., 2009; Shuck et  al., 2011) have suggested that behaviorally 
engaged employees often work harder, turnover less, are involved in fewer accidents 
on the job, and experience higher levels of overall well-being.
We contend that the three dimensions of employee engagement offer a directly 
relevant conceptualization of alignment at the individual level. We suggest that the 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  27
alignment provides meaning, a sense of purpose and understanding of the or ganization 
such that the employee is able to interpret, search for, make meaning, and identify with 
the organization’s current and future course of actions. Thus, cognitively engaged 
employees understand and share a common purpose with their organization, and are 
therefore willing to make a personal investment. Emotionally engaged employees fur -
ther identify their personal values and norms with those of the organization and are 
invested in productive, organizationally aligned behavior. Finally, behaviorally 
engaged employees align their efforts through incentive and reward structures to 
achieve the organization’s vision and mission.
Alignment of different internal components in the organization is more likely to 
impact the extent to which an individual employee performs effectively at work. For 
example, performance can be motivated by the alignment of strategy-structure; orga -
nizational size and strategic planning, and strategy-culture (Mintzberg, 1978). 
Combined together, these internal components can be described as the organizational 
processes, procedures, and routines that impact and affect how an individual employee 
perceives and reacts to work and the organization in specific ways. Thus, effective 
optimization of business processes, internal alignment of organizational structure, 
strategy, and culture and connection to the external market may influence an employ -
ee’s cognitive and psychological appraisal and interpretation of the work environment. 
A positive appraisal and interpretation is likely to produce performance behaviors that 
support the organization. Conversely, a negative framing of the work environment is 
likely to result in poor or ineffective performance. We propose this as an important 
linkage emerging from the exploration of the alignment-engagement literatures and 
the recognition of its effect on employee performance. We identify employee engage -
ment as a linking pin that explicates how alignment can support and/or hinder the 
consequent effect on individual performance.
Conceptual Model Linking Alignment, Engagement, and 
Performance
Figure 1 identifies how we envisioned the prototypical-overlapping pathway for link -
ing organizational alignment, engagement, and individual performance. In the figure, 
we emphasize the outcomes associated with alignment as well as the intersection of 
the three dimensions of focus in this work—(a) organizational systems, practices, and 
routines; (b) job specifications, procedures, and criteria; and (c) individual skills, 
knowledge, and attributes. The integration of employees’ roles as well as job respon -
sibilities and their integration with individual departments as well as cross-functional 
processes strengthen alignment of organizational goals (Powell, 1992). Put in another 
way, removal of barriers between departments can not only enhance cooperation but 
also increase alignment and improve departmental and individual employee perfor -
mance (Alagaraja & Egan, 2013). Furthermore, tighter alignment of job specifica -
tions, procedures, and criteria with individual skills and knowledge can enhance 
employee performance (Hale, 2007). Thus, it is imperative that organizational 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=13>>>
28  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
systems, procedures, and routines are aligned with job specifications, responsibilities, 
and criteria as an important means for optimizing employee performance. Our concep -
tual model highlights this important but under-examined assumptions of aligning 
organizational-level systems with job characteristics that translate organizational 
goals, values, and routines into everyday management of roles, responsibilities, and 
tasks both at the department/functional and the individual level. The alignment of 
organizational-level systems (e.g., organizational design), procedures (e.g., reward 
structures), and routines (e.g., existing cultural norms) influence the design of jobs, 
role specifications, and performance criteria of individual employees (Alagaraja, 
2013a; Swanson, 2009). Thus, our conceptual model addresses the existing gap in the 
HRD and management literature by suggesting that the importance of alignment 
between different factors (organizational, departmental, job characteristics, as well as 
individual skills and knowledge) can affect employees’ behaviors and performance 
outcomes in the organization. We further posit that employee engagement specifically 
emphasizes the third component (c) individual skills, knowledge, and attributes as 
critical for individual performance. We also note that any one component is dynamic 
and constantly in flux (represented by the curved lines moving away from each inter -
section) as an employee continuously appraises their work environment and sense of 
alignment. See Figure 1.
Figure 1.  Individual performance as the dynamic outcome of alignment–engagement linkage.
Source.  Adapted from Hale (2007).
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  29
Depicted within Figure 1, organizational vision and mission, strategic goals, val -
ues, and norms, reward systems, processes, and tactics reflect the workplace, as well 
as the job itself. This reflection is indicative of how employees understand, infer, 
make meaning, and create unique ways that affect their performance on the job. 
When there is misalignment or when organizational goals are disconnected from 
processes and work flow (the circles in our diagram get further apart), managers can 
expect misfires and miscues in performance. On the contrary, employees’ under -
standing of the vision and mission, developing meaning of their job and fit of skills, 
attributes, and knowledge spurs the idea of engagement (the circles overlap and get 
closer), high levels of performance are a likely outcome. Alignment is not just the 
organizational conditions that produce the experience of the engagement phenom -
ena. Much more, when employees are aligned, this state allows for engagement to 
flourish—however, like an organizational hygiene factor, alignment does not guar -
antee engagement. Alignment is not a sufficient condition for engagement, although 
we note the conceptual linkage.
We would further suggest that it is critical to monitor alignment to nurture the posi -
tive, psychological state of engagement. We suggest that the continuous application of 
alignment principles remains important; those who lead organizations must develop a 
drive for alignment, not so much focus on practice of alignment as is the norm. For 
example, improving formal communications in the organization is a well-intended 
HRD initiative that has developing and disseminating newsletters as an outcome of 
alignment. However, this outcome does not necessarily drive engagement nor does it 
guarantee performance (Shuck, 2013).
Organizations must drive alignment by connecting the overarching goals at the 
individual level, such that this individual connection generates emotion, drives behav -
ioral intention and resulting performance. The physical, mechanistic, rational aspect of 
alignment represents the espoused organization. The practice of alignment as we sug -
gest in the above example in fact, reveals the potential and in times embedded tension 
in the different ways employees encounter the espoused organization different from 
the organization they experience day-to-day. The experienced organization is reflected 
by the states of engagement employees live, feel, think, and act on. Do not be fooled 
though—engagement is not what we see, but what an employee experiences and how 
they direct the intensity of their energies. Central to our position then, is that we pro -
pose employee engagement as a psychological state reflective of an employee’s con -
tinuous calibration of their organizational environment. This continuous calibration 
helps prompts employee to make decisions regarding whether to pull toward or away 
from their coworkers, team, department, or the entire organization. We note the poten -
tial disjointment here between job engagement (Rich et  al., 2010), work engagement 
(Hallberg & Schaufeli, 2006), and employee engagement (Shuck & Wollard, 2010) 
with personal engagement (Kahn, 1990) in the context of alignment. Although this is 
a subjective process, unique to each individual, we suggest that a primal, logical deci -
sion-making process revolving around the interplay between cognitions and emotions 
drives this activity—all set within the context of an employees’ personal sense of 
organizational and personal well-being (i.e., alignment).
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=15>>>
30  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
In sum, we used theoretical contributions from both HRD and management sci -
ences to build on several aspects of seminal work in alignment, engagement, and 
employee performance. Instead of considering employee performance, employee 
engagement, and organizational alignment as mutually exclusive concepts, we theo -
rized the importance of linking alignment with engagement and position employee 
performance as an outcome of the potential tension/harmony that is produced as a 
result of the alignment–engagement linkage. We also challenged the notion that 
employee performance outcomes, including turnover, retention, and productivity, 
should be generally conceptualized at the individual level. Instead, we argued and 
demonstrated that the very nature of employee performance is inherently an outcome 
of the embedded organizational system. In particular, we suggested that the state of 
engagement is realized and contingent on the ability of the organization to drive align -
ment at all levels. Furthermore, we contend that as an embedded system, employee 
engagement has the potential to affect not only the individual employee but also influ -
ence the performance of others in the organization.
Moreover, this literature review revealed a dearth in scholarly studies reviewing 
and connecting organizational alignment with employee engagement. Through our 
review, organizational alignment, and their associated outcomes where linked as criti -
cal for enhancing employee engagement. Stronger alignment implied that organiza -
tional systems, processes, procedures, culture, structure, and strategy fit  well together. 
The integration of alignment outcomes with the three main facets of employee engage -
ment (cognitive, emotional, and behavioral) augments linkages to employee perfor -
mance. Alignment can produce, shape, or influence any one of the three types of 
engagement—and we note the distal power of how influential cognitive and emotional 
engagement can be. The level of full engagement an employee experiences as a result 
of alignment can have a specific, measurable impact on individual performance. We 
strongly recommend future research explore this area fully.
Finally, from a system’s perspective, alignment in the technology and systems of 
the larger organization can provide support for the optimum performance of individual 
employees. We trace the typical pathway for linking alignment with individual perfor -
mance and identify employee engagement as a means to develop a richer understand -
ing of overall performance. Greater harmony between various organizational alignment 
outcomes can strengthen the link between involvement, willingness, and engagement 
of the employee to perform toward the job. As an exploratory offering to advance both 
theory and practice in HRD, our conceptual model enhances the understanding and 
interpretation of dynamic aspects of individual performance that is shaped by the indi -
vidual contributions of employees as much as it is influenced by job characteristics 
and organizational systems.
Overall, increasing overlap between the three dimensions (organizational systems, 
job characteristics, and individual attributes), indicate greater alignment toward the 
achievement of shared organizational goals as well as increased engagement of 
employees at work. When organizational goals, job, and task responsibilities as well 
as individual employees are heading in the same direction (Weiser, 2000), employees 
are more likely to exhibit both necessary and discretionary behaviors. Such employees 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  31
are more likely to make decisions to pull toward their coworkers, team, department, 
and the entire organization. They generally share a coupled purpose with their organi -
zation; make personal investment of resources, willingly give of their knowledge, 
skills, and abilities, which facilitate individual performance.
Implications for HRD Theory, Research, and Practice
Within HRD, the concept of engagement is only beginning the processes of matura -
tion. Consequently, little is known about the inner-related workings of the phenome -
non as they are experienced in real time in our field. Thus, the application or 
organizational alignment theory to engagement provides ample opportunity to advance 
theory development in HRD. For example, one of the most salient opportunities for 
advancement is in progressing the three-dimensional model espoused by several 
scholars within a framework of context (Rich et  al., 2010; Shuck & Reio, 2013; Shuck 
et  al., 2014). For example, unattached, engagement is simply an occurring phenome -
non within the psychology of the employee. Applied to a framework such as the pro -
cess and relational perspectives of alignment, engagement is given context. It also 
seems practical that climate, in the form of alignment, is critical for understanding the 
application of both prevailing areas of study, advancing each literature stream. This 
convergence of organizational alignment and engagement extends that work specifi -
cally by naming those areas of organizational design and rewards, existing cultural 
norms, and performance barriers between different departments that connote the con -
ditions of any one organization. Moreover, this work extends into the work of Brown 
and Leigh (1996) who grounded a model of psychological climate, which has been 
used extensively in research on and around engagement. Contextualizing that environ -
ment through the lens of organizational alignment gives our model directionality and 
sensitivity to that theoretical base (i.e., Kahn, 1990), suggesting that not only do orga -
nizations need climates of work that are psychologically safe, but they also need align -
ment within those environments—a nuance that is underrepresented in theoretical 
application of engagement at this time.
Within the areas of HRD research, we maintain that this conceptual model requires 
testing, and we suspect that as a result, further refinement will occur. As a way to 
broaden generalizability, future research might focus on a cross-section of industries, 
nationally and internationally, which would apply the three-dimensional framework of 
engagement alongside measures of organizational alignment and job specifications as 
a means for understanding the empirical interplay and practical significance of the two 
areas. We note that it is possible for engagement and alignment to both operate 
uniquely in differing contexts and thus, would argue for research to apply this frame -
work across multiple settings and cultures. Likewise, because HRD can lend itself to 
intervention research and program evaluation using prospective and retrospective 
approaches (Nimon, Zigarmi, & Allen, 2011), experimental methods that couple vary -
ing alignment strategies as a means for developing higher levels of engagement might 
also examine the external validity of the alignment framework, method, and measures 
espoused in our model. Still further, as the techniques for empirical examination in 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=17>>>
32  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
HRD gain in sophistication, qualitative approaches to understanding the phenomenon 
of engagement within the context of alignment seem prudent. Developing a grounded 
understanding of how employees actually experience alignment, how they interpret 
the structures of alignment, and how their perceptions lead to states of heightened 
individual performance would be not only informative but also one of only a handful 
of studies that have explored engagement from a rigorous, qualitative lens.
Finally, we name three specific implications for practice. First, engagement as an 
outcome must be preceded by those conditions that nurture the phenomenon as men -
tioned. Notwithstanding, the concept of alignment offers a way to understand, contex -
tualize, and apply those conditions. For example, the optimization of business 
processes in ways that create meaning and purpose (Shuck & Rose, 2013), internal 
alignment of organizational structure so that employee’s experience meaning and 
safety (Kahn, 2010), communicating strategy and culture in ways that connect to 
external stakeholders indicate the relative importance of work that could influence 
levels of engagement (Alagaraja, 2013b). Seeking engagement without organizational 
alignment seems a futile exercise in the shuffling of resources. Second, we highlight 
the interdependent nature of alignment and engagement. Practically, those organiza -
tions who seek higher levels of engagement must understand the connection between 
how employees experience alignment and how this alignment influences cognitive 
and emotional appraisal and interpretation of the work environment. If a positive 
appraisal of the environment within the lens of alignment is likely, than influencing 
those factors that influence the appraisal can be powerful for organizations—transfor -
mational at the very least. It is our experience that all engagement cascades upward 
from individuals, to work teams, departments and to the whole organization, and thus, 
alignment occurs on these levels as well. This is not to diminish the role of leaders and 
managers, but rather to identify the true power of engagement—which lies within the 
individual. Consequently, we could apply the construct of engagement within the 
function of alignment. That is, within each level of organizational alignment, engage -
ment is a distal indicator of how well alignment is occurring. As such, organizations 
must work to intentionally create those structures that are aligned with the outcomes 
they seek. For example, engagement is not likely to occur in misaligned areas of work 
teams or with misguided one-on-one conversations with a leader. Rather, it is when 
these structures and relations are aligned that organizations may reap the advantageous 
benefits of a highly engaged employee base.
Finally, the experiences of organizational alignment and employee engagement act 
as silent indicators of organizational identity. Organizational alignment connotes how 
well embedded workplace structures and practices lend themselves to broader goals. 
Employee engagement connotes how well individual employees are reacting to those 
embedded structures and practices. The two are intertwined and neither can be 
demanded. But the power for both lay in different areas. For example, the ability to 
create and influence embedded structures and practices lies within the purview of the 
organization. An employee often cannot create these for himself or herself, as they are 
a collective experience of artifacts. Nonetheless, the power of engagement lies with 
the employee as a response to those embedded structures and practices. We note then, 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  33
that neither can be demanded—they can only be cultivated, fostered, and developed. 
Leaders and managers must understand their ability to positively influence these two 
areas as dynamic systems and that they are, in part, a reflection of their leadership. 
Misalignment and disengagement do not happen by accident and they are not the fault 
of a few bad apples on the frontline; they are developed and cultivated within inten -
tional systems and practices. Thus, we implore for organizations, leaders, managers, 
and employees to explore their levels of engagement as a function of alignment and to 
be willing to create those conditions of environmental success proportionate to the 
levels of performance they desire.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of 
this article.
References
Alagaraja, M. (2013a). HRM and HRD perspectives on organizational performance. Human 
Resource Development Review , 12 , 117-143.
Alagaraja, M. (2013b). Mobilizing organizational alignment through strategic human resource 
development. Human Resource Development International , 16 , 74-93.
Alagaraja, M. (2013c). The strategic value and transaction effectiveness of HRD: A qualitative 
study of internal customer perspectives. European Journal of Training and Development , 
37 , 436-453.
Alagaraja, M. (2014). A conceptual model of organizations as learning-performance systems: 
Integrative review of lean implementation literature. Human Resource Development 
Review , 13 , 207-233. 
Alagaraja, M., & Egan, T. (2013). The strategic value of HRD in lean strategy implementation. 
Human Resource Development Quarterly , 24 , 1-27.
Albrecht, S. L. (2012). The influence of job, team and organizational level resources on 
employee well-being, engagement, commitment and extra-role performance. International 
Journal of Manpower , 33 , 840-853.
Anderson, V. (2009). Desperately seeking alignment: Reflections of senior line managers and 
HRD executives. Human Resource Development International , 12 , 263-277.
Avison, D., Jones, J., Powell, P., & Wilson, D. (2004). Using and validating the strategic align -
ment model. Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 13 , 223-246.
Bergeron, F., Raymond, L., & Rivard, S. (2004). Ideal patterns of strategic alignment and busi -
ness performance. Information & Management , 41 , 1003-1020.
Brown, S. P., & Leigh, T. W. (1996). A new look at psychological climate and its relationship 
to job involvement, effort, and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology , 81 , 359-368. 
Burn, J. M. (1996). IS innovation and organizational alignment: A professional juggling act. 
Journal of Information Technology , 11 , 3-12.
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=19>>>
34  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
Burn, J. M., & Szeto, C. (1999). Effective management of information technology: Closing the 
strategic divide! Journal of Scientific & Industrial Research , 58 , 171-180.
Campbell, B., Kay, R., & Avison, D. (2005). Strategic alignment: A practitioner’s perspective. 
Journal of Enterprise Information Management , 18 , 653-664.
Chalofsky, N., & Cavallaro, L. (2013). A good living versus a good life: Meaning, purpose, and 
HRD. Advances in Developing Human Resources , 15 , 331-340. 
Chalofsky, N., & Krishna, V. (2009). Meaningfulness, commitment, and engagement: The 
intersection of a deeper level of intrinsic motivation. Advances in Developing Human 
Resources , 11 , 189-203. 
Christian, M. S., Garza, A. S., & Slaughter, J. E. (2011). Work engagement: A quantitative 
review and test of its relations with task and contextual performance. Personnel Psychology , 
64 , 89-136. 
Ciborra, C. U. (1997). De profundis? Deconstructing the concept of strategic alignment. 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 9, 67-82.
Gratton, L., & Truss, C. (2003). The three-dimensional people strategy: Putting human resources 
policies into action. The Academy of Management Executive , 17 (3), 74-86.
Gulledge, T. R. Jr., & Sommer, R. A. (2002). Business process management: Public sector 
implications. Business Process Management Journal , 8, 364-376.
Hale, J. (2007). The performance consultant’s fieldbook: Tools and techniques for improving 
organizations and people . San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Hallberg, U., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2006). “Same same” but different? Can work engage -
ment be discriminated from job involvement and organizational commitment? European 
Psychologist , 11 , 119-127.
Harter, J. K., Schmidt, F. L., & Hayes, T. L. (2002). Business-unit-level relationship between 
employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and business outcomes: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 268-279. 
Henderson, J. C., & Venkatraman, N. (1989). Strategic alignment: A framework for strategic 
information technology management. In T. Kochan & M. Unseem (Eds.), Transforming 
organisations  (pp. 97-117). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kahn, W. (1990). Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at 
work. The Academy of Management Journal , 33 , 692-724.
Kahn, W. (2010). The essence of employee engagement: Lessons from the field. In S. Albrecht 
(Ed.), Handbook of employee engagement  (pp. 20-30). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Kathuria, R., Joshi, P. M., & Porth, S. J. (2007). Organizational alignment and performance: 
Past, present and future. Management Decision , 45 , 503-517.
Kühnel, J., Sonnentag, S., & Westman, M. (2009). Does work engagement increase after a short 
respite? The role of job involvement as a double-edged sword. Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology , 82 , 575-594. 
Lawrence, P. R., & Lorsch, J. W. (1967). Organization and environment: Managing differentia -
tion and integration . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Macey, W. H., & Schneider, B. (2008). The meaning of employee engagement. Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology , 1, 3-30. 
Macey, W. H., Schneider, B., Barbera, K. M., & Young, S. A. (2009). Employee engagement: 
Tools for analysis, practice, and competitive advantage . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. M. (1990). A review and meta-analysis of the antecedents, cor -
relates, and consequences of organizational commitment. Psychological Bulletin , 108 ,  
171-194. 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  35
May, D. R., Gilson, R. L., & Harter, L. M. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaningful -
ness, safety, and avaliablity and the engagement of the human spirit at work. Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 77 (1), 11-37. 
Miles, R. E., Snow, C. C., Meyer, A. D., & Coleman, H. J. (1978). Organizational strategy, 
structure, and process. Academy of Management Review , 3, 546-562.
Mintzberg, H. (1978). Patterns in strategy formation. Management Science , 23 , 934-948.
Nimon, K., Zigarmi, D., & Allen, J. (2011). Measures of program effectiveness based on ret -
rospective pretest data: Are all created equal? American Journal of Evaluation , 32 , 8-28. 
doi:10.1177/1098214010378354
Parker, S. K., & Griffin, M. A. (2011). Understanding active psychological states: Embedding 
engagement in a wider nomological net and closer attention to performance. European 
Journal of Work & Organizational Psychology , 20 , 60-67.
Porter, M. E. (1981). The contributions of industrial organization to strategic management. 
Academy of Management Review , 64 , 609-620.
Powell, T. C. (1992). Organizational alignment as competitive advantage. Strategic Management 
Journal , 13 , 119-134.
Rich, B. L., Lepine, J. A., & Crawford, E. R. (2010). Job engagement: Antecedents and effects 
on job performance. The Academy of Management Journal , 53 , 617-635.
Rummler, G. A., & Brache, A. P. (1995). Improving performance: How to manage the white 
space on the organization chart  (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Rurkkhum, S., & Bartlett, K. R. (2012). The relationship between employee engagement 
and organizational citizenship behavior in Thailand. Human Resource Development 
International , 15 , 157-174.
Saks, A. M. (2006). Antecedents and consequences of employee engagement. Journal of 
Managerial Psychology , 21 , 600-619. 
Saks, A. M., & Gruman, J. A. (2014). What do we really know about employee engagement? 
Human Resource Development Quarterly , 25 , 155-182. 
Sarti, D. (2014). Job resources as antecedents of engagement at work: Evidencefrom a long-
term care setting. Human Resource Development Quarterly , 25 , 213-237. 
Schaufeli, W. B. (2012). Work engagement: What do we know and where do we go? Romanian 
Journal of Applied Psychology , 14 , 3-10.
Sender, S. W. (1997). Systematic agreement: A theory of organizational alignment. Human 
Resource Development Quarterly , 8, 23-40.
Shuck, B. (2011). Four emerging perspectives of employee engagement: An integrative litera -
ture review. Human Resource Development Review , 10 , 304-328. 
Shuck, B. (2013). Invited reaction: The relationship between work engagement and perfor -
mance: A review of empirical literature and a proposed research agenda. Human Resource 
Development Review , 12 , 277-283. 
Shuck, B., Ghosh, R., Zigarmi, D., & Nimon, K. (2013). The jingle jangle of employee 
engagement: Further exploration of the emerging construct & implications for work -
place learning and performance. Human Resource Development Review , 12 , 11-35. 
doi:10.1177/1534484312463921
Shuck, B., & Herd, A. M. (2012). Employee engagement and leadership exploring the conver -
gence of two frameworks and implications for leadership development in HRD. Human 
Resource Development Review , 11 , 156-181.
Shuck, B., & Reio, T. (2013). Employee engagement and wellbeing: A moderation model and 
implications for practice. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies , 21 , 43-58. 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=21>>>
36  Human Resource Development Review 14(1)
Shuck, B., Reio, T., & Rocco, T. (2011). Employee engagement: An examination of antecedent 
and outcome variables. Human Resource Development International , 14 , 427-445. 
Shuck, B., & Rose, K. (2013). Reframing employee engagement within the context of meaning 
and purpose. Advances in Developing Human Resources , 15 , 341-355. 
Shuck, B., Twyford, D., Reio, T. G., & Shuck, A. (2014). Human resource development prac -
tices and employee engagement. Examining the connection with employee turnover nten -
tions. Human Resource Development Qaurterly , 25 , 239-270. 
Shuck, B., & Wollard, K. (2010). Employee engagement and HRD: A seminal review of the 
foundations. Human Resource Development Review , 9, 89-110. 
Smaczny, T. (2001). Is an alignment between business and information technology the appropri -
ate paradigm to manage IT in today’s organisations? Management Decision , 39 , 797-802.
Song, J., Kolb, J. A., Lee, U. H., & Kim, H. K. (2012). Role of transformational leadership 
in effective organizational knowledge creation practices: Mediating effects of employees’ 
work engagement. Human Resource Development Quarterly , 23 , 65-101. 
Swanson, R. A. (1995). Human resource development: Performance is the key. Human Resource 
Development Quarterly , 6, 207-213.
Swanson, R. A. (2009). Theory of human resource development. In R. A. Swanson & E. F. 
Holton III (Eds.), Foundations of human resource development  (2nd ed., pp. 97-111). San 
Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Tosti, D., & Jackson, S. F. (2000). Organizational alignment . Retrieved from www.vanguardc.
com
Venkatraman, N., Henderson, J. C., & Oldach, S. (1993). Continuous strategic alignment: 
Exploiting information technology capabilities for competitive success. European 
Management Journal , 11 , 139-149.
Weiser, J. R. (2000). Organizational alignment: Are we heading in the same direction. The 
Kansas Banker , 90 (1), 11-15.
Zigarmi, D., Nimon, K., & Shuck, B. (2014). Employee engagement: Job attitude or mediator 
between job attitudes and affect? In D. Chapman (Ed.), Proceedings of the Academy of 
Human Resource Development Conference , Houston, TX.
Author Biographies
Meera Alagaraja is an assistant professor of human resource development at the University of 
Louisville. Her research interests include strategic HRD, performance interventions, interna -
tional HRD, and organizational learning. She received the Monica M Lee Research Excellence 
award (2013) for outstanding article of the year. She has also published in Human Resource 
Development Review, Human Resource Development International , and Human Resource 
Development Quarterly  as well as the European Journal of Training and Development .
Brad Shuck joined the Department of Evaluation, Leadership, and Organizational Development  
faculty at the University of Louisville  as an assistant professor in 2010. His primary areas of 
research include the application, meaning, and measurement of employee engagement, emerg -
ing areas of positive psychology, and leader development. Shuck was recently awarded the E F 
Holton III Outstanding Article of the Year (2013)  and the Advances in Developing Human 
Resources Outstanding Issue of the Year  (2011) for his work on employee engagement. His 
scholarship has appeared in refereed journals such as Leadership and Organizational Studies, 
Human Resource Development Review, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Human 
Resource Development International, Couple and Family Psychology: Research and Practice, 
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Alagaraja and Shuck  37
Journal of Continuing Higher Education, Journal of Children’s Health Care , and the Journal 
of Management Development , amoung others. In addition to his primary faculty appointment, 
Shuck holds affiliate faculty status in the Department of Educational & Counseling Psychology, 
Counseling, and College Student Personnel  at the University of  Louisville .
 at UNIV OF LOUISVILLE on April 14, 2015hrd.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
View publication stats