<<<PAGE=1>>>
6 Use of evidence in a 
complex social programme
Case of an evaluation of the  
state’s response to violence  
against women and children  
in South Africa
Matodzi M. Amisi, Thabani Buthelezi  
and Siza Magangoe
Summary
This chapter focuses on the use of evidence from the Diagnostic Review of 
South Africa’s response to violence against women and children (VAWC), 
carried out by the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation and 
Department of Social Development between 2014 and 2016. The Diagnostic 
Review provided evidence that government needed to develop a new plan for 
VAWC, increase the budget allocation for violence prevention and services and 
better coordinate VAWC responses, all of which is being taken forward in the 
National Strategic Plan for gender-based violence. Many of the interventions 
to promote the use of evaluations come from the national evaluation system, 
such as evaluation steering committees and improvement plans. These were 
found to have created ownership and likely use. The interventions were opti-
mised through strong knowledge brokering by government evaluation units 
and creation of spaces for intersectoral dialogue to facilitate evidence use. The 
chapter adds to the knowledge base of factors that facilitate or inhibit evidence 
use in multi-sectoral complex interventions.
Introduction
Women and children in South Africa experience a very high level of different 
forms of violence including intimate partner violence, neglect, rape, femicide, 
child homicide and sexual assault. Research undertaken by South Africa’s Med-
ical Research Council reveals that 25% of women have experienced physical 
violence at some point in their lives (Gender Links and The Medical Research 
Council. 2010). Violence against children (VAC) shows the same trends, with 
studies finding that 1 in 3 children in South Africa have experienced some 
form of violence (Ward et al., 2018).
These high levels of violence have persisted despite significant investment by 
government, development partners, and civil society organisations (CSOs) in 
evidence generation, enacting policy, setting up institutions, allocating resources
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 93
and delivering services aimed at reducing violence. This chapter uses the jour-
ney of the Diagnostic Review of South Africa’s response to violence against 
women and children (VAWC) to understand facilitators and barriers to evi -
dence use in public policy. The Diagnostic Review was carried out between 
2014 and 2016 by South Africa’s Departments of Planning Monitoring and 
Evaluation (DPME) and Social Development (DSD). The chapter also provides 
a snapshot of the operations of South Africa’s national evaluation system (NES), 
in itself an important policy experiment in promoting the generation and use 
of evaluation evidence. Lessons shared in the chapter should improve uptake 
of research evidence in the VAWC sector in South Africa and offer insight and 
suggestions for improving uptake of evidence in other multi-sectoral interven-
tions to address complex social problems.
The chapter draws from a case study carried out as part of a research project 
titled Evidence in Practice: Documenting and Sharing Lessons from Evidence-
Informed Policy Making and Implementation in Africa. Data for the case study 
was collected between November 2018 and March 2019. The data comes from 
semi-structured interviews with 14 key informants, document review and par-
ticipant observation. The main author was the evaluation lead from DPME on 
this project; the second author was chief of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in 
DSD at the time the evaluation was done; and the third author led the policy pro-
cess. Respondents were selected purposively because of their knowledge of the 
sector and known active participation in relevant policy and programme delivery. 
The case study used the framework described in Chapter 3 to guide data collec-
tion and analysis. In addition, the case applied the realist notion of change (out-
comes) being the result of interaction between context and mechanism. Thus, 
the case study aimed to understand which evidence use interventions worked to 
produce which outcomes (decision/policy) and in which context.
Background: country, institutional and policy context
South Africa’s democracy is nascent, established only in 1994 after many years 
of struggle against white minority rule. While the country has made signifi -
cant investment in social protection, human development outcomes have not 
improved at the rate anticipated, partly due to social problems such as high 
levels of violence, decades of under-investment in human capital, poor nutri -
tion and so forth. This has contributed to high levels of unemployment and 
underdevelopment. Seventy-six percent of the population, mostly black South 
Africans, live with the constant threat of poverty (World Bank, 2018). Family 
and household structures have also been strongly shaped by apartheid’s restric-
tive labour migration policies which forced separation of migrant men from 
their families. While these policies were relaxed in the early 1990s and com -
pletely abolished after 1994, the result is that nuclear families are not the norm 
in South Africa, which impacts family dynamics and the ability of families to 
protect children. In fact, couples living with their own children make up only 
19% of all households and 62% of children live in extended family arrange -
ments (Hall and Mokomane, 2018, pp. 31–32), with single parent households 
representing 11% of households.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
94 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Though the constitution and government legislation are considered pro -
gressive, societal values are conservative. The 2016 Community Survey reports 
that more than 80% of the South African population is religious, with about 
78% professing to be Christian, 4% practicing African religions and 2.6% being 
Muslim or Hindu (Statistics South Africa, 2016 , p. 42). Patriarchy is embed-
ded in the traditions, customs and values of most African cultures, and dur -
ing apartheid it was state sanctioned, with white men having most rights and 
black women least rights and protection (Meer, 2016; Ademiluka, 2018). Others 
have argued that it is this confluence of deeply embedded patriarchy, religious 
conservatism, inequality, poverty, breakdown of the family and history of state-
sanctioned violence under apartheid that has left South Africa battling with 
high levels of untreated trauma that is reproducing violence. The complexity 
makes responding to the problem so difficult (Lamb and Warton, 2011).
An important factor in South Africa’s response to violence is government’s 
configuration and capacity. The democratic political system of government at 
national, provincial and local level is a result of the 1994 consolidation of the 
apartheid state’s racially fragmented administrations. Constitutional instructions 
allocate public service functions as either the exclusive mandate of national, 
provincial or local government or shared between spheres of government. 
Provincial and local governments are independent spheres of government and 
can determine their own priorities, develop plans and implement programmes 
(Amisi and Vawda, 2017), and they have varying capacity and resources (Chipkin 
and Meny-Gibert, 2011). This fragmentation diminishes government’s ability to 
collaborate and deliver integrated services. This problem is experienced in gov-
ernment response to VAWC. For example, though most departments have done 
relatively well in delivering on their respective VAWC mandates, they have not 
effectively collaborated to optimise their cumulative effect enough to reduce 
the levels and effect of violence (DPME and DSD, 2016; Gould et al., 2019).
South Africa has a vibrant NGO sector and NGOs are critical to the country’s 
response to VAWC. Nearly 40% of all registered NGOs operate in the social ser-
vices sector (DPME and DSD, 2017). More than 90% of social welfare services, 
including VAWC services, are provided by NGOs (Barberton et al., 2018, quoted 
in Gould et al., 2019). Analysis done by National Treasury shows that government 
funding for social welfare services is low and NPOs experience up to a 71% 
funding gap (Barberton et al., 2018, p. i). In relation to NGOs, government is a 
policy maker, a regulator, a funder and, in some cases, a co-provider of services. 
The interplay of these different roles and funding challenges have caused conflict 
in the sector (DPME and DSD, 2017; Barberton et al., 2018) which also influ-
ences the flow of information between the government and CSOs.
The evolution of V AWC-related national policies
Over the years, the national policy landscape relating to VAWC has changed 
rapidly, reflecting a shift in paradigm and political leadership in the different 
ministries and the country. Figure 6.1 provides a visual representation of the 
policy timeline briefly introduced in preceding sections.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 95
2017
2019
2016
2015
2013
2012
2011
2010
2008
2004
1998
1996
Victim Empowerment 
Bill
Drafting of NSP-GBV 
commence, 
Constitutional court 
outlaws spanking in the 
home
2018
Integrated Urban 
Development 
framework
ECD policy-DSD
White paper on safety
and security
Dialogue Forum 
(Violence Prevention 
Forum)
Review of PoA (2018)
Total shutdown 
(grassroots movement)
Presidential GBV 
Summit 
National Action Plan for 
Children
National GBV Council
National Development 
Plan
White paper on families
PoA: VAWC
Rural Safety Strategy
Integrated social Crime 
Prevention Strategy
Community policy 
forum policy
Service charter for 
victims of crime and 
violence
Shukumisa
National Crime 
Prevention Strategy
White paper on safety 
and security (1998)
Domestic Violence Act
Figure 6.1 Timeline showing the evolution of VAWC-related national policy
Source: Author generated.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
96 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Though the timeline depicts a linear evolution of policy, in practice this has 
not been the case and it has been punctuated by changes in political leadership 
which, in most cases, have led to changes in policy direction. For example, Rauch 
(2000) argues that the shift in focus from crime prevention in the National Crime 
Prevention Strategy to crime combating was precipitated by a change in minister. 
One of the striking aspects of policy relating to VAWC is the difference in how 
criminal justice departments and social sector departments understand and respond 
to VAWC. Social sector departments are likely to see VAWC as a social problem 
that requires socio-economic interventions while criminal justice departments are 
likely to take a tough-on-crime approach (DPME and DSD, 2016). Attempts to 
address this policy disjuncture include the development of the Integrated Social 
Crime Prevention Strategy in 2011, led by DSD. More recently, the inter-minis-
terial committee (IMC) on VAWC, the Programme of Action on Violence against 
Women and Children (PoA:VAWC) and the White Paper on Safety and Security 
2016 cover programmes from both criminal justice and social sector departments.
Identifying the need for evidence
A key element of the analytical framework on evidence use presented in Chapter 3 is 
the demand for evidence. This section explores the sources of the demand for evidence.
When the IMC on VAWC was established in 2010, it was tasked with inves-
tigating the root causes of VAWC and how to end all forms of violence against 
women and children. The South African government has a culture of commis-
sioning evidence and so it was not surprising that when the IMC was established, 
they commissioned two studies to guide their work. One of the studies came to 
be known as the Diagnostic Review. DSD’s evaluation unit recommended that 
the review be carried out as part of the National Evaluation Plan (NEP) imple-
mented by the DPME and governed by South Africa’s National Evaluation Policy 
Framework (NEPF). DPME’s involvement would help because the evaluation 
required involvement of multiple departments. Secondly, the NEPF would ensure 
that the Diagnostic Review would be taken to Cabinet. Both the Evaluation 
and Policy Units in DSD viewed submission to Cabinet as a potential trigger for 
change, as Cabinet has the power to give direction/instructions to departments.
The Diagnostic Review was carried out at the demand of the potential evidence 
users in the IMC to answer an existing policy question, and with the participation 
of policy makers so they could be part of shaping the research process. Data from 
the interviews indicates this is not always the case for research in the sector. One 
respondent stated, ‘there is almost an attitude amongst researchers, it is research for 
research sake, whether it finds practical application in government they do not seem 
to really care’ (Respondent 8 – development partner). Another respondent said,
I have been looking a lot at evidence on what work [is needed] to prevent 
VAWC. . . . The information is not helpful for implementers. The questions 
about costs, transferability, etc. are not answered. Without intending to do so, 
researchers fail policy makers because we don’t answer the right questions.
(Respondent 4 – think tank)
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 97
The role of development partners was important in the demand for evidence. 
Both the root cause analysis study and the Diagnostic Review were funded by 
UNICEF . This gave UNICEF some power in shaping the conceptualisation 
and use of the two studies, as we will show in the next sections.
The evaluation process
The NEPF directs all national evaluations to be managed by a technical working 
group (TWG) and evaluation steering committee (ESC). The TWG included 
DSD and UNICEF . The TWG developed the terms of reference (T oRs) and 
managed the evaluation, while the ESC, headed by the senior policy head 
from DSD oversaw the evaluation. For the Diagnostic Review, the technical 
committee for the IMC (IMC TTT) took on an additional role as the steering 
committee for the evaluation. Having these cross-government structures was 
important for the evaluation to incorporate what was happening in different 
subsectors and to have the support and ownership of the key departments.
It was difficult to attain consensus between the different departments on what 
the Diagnostic Review should cover, which showed unresolved policy disso -
nance in the sector. At the time of the evaluation, there were numerous discussions 
within the TWG and ESC (IMC TTT) about whether the problem is vio -
lence against women, gender-based violence (GBV) or violence against women  
and children. Framing the evaluation as responding to gender-based violence 
meant excluding violence against children, particularly forms of violence that 
are not gendered, such as spanking in the home, corporal punishment at schools 
and violence between children. The Children’s Unit within DSD and UNICEF 
did not accept this proposal. The ESC did not approve separating women and 
children. Focusing on both VAW and VAC showed a recognition of the intersec-
tion between violence experienced by women and children. Thus, the decision 
about the evaluation focus was, in itself, signalling a policy position by govern-
ment. The process to get consensus on the questions to be asked and the scope 
of the evaluation took some time; the T oRs went through 14 iterations from 
October 2013 to December 2013 before final approval by the ESC. The ability 
to broker a safe space for consensus building was an important role of the ESC.
The evaluation process was guided by the ESC. They substantively shaped the 
research process and the recommendations and approved the final report. This 
resulted in departments owning the recommendations but also the recommen-
dations addressing key gaps in how government was responding to VAWC. The 
Diagnostic Review did not generate anything radically new but, as one of the 
respondents indicated, ‘The difference was that this was done by government, and 
government itself was acknowledging these issues’ (Respondent 4 – think tank).
Taking forward the ﬁndings
Following approval of the final report by the steering committee, the head of the 
steering committee formulates a management response to the recommendations
<<<PAGE=7>>>
98 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
and oversees the drafting of an improvement plan which spells out steps that will 
be taken to address the recommendations. In the current case, the plan was 
developed in a workshop with CSOs, government departments and develop -
ment partners. The improvement plan was approved in April 2017 by the IMC 
TTT and was submitted for formal ratification by the head of the IMC TTT 
(director general of DSD) in July 2017.
The Diagnostic Review’s findings were translated to messages for different 
target audiences. DPME, working together with DSD’s policy and evaluation 
units, translated the evaluation report and improvement plan into a seven-page 
cabinet memorandum. Only key findings and recommendations were carefully 
selected by DSD and DPME to be presented in the memorandum. The memo-
randum was presented to different coordinating structures of government; firstly 
the cluster of director generals and then tabled at a Cabinet sub-committee.  
Because of the cross-cutting nature of VAWC, the Diagnostic Review was 
presented to both the social cluster and the criminal justice cluster and their 
respective Cabinet committees.
This process was carefully managed, balancing both political and technical pres-
sures. The process took a year, with disagreements between departments leading 
departments to ask DPME to give them more time to interrogate the report and  
recommendations to units within departments who did not participate in the 
ESC but were affected by the recommendations. The submission to Cabinet  
made sure that heads of departments in the social and criminal justice sectors 
and all ministers were aware of the important findings and recommendations 
in the Diagnostic Review and that they were accoun table for implementing 
the improvement plan. As with discussions in the ESC, the submission process 
offered space for senior managers and ministers to debate how government 
can improve its response to the problem. Approval by Cabinet was also the 
mechanism that enabled wider dissemination of the report. Under the National 
Evaluation System, once a report is approved by Cabinet without reservation, it 
can be made public and sent to Parliament.
As required by the NEPF , significant efforts were made to share the results. All 
important documents were placed on DPME and DSD websites, including the 
full report, the management response to the recommendations from the DSD, 
the improvement plan, and reports on progress against the improvement plan. 
This made the report easy to access by the sector. It also made government 
transparent in its learning, important in a sector fraught with mistrust and con-
flictual relationships between different stakeholders.
Two  policy briefs were developed informed by the evaluation, one co-authored 
by DPME and DSD’s evaluation and policy units, and one with the Institute 
for Security Studies and Save the Children South Africa. This co-production 
of policy briefs was intended to improve ownership and wider dissemination 
of results. The findings were also presented by government officials in DPME 
and DSD in more than ten different workshops and seminars, which familiar -
ised the sector with the findings and recommendations of the evaluation and 
the resultant improvement plan. This showed ownership by government of the
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 99
findings and commitment to addressing the issues identified, addressing a chal-
lenge in the sector where researchers often speak of failure by state agencies to 
respond, leading to further divisions/conflicts.
Internal government M&E units facilitated use of the Diagnostic Review 
through ongoing knowledge brokering within government and with external 
stakeholders. Within DSD the evaluation unit played an internal knowledge broker role, 
translating the research report into an internal communication memorandum to 
communicate to management of the department the findings and implications of 
the Diagnostic Review and the improvement plan. The unit also ensured that the 
minister was briefed before the presentation of the evaluation in Cabinet and the 
team presenting to Cabinet were aware of what is politically acceptable and what 
is not. DPME also played a strong knowledge broker role, working with DSD and 
other departments to make sure findings and lessons from the Diagnostic Review 
were integrated into the Programme of Action (PoA) on VAWC and its M&E 
framework. DPME continues to play an important role in the National Strategic 
Plan for GBV . As shown in the following comments, this role was influential:
The respect given to DPME based on the pivotal role of the department 
and the mandate assigned to the department, and the level of work that the 
department did around the Diagnostic Review contributed to the buy in 
from departments. The push from DPME was very helpful. They did not 
come as big brother but gently guided the departments.
(Respondent 1 – development partner)
DPME is in the Presidency and this gave us some influence. It is the poli-
tics of being in the Presidency. The clout that came with being DPME, that 
is why we were able to enforce some of the work.
(Respondent 2 – government)
Analysing use and the factors which contributed to use
This book seeks to contribute to an understanding of how evidence use can be 
promoted. In this section, we therefore first seek to understand the types of use 
that happened in the Diagnostic Review, and then unpack how the different 
use interventions and other factors contributed to, or inhibited, use.
Using the results of the Diagnostic Review
There are different ways of understanding use, and Chapters 1 and 2 discuss 
instrumental, conceptual, symbolic and process use. Instrumental use refers 
to cases where the recommendations are implemented, while conceptual use 
refers to cases where information provided through the research gives new 
insight and understanding that shapes the ways individuals and organisations 
do their work. Very often, organisations which track use of evaluations track 
responses to individual recommendations (i.e. instrumental use). As this chapter
<<<PAGE=9>>>
100 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
will show, in multi-sectoral complex interventions, conceptual use can be an 
important enabler for wider policy changes and remains important in EIDM.
Instrumental use of the Diagnostic Review
The following are some instrumental uses of the Diagnostic Review:
1 The Review of the PoA was informed by the results of the Diagnostic Review
In 2017, DSD with the support of UNICEF started a process to review 
and develop a new PoA. This responded to the first recommendation 
of the Diagnostic Review. Though this process was paused pending the 
completion of the National Strategic Plan, the Diagnostic Review and 
other research studies were important sources in the revision process 
and in the NSP , as shown in the comment:
The current PoA it is trying to embrace the evidence that was generated 
from the evaluation, the system-strengthening pillar was informed by the 
Diagnostic Review. The majority of issues [addressed in the PoA] came 
from there [Diagnostic Review], the coordination structure, the issue of 
information management, issue of social mobilisation.
(Respondent 1 – development partner)
2 Bringing the voice of CSOs and provincial government to the revision of 
the PoA
The revision of the PoA followed the process recommended by the Diag-
nostic Review, which emphasised the involvement of CSOs and provin-
cial government. The T oRs advertised by UNICEF for a consultant to 
review the PoA specifically mentioned the need to consult with CSOs 
and provincial government in the review of the PoA. However, the 
way the involvement of CSOs was handled highlighted some limitations 
with tracking/measuring instrumental use of evaluation findings. DSD 
implemented several recommendations as articulated in the report, 
but without fully owning the intent underlying the recommendation. 
Therefore, the extent to which the implementation of the recommen-
dation will change practice over time is not yet known.
3 Establishment of a coordinating structure for VAWC
The Diagnostic Review recommended that a structure be established to 
coordinate the work of multiple departments responding to VAWC and 
that this structure must include NGOs. This was included in the revised 
PoA and in the Victim Empowerment Bill (2017), and was supported by 
DSD in the process of developing the National Strategic Plan for GBV .
4 Increase in the budget allocation for violence prevention
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 101
In 2018, National Treasury announced an additional budget allocation to 
provincial DSDs for VAWC programmes. The budget was increased by ZAR 
206 million in the financial year 2018/19 while ZAR 309 million was added 
for the 2019/2020 financial year. This was a much-needed increase in strained 
budgets and addressed a big concern in the Review. The increase came as a 
result of a confluence of interventions. The Diagnostic Review found signifi-
cant shortfalls in funding for response services. DSD used this finding in its 
budget proposal to National Treasury to motivate for additional budget alloca-
tion. However, this was only supported by National Treasury because other fac-
tors had influenced Treasury officials to believe that violence can be prevented, 
and that resources allocated for response services are inadequate, amongst oth-
ers. This is shown in the next section.
Conceptual use
Respondents reported some cases of conceptual use. For example, UNICEF 
indicated that the evidence from the Diagnostic Review had been useful for 
informing other pieces of work they were doing, including the discussions that 
led to South Africa becoming a pathfinding1 country for VAC.
We are able to use this [Diagnostic Review] in our proposal for funding to 
shape the investment by other funders in South Africa in the area of GBV/
VAC. And when we engaged with global partners we used the Diagnostic 
Review and root causes study to get support for work in South Africa. We 
also used the information when doing preparatory work for [the] Stock -
holm [conference] and in motivating for South Africa to be one of the 
pathfinder countries; the reports were shared with partners.
(Respondent 1 – development partner)
The seeming openness to sharing the report and its findings helped create 
connections between government and CSOs and created space for more open 
conversations about why government interventions had not worked to address 
VAWC and what was needed to strengthen government response to VAWC.
What was useful was that when it [Diagnostic Review] became public it 
became the basis of a conversation. And an honest conversation. The Diag-
nostic Review said tough things and in a way that did not sound blamey. 
The findings were hard and difficult but did not come across accusatory.
(Respondent 4 – think tank)
The respondent from DPME also indicated how, beyond its specific recom -
mendations, the Diagnostic Review had been used in preparation of the gov -
ernment’s next Medium-T erm Strategic Framework (MTSF). She, however, 
was cautious to claim victory in being able to influence the MTSF as the pro-
cess was not yet complete.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
102 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Another conceptual use was enabling DPME to use evidence to respond to 
related issues arising. For example, the Diagnostic Review was very important 
when government had to respond to the T otal Shutdown movement:
When #T otalShutdown happened, we had material to help us respond. 
The Diagnostic Review shaped the government’s input to the GBV sum-
mit held in November 2018. We had something to say and used it to push 
back against what lobbyists might be pushing for using research.
(Respondent 2 – government)
What can we learn from the interventions that were implemented to promote 
use of the evidence from the Diagnostic Review and the resultant decisions 
it influenced? Table 6.1 presents use interventions and decisions influenced as 
stand-alone activities for ease of reading.
It is important to note that, though presented in Table 6.1 as stand-alone 
interventions, the way that the different use interventions worked to produce 
evidence use is not linear. In fact, the interventions interacted with one another 
and one action stimulated another in a snowball effect. The next section shows 
how these specific use interventions interacted with the wider context and 
with each other to facilitate uptake of evidence.
Enablers and inhibitors of evidence use in the V AWC sector
When commenting about barriers to evidence use, most respondents tended 
to reflect on trends they have observed in the sector more broadly rather than 
focusing on the Diagnostic Review. Therefore, the following analysis does 
not limit itself to the Diagnostic Review but includes experiences with other 
research and evaluation in the VAWC sector. It takes elements from the analyti-
cal framework relating to context, taken from Chapter 3. These are summarised 
in Table 6.2 and elaborated after the table.
The macro-context
An important barrier to uptake of research and full implementation of research 
findings that respondents raised and reflected on is the seeming disjuncture 
between the values of individual public servants and those of researchers . This was 
seen in contestations around the amendment of the constitution to decrimi -
nalise sexual relations between young children, discussions around the right to 
terminate pregnancy and, more recently, the criminalisation of spanking where 
religious communities applied for an appeal citing a religious right for parents 
to chastise their children:
We are a conservative society, but our policies are very liberal. We have 
tried to impose policy on people who do not want it. We need to work 
closely with people who have to implement policies. Because if you are
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 103
T able 6.1 Interventions to promote use and their effect
Intervention Effect
Elements of the NES
T echnical Working The interactions in the TWG and ESC facilitated 
Group and Evaluation co-development of evaluation elements, e.g. T oRs, 
Steering Committee collaboration and trust between DSD, DPME and 
comprising key UNICEF . They provided a safe space for meaningful 
stakeholders dialogue. In this space the researchers could gain 
understanding of the policy world they are evaluating, and 
policy makers could be made more aware of the research 
process, inform the process and interrogate findings and 
analysis. The ESC was also useful in building consensus on 
problem definition.
Simple evaluation report The full evaluation report was 206 pages long. The 1-page, 
5-page and 25-page structure used for the summary report 
under the NES facilitated accessibility of the findings.
Management response The management response provided a formal mechanism 
whereby the different departments had to formally 
acknowledge the recommendations.
Improvement plan The improvement plan provided a plan agreed by all 
stakeholders for taking forward and institutionalising the 
recommendations.
Report public on The availability of the report, improvement plan etc. created 
DPME website transparency and access and increased commitment from 
stakeholders.
Elements outside the 
NES
Knowledge brokering Internal communication made management and the 
role of departmental minister of the department aware of the findings and 
M&E unit recommendations and created an opportunity to 
potentially agree/object to what has been recommended. 
Formal approval authorises the evaluation unit to hold 
the department and individual units accountable for 
implementation of the research findings.
Knowledge brokering An important role was played by DPME as both a 
role of DPME commissioner and knowledge broker in supporting 
the use of the Diagnostic Review up to two years after 
completion of the evaluation. This role in this evaluation 
went beyond the normal role that DPME evaluation 
directors played.
Process facilitation VAWC is predominantly experienced in black communities. 
and relationship However, lead researchers tend to be white, and this 
management was the case with the Diagnostic Review. This has the 
potential to create tensions that inhibits uptake of findings. 
For the Diagnostic Review this was also an issue. The 
DPME project manager played a relationship management 
role, sensitising the research team to dynamics they should 
be aware of, including advising them to add experienced 
black researchers to the team. A more balanced team was 
well received and their work better received.
(Continued)
<<<PAGE=13>>>
104 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Intervention Effect
Spaces for ongoing Presentation of the Diagnostic Review in sectoral spaces 
dialogue in the sector for ongoing intersectoral dialogue (led by CSOs) like the 
Dialogue Forum (now called Violence Prevention Forum) 
and Soul City Social Lab enabled difficult conversations 
between CSOs, government, development partners and 
academia about why interventions have not worked 
and how they can be strengthened, and strengthening 
partnerships between government and CSOs. This built 
trust and strengthened relationships which ensured that 
the revised PoA and the National Strategic Plan on GBV 
were informed by evidence.
Advocacy by CSOs South African CSOs have a long history of advocacy for 
policy reforms. Some of the uses of the Diagnostic 
Review were influenced by, or enabled by, CSO advocacy. 
This includes CSOs in the Violence Prevention Forum 
and the Soul City Social Lab and Shukumisa Campaign.
T able 6.1 (Continued)
T able 6.2 Summary of enabling factors and barriers from the context
Element of the Enabling factor Inhibitor
context
Macro-context Progressive legislation Conservative values in the 
bureaucracy do not match 
progressive legislation
Demand from policy Perception that in many cases research 
makers for diagnostic is shaped by researchers not policy 
review makers and does not answer key 
implementation questions like cost
Intra- and inter- Where these exist, good Interaction between researchers, 
institutional relationships between government, NGOs etc. are often 
linkages government and hostile, characterised by serious 
researchers mistrust, power misuse, power 
dynamics, personality politics etc.
Role of DPME in building Competition between departments 
trust and understanding limiting consensus in policy, 
between supplier and collaboration and co-delivery of 
government users policy
Multiple engagements Organisational silos within and across 
reinforcing messages and departments
relationships
Organisational Lack of time and capacity to absorb 
capacity research
Linking Research processes that Weakness in facilitating linkages 
research give voice to the lived between research and the 
and other experiences of women experience of wider stakeholders
evidence and not just the voice of 
the researcher
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 105
forced to implement a policy you do not believe in and goes against what 
you believe, who will you blame but the client. We have not been informed 
by what is going on the ground but what is coming from top down. We 
have imposed policies on populations who have not had a say on them. 
(Respondent 9 – research institute)
Where research seems to be pushing for liberal positions or a position in policy 
does not accord with the values of those implementing it, the position is less 
likely to be taken on and does not significantly change the way services are 
provided. Kahan (2007) referred to this as identity protective cognition. Peo -
ple are more likely to use evidence in ways that are supported by their peer 
groups than to be guided by the fidelity of the evidence. Shared ideological and 
cultural commitments are likely to be intertwined with membership of com -
munities (such as church, office, etc.) that furnish individuals with important 
bases of support. Most individuals will rarely form a contrary position to one 
held in institutions that provide them with important aspects that define their 
identity and social support.
The Diagnostic Review did not address any of the contentious issues in the 
sector. It focused on systems and how the government system was responding 
to the problem. Though it raised the issue of the beliefs and values of public 
servants, this was not a central issue of focus. Therefore, it was easier for different 
sectors and departments to agree on findings and recommendations.
Intra- and inter-institutional linkages
According to Weyrauch et al. (2016, p. 35),
There are two particular types of relationships that exert significant influ -
ence over how knowledge interacts (or not) with policy. One is related to 
the internal relationships between the government institution and other 
related government agencies. The second one relates to interaction with 
relevant users and producers of knowledge who can affect or be affected 
by policy design and implementation.
In this case we reflect on relationships between government and researchers, 
and relationships within government.
Relationships between researchers and government or NGOs  implementing pro-
grammes was cited as an important facilitator/barrier to evidence uptake. Some 
respondents argued that unrecognised and inadequately addressed trauma is 
seen in the behaviours of individual decision makers (both in government and 
NGOs) and in the nature of relations within the sector. Respondents reported 
that interactions between researchers, government and NGOs, and within gov-
ernment departments, are often hostile, characterised by serious mistrust, power 
misuse and personality politics hindering evidence-informed policy discussions 
in the sector.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
106 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Another important issue shaping relations in the sector is race. As already 
mentioned, researchers tend to be white and public service policy makers and 
implementers at national level are usually black, and specifically black Afri -
cans. This often raises issues of perceived cultural imposition and ideological 
differences between researchers and public servants or the communities they 
research.
We (as white people) can’t speak any of the African languages. It is seen as 
disrespectful in many settings; even communities have often raised the issue 
of race. We often experience people who are openly dismissive because we 
are white. Y ou walk into a meeting and people look you up and down and 
comment in another language. Y ou can anticipate that it is unlikely that 
they will listen to you, they will come back to you with some response 
about you not understanding the cultural context. Despite indicating our 
understanding of the culture, they will make some comments that refer 
to your otherness and your difference. This is fine, I recognise that I am a 
product of apartheid and that my otherness is an issue.
(Respondent 11 – development specialist)
This played out in the Diagnostic Review and illustrates the importance of 
internal M&E units’ key knowledge broker role. When KPMG was hired to carry 
out the work, there were reservations because the lead researcher was a white 
English woman who had recently relocated to South Africa, and the team was 
predominately white. There were questions about the ability of the team to 
understand the experiences of black women and communities. T o overcome 
this issue, the DPME project manager, together with the Chief Director for 
M&E at DSD, advised KPMG to diversify their team and sensitised the research 
team to what is likely to trigger pushback from the ESC. As a result, KPMG 
added black sector experts to their team. Second, the project manager in DPME 
managed relations with the ESC, often having discussions outside of the official 
ESC meetings with senior officials in key departments to allay their fears about 
the research process or team. Most of the communication to external stake -
holders was by DPME and DSD, not the evaluators. By doing this, the relation-
ship between government and researchers was maintained, and despite some of 
the difficult findings that pointed at failures of government, the evaluation was 
not rejected by government.
The case study also showed how when a piece of evidence is completed 
it becomes part of an existing body of knowledge and moves between exist -
ing networks of people and institutions. Interviews revealed how often it was 
existing connections between individuals and reinforcement through different 
platforms that promoted ongoing conversations that were important enablers 
of use of the Diagnostic Review. The National Treasury respondent indicated 
that it was being part of ongoing dialogue with the sector through the CSO-
led Dialogue Forum (now called the Violence Prevention Forum) that made all 
these different studies make sense, including the Diagnostic Review. The same
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 107
official was part of a study tour to Uganda to see Ugandan models for violence 
prevention that had been effective. He stated the following: ‘Going on the study 
tour broadened my perspective on interventions that are available to address 
violence. I looked at the interventions that are available in Uganda and see what 
we can learn’ (Respondent 3 – government).
This is a good example of how a combination of factors often work together 
to influence the use of evidence. In this case, participation in an ongoing discus-
sion with CSOs, government and academics and going on a study tour primed 
the official to be able to receive and use the information. Exposure of this 
Treasury official made it possible for the DSD’s request for additional budget to 
be supported at a time when government was cutting budgets across the public 
service. Also, it highlights the importance of spaces for dialogue in evidence use, 
particularly in a sector where there are high levels of contestation, fragmenta -
tion, value-laden issues and so forth. Spaces for dialogue offer opportunities for 
sense making that can challenge strongly held beliefs, unlike other communica-
tion approaches. This can enhance interaction between different stakeholders, 
foster agreement with research evidence and motivate stakeholders to act on 
the evidence, key in promoting behaviour change.
Organisational silos and competition between departments was raised as a key chal-
lenge in the VAWC sector. VAWC programmes span many different policy 
domains that are the responsibility of different departments, and the silo man-
dates create artificial divisions within the VAWC sector that limit information 
flows. Respondents reported that collaboration is weak in the sector, and there 
is competition and conflictual relations between departments:
A lot of the decision-making processes in government are based on poli -
tics and some form of competition and not on technical issues. That is the 
issue. It creates huge problems. Competition between departments, units, 
individuals and even within the same party. People do not get along and 
the right decisions do not get taken.
(Respondent 7 – independent consultant)
This was also the experience of other respondents who argued that revision of 
the PoA was hampered by relationship issues between departments.
The fragmentation also happens within departments where it is possible to have 
different units working on different aspects of VAWC. In DSD, for example, 
there is the Children’s Unit which works primarily through the lens of the child 
protection system; the Victim Empowerment Programme (VEP) unit is mostly 
guided by VEP policy; the Family Unit’s work is shaped by the White Paper 
on Families; then there is the Social Crime Prevention Unit, amongst others. 
A respondent spoke of contestations within DSD where there was no agree -
ment on some policy issues between the Children’s Unit and the VEP Unit:
During the revision of the PoA, the VEP chief director left the process. This 
created a power crisis. The two directorates are not working well together,
<<<PAGE=17>>>
108 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
not taking decisions and not engaging with materials that are developed 
for the project.
(Respondent 2 – consultant)
The fact that VAWC is spread between so many units has been a problem. 
No one takes full responsibility for it in the department. Y ou cannot hold 
any one unit for the improvement plan. I used to ask progress from one 
unit, and one day I was just told to go ask another unit. And that unit has 
not been responsive.
(Respondent 14 – government)
The different units in departments dealing with VAWC tend to relate to their 
subsector and the research that is produced in that subsector. This deepens pol-
icy fragmentation in the sector, as researchers in different subsectors are likely 
to push for certain reforms without being cognisant of how those reforms 
affect the entire policy area and therefore the achievement of broader policy 
outcomes (Gould et al., 2017). The ESC provided a platform to facilitate infor-
mation sharing during the research process, and attempted to overcome these 
fragmentations.
Balancing different ways of knowing (grassroots knowledge  
and research evidence) in policy
Participants spoke about how despite instrumental implementation of the 
Diagnostic Review’s recommendations, there were difficulties in balancing 
knowledge from empirical evidence with that from communities/CSOs that 
were consulted during the review of the PoA and planning the presidential 
GBV summit. Research was seen in some of the discussions as an elite indul -
gence which does not always represent the needs of survivors. Survivors of 
violence wanted certain actions (e.g. harsher punishment of perpetrators), 
which in some cases empirical evidence showed was not effective to address 
the problem.
Conclusions and lessons
How did the context and intervention inﬂuence the use of evidence?
A realist analysis suggests that in different contexts, interventions will result in 
varying outcomes (see Chapter 1). From a realist perspective, change cannot 
be solely attributed to the nature of an intervention as there are underlying 
causes of change that may not be directly observable ( Pawson et al., 2005 ). 
Interventions (I) require mechanisms (M) which connect programmes to their 
outcomes (O) within certain contexts (C). In this case study, the interven -
tion included an evidence-generation process (an evaluation) and interventions 
to promote use (e.g. communications), which influenced certain behavioural
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 109
mechanisms (agreement, access to information, building trust, amongst others) 
and resulted in certain use outcomes (how the evidence influenced policy and 
practice). Understanding which mechanisms work within which context can 
help us understand conditions that increase the likelihood of research utilisa -
tion and therefore we can be better placed to reproduce these. Here we added 
to the realist Context-Mechanism-Outcome configuration, Interventions for 
evidence use.
In this case study we observe a number of interventions and mechanisms 
that appear to facilitate use of evidence (building on the analytical framework 
in Chapter 2):
1 In the context of interventions crossing organisational silos, the following 
are essential:
• The formalised involvement of different organisations and stakehold -
ers in the evidence-generation process (evidence generation). The par-
ticipation of departments in the research process and on structures like 
the steering committee/IMC TTT was important to legitimise the 
research process and the outcomes. When departments pushed against 
the findings or recommendations on the grounds that their depart -
ments were not consulted, DSD and DPME could remind the depart-
ments of their participation in the research process.
• Dissemination of findings with government formalised structures for 
coordination is essential. In this case study, these were the clusters 
and the IMC (inter-ministerial committee), which allowed different 
departments to interrogate the research and its implications for their 
departments (use intervention), in some cases suggesting changes to how 
the recommendation should be responded to.
2 In a sector where people hold strong opposing beliefs and where there is 
a history of conflict, oppression and subordination on the basis of race (or 
any other construct) (context), the following are very important:
• The representativity of the evidence-generation team (evidence 
generation);
• Wide dissemination of evidence led by government (use intervention);
• Knowledge brokers that can facilitate mutual understanding and trust 
(use intervention);
• Promotion of spaces for meaningful dialogue (use intervention), which 
can promote agreement, mutual understanding and trust (change 
mechanisms).
3 In a context where there is poor inter-sector communication and relations, 
introducing the Diagnostic Review (government piece of evidence) into 
use interventions in the wider policy ecosystem was an important facilita-
tor of much-needed honest discussion about how to strengthen the coun-
try’s response to VAWC and therefore the use of the evidence. Examples of
<<<PAGE=19>>>
110 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
interventions included the government-led study tour to Uganda, the Vio-
lence Prevention Forum (CSO-led), the Social Lab (CSO-led) and Shelter 
Movement work (CSO-led), through the knowledge brokering role of 
government (use intervention).
4 In the context of well-established and vibrant CSOs with a history of 
community mobilisation and policy reform advocacy and a democratic 
government that embraces participation in political processes, pressure 
from grassroots CSOs pushed government to implement some of the 
recommendations.
Lessons around use of evidence in the V AWC sector
The case study shows how, though use interventions are critical to facilitate use 
of evidence, policy making and implementation is a long process that is highly 
contested and without a clear beginning or end. Therefore use interventions 
enable change in a nonlinear, and sometimes unpredictable, chain of reactions. 
Knowledge brokering is an important facilitator of evidence use; however, this 
process has to be built into the research process. This is because policy decisions 
are made at different stages of policy development – problem identification and 
analysis, options analysis, choice of intervention, implementation and M&E. 
It is important therefore to appreciate that the power to shape policy shifts 
between different stakeholders through the policy process. We have also shown 
how the contestation and power shifts not only happen between government 
and NGOs but also within government institutions, particularly in intersectoral 
policies addressing complex social problems. Government is not homogenous 
and neither are departments. Within departments, units can have different views 
on policy and it is possible to have contestations within departments as well as 
between departments.
Evidence uptake is a continuous process that happens both during and after 
the research process. If space is created for cross-sectoral discussions during the 
evaluation process, it can offer opportunity to build consensus on contentious 
policy issues.
We conclude with some lessons.
Research processes need to overcome the impact of strongly  
held values, beliefs and norms
In a sector like VAWC with strongly held values, beliefs and norms, evidence 
use is more than a technical endeavour. These values can be held by indi -
vidual policy makers, politicians and staff in organisations, making it difficult 
for research that challenges these values to influence policy and transform the 
way policy and programmes work. Researchers and evaluators in the sector are 
therefore not only involved in the process of producing knowledge for policy 
making, but they are engaged in a process that questions societal values, beliefs
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 111
and norms. Opening the research process to interrogation by people who hold 
different positions in spaces where they can interact with one another and with 
the research process can open research to take in the different perspectives, 
enriching the research and strengthening advocacy possibilities.
Safe spaces where meaningful conversations can be held are critical, as are the 
skills to facilitate such conversations. Steering committees, when managed well, 
can create safe spaces for different views to be debated during the research pro-
cess, thus informing analysis, conclusions and recommendations from research. 
But these spaces for dialogue can also be provided for outside of the research 
process. External stakeholders such as think tanks and CSOs have key roles to 
play in this regard, as this case study has demonstrated.
The composition of the research team matters
Given South Africa’s history, VAWC disproportionately affects black com -
munities which are often the intended beneficiaries of programmes target -
ing poverty-related issues, and are also often the objects/subjects of research. 
Representivity in research teams can address the sense of ‘othering’ of com -
munities. Representivity, however, is not just about including researchers of 
different races, gender or sexual orientation (or whatever social categorisation 
is important in a specific context). It is also about representation of different 
world views, ideologies and experiences that relate to the populations being 
studied and those that the research process aims to influence. Such an approach 
to setting up research teams can enrich research processes and make researchers 
sensitive and responsive to issues that might make it difficult for certain people 
to receive the messages from the research.
Wider lessons
Importance of government internal capacity for research/evaluation  
and knowledge brokering
Government internal evaluation and research capacity is important for effec -
tive evidence use. Evaluation/research units in departments need to have the 
capacity to work with policy makers and implementers as knowledge brokers 
to develop evidence agendas, have systems to access research carried out by 
institutions outside of government and have the capacity to make sense of 
external research and to advise policy makers. They need to create spaces for 
dialogue between their departments and external researchers. Where research is 
commissioned, these units still need to have the capacity to shape and guide the 
research process to ensure it remains relevant and can be used effectively. Where 
government has strong evaluation/research capacity, it is better placed to shape 
the research agenda, ask the right policy questions and guide the production of 
evidence to ensure that it responds to policy needs.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
112 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Complexity of internal government policy-making processes
Some of the challenges with evidence use related to how policy making unfolds 
in the South African government. Most policy discussions are not open to par-
ticipation by non-government stakeholders. They happen between and within 
departments and public entities, in management fora, at clusters, Cabinet and 
so forth, and consultation with wider stakeholders often only happens when 
this process is completed. It can be difficult for a policy maker to push an idea 
through these different government structures simply because it is evident in 
research, particularly if it challenges dominant values and views. Government 
needs to be more open to including wider views earlier on in processes and 
individual policy makers need to be supported through what can be lengthy 
policy processes.
Evidence needs to be used for the underlying meaning,  
not just compliance with recommendations
This case study shows that it is possible for departments to implement rec -
ommendations and therefore tick the box of instrumental use without this 
affecting the wider meaning underlying the policy, and so actual policy con -
tent and implementation. Organisations may use research evidence to make 
minor changes to policy and programmes, but not necessarily to transform 
policy approaches. In the Diagnostic Review, the respondents acknowledged 
that the recommendations that were implemented were the least controversial 
and therefore easier to implement. The evidence-informed decision-making 
sector needs a better understanding of how to support decision makers and 
institutions and develop means of measuring evidence use that overcome this 
challenge.
And ﬁnally
This chapter has focused on an evaluation in a complex sector, with inter- and 
intra-organisational dependencies and rivalries, and strongly held and differing 
values which often differ between policy makers, and between policy mak -
ers and researchers. It highlights the mistrust and miscommunication between 
many researchers and policy makers and how this had to be mediated. The 
chapter showcases an evaluation conducted carefully and sensitively, paying a 
lot of attention to process and not just product which has led to significant use, 
both instrumentally and conceptually. The evaluation was helped by an estab-
lished national evaluation system, formalising many of the elements likely to 
promote use. The focus on systems which can build co-ownership is critical. We 
also see the importance of facilitating meaningful dialogue within departments, 
across departments, and with wider stakeholders – facilitation skills which are 
rare in government. The latter is an area where more work is needed to see how 
to build the skills and systems which can promote such dialogue, can build trust
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Evidence in a complex social programme 113
and openness to evidence, and can help to build changes in understanding, in 
motivation to do things differently and in the capability to do so.
Note
 1 Since its launch in July of 2016, the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children 
has promoted the concept of pathfinding, which aims to raise awareness, stimulate leader-
ship commitment, galvanise action, and establish a standard of national violence preven-
tion throughout the world (www.end-violence.org/pathfinding-countries).
References
Ademiluka, S.O. 2018. Patriarchy and women abuse: Perspectives from Ancient Israel and 
Africa. Old Testament Essays, 31(2), 339–362.
Amisi, M.M. and Vawda, A. 2017. Strengthening democratic governance in the building of 
integrated human settlements through evaluations. In Podems, D. (ed.), Democratic evalua-
tion and democracy: Exploring the reality. Charlotte: Information Age Publishing, pp. 127–138.
Barberton, C., Abdoll, C., Ragwala, L., Budlender, D. and Mohamed, Z. 2018. Performance 
and expenditure review: Cost implications of funding for NPOs following the Nawongo court judge-
ments. Government T echnical Advisory Centre, National Treasury, Cornerstone Economic 
Research. Retrieved from www.gtac.gov.za/perdetail/Cost%20implications%20of%20
funding%20NPOs%20following%20the%20NAWONGO%20court%20judgements.pdf
Chipkin, I. and Meny-Gibert, S. 2011. Why the past matters: History of the public service in South Africa. 
Retrieved from https://pari.org.za/past-matters-histories-public-service-south-africa/
DPME. 2017. The evaluation of the non-proﬁt regulatory system. Department of Planning, Moni-
toring and Evaluation and the Department of Social Development. Unpublished report.
DPME and DSD. 2016. Diagnostic review of the state response to violence against women and 
children. Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, and the Department of 
Social Development. Retrieved from https://evaluations.dpme.gov.za/images/gallery/
DPME%20-%20VAWC.pdf
Gender Links and The Medical Research Council. 2010. The war@home: Findings of the GBV 
prevalence study in Gauteng, Western Cape, KwaZulu Natal and Limpopo Provinces of South 
Africa. Retrieved from https://genderlinks.org.za/programme-web-menu/publications/
the-warhome-findings-of-the-gbv-prevalence-study-in-south-africa-2012–11–25/
Gould, C., Mufamadi, D., Amisi, M.M., Dartnall, E., Moruane, S., Abdoll, C., Connors, J., 
Naicker, S., Shai, N., Malek, E., Rezant, B., Edelstein, I., Mabunda, A., Mayet, Y ., Frost, K., 
Dippenaar, W ., Kader, Z., Iewaks, A. and Moeketsi, J. 2019. What will it take to prevent inter-
personal violence in South Africa?  Institute for Security Studies (ISS) policy brief, Pretoria. 
Retrieved from https://issafrica.org/research/policy-brief/what-will-it-take-to-prevent- 
interpersonal-violence-in-south-africa
Gould, C., Mufamadi, D., Hsiao, C. and Amisi, M.M. 2017. Preventing violence in South 
Africa: From policing to prevention . Institute for Security Studies (ISS) policy brief, Pre -
toria. Retrieved from https://issafrica.org/research/policy-brief/reducing-violence-in- 
south-africa-from-policing-to-prevention
Hall, K. and Mokomane, Z. 2018. The shape of children’s families and households: A demo-
graphic overview. In Hall, K., Richter, L., Mokomane, Z. and Lake, L. (eds.), Children, 
families and the state. South African Child Gauge, Children’s Institute, University of Cape 
T own. Retrieved from www.ci.uct.ac.za/sites/default/files/image_tool/images/367/
<<<PAGE=23>>>
114 Matodzi M. Amisi et al.
Child_Gauge/South_African_Child_Gauge_2018/Chapters/the_shape_of_childrens_
families_and_households.pdf
Kahan, D.M. 2007. Culture and identity-protective cognition: Explaining the white male effect in risk 
perception. Faculty Scholarship Series. 101. Retrieved from https://digitalcommons.law.
yale.edu/fss_papers/101
Lamb, G. and Warton, G. 2011. Why is crime in South Africa so violent? A rapid review . Pro-
gramme to Promote Pro Poor Policy Development, Pretoria. Retrieved from www.
psppdknowledgerepository.org/search/adsearch/send/62-rapid-evidence-reviews/275-
why-is-crime-in-south-africa-so-violent-a-rapid-review
Meer, F . 2016. Women in the apartheid society. Retrieved from www.sahistory.org.za/archive/
women-apartheid-society-fatima-meer-0
Pawson, R., Greenhalgh, T., Harvey, G. and Walshe, K. 2005. Realist review: A new method 
of systematic review designed for complex policy interventions. Journal of Health Services 
Research & Policy, 10(1), 21–34. https://doi.org/10.1258/1355819054308530.
Rauch, J. 2000. The national crime prevention strategy. Retrieved from www.csvr.org.za/docs/
crime/1996nationalcrime.pdf
Statistics South Africa. 2016. Community survey 2016-in brief. Retrieved from http://cs2016.
statssa.gov.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/CS-in-brief-14-07-2017-with-cover_1.pdf
Ward, C.L., Artz, L., Leoschut, L., Kassanjee, R. and Burton, P . 2018. Sexual violence against 
children in South Africa: A nationally representative cross-sectional study of prevalence 
and correlates. Lancet Global Health, 6, e460–e468. Retrieved from www.thelancet.com/
action/showPdf?pii=S2214-109X%2818%2930060-3
Weyrauch, V ., Echt, L. and Suliman, S. 2016. Knowledge into policy: Going beyond ‘Context mat-
ters’. Retrieved from www.inasp.info/sites/default/files/2018-04/Going%20beyond%20
context%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20framework.pdf
World Bank. 2018. Overcoming poverty and inequality in South Africa: Assessment of drivers, 
constraints and opportunities . Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/530481521735906534/pdf/124521-REV-OUO-South-Africa-Poverty-and-Ine  
quality-Assessment-Report-2018-FINAL-WEB.pdf