<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 9 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Matodzi M. Amisi1  
Mohammed S. Awal2 
Mine Pabari3,4 
Dede Bedu-Addo5 
Affiliations:
1Center for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results, 
University of the 
Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
2Ghana Centre for 
Democratic Development, 
Accra, Ghana
3Athari Advisory, Nairobi, Kenya
4Center for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results, 
Faculty of Commerce, Law 
and Management, University 
of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
5Ghana Monitoring and 
Evaluation Forum, Accra, 
Ghana
Corresponding author:
Matodzi Amisi,
michellematodzi@gmail.com
Dates:
Received: 31 May 2021
Accepted: 12 Nov. 2021
Published: 09 Dec. 2021
How to cite this article:
Amisi, M.M., Awal, M.S., 
Pabari, M. & Bedu-Addo, D., 
2021, ‘How relationship and 
dialogue facilitate evidence 
use: Lessons from African 
countries’, African Evaluation 
Journal 9(1), a559. https://
doi.org/10.4102/aej.v9i1.559
Copyright:
© 2021. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
A growing recognition within the field of evidence-informed policy and practice or evidence-
informed decision-making is that policy and decision-making are political processes informed by 
the values, culture and experiences of policymakers and practitioners as well as technical 
considerations such as the fit with existing systems, human resources and budgets (Du Toit 2012; 
Oliver & Faul 2018; Parkhurst 2017). In addition, knowledge generation is not the sole domain of 
researchers (Weber et al. 2014). Policymakers and implementers also hold knowledge and 
expertise that researchers may not possess, and this knowledge and experience is important not 
only in the uptake of research but also in how research evidence is generated (Amisi 2015; Stewart, 
Dyal & Langer 2017). Evidence use is increasingly viewed as a social process, aided by processes 
that promote information flows between individuals and organisations, and by the collective 
interpretation of existing knowledge (Amisi, Buthelezi & Magangoe 2020; Rickinson & Edwards 
2021). In this understanding of evidence use, the relationships between different stakeholders in 
the policy ecosystem are critical enablers for the use of evidence in policy and practice. 
Understanding who is taking part in different policy processes, research and evaluation and to 
whom they are connected (their networks) and how they access information is an important 
building block for promoting the use of evidence in policy (Oliver & Faul 2018). Yet, relational 
aspects of evidence use do not receive adequate attention in the evidence-based policymaking 
literature (Oliver & Faul 2018), with researchers and development practitioners tending to 
focus more on the development of evidence tools to support integration of evidence in policy 
(Stewart & Smith 2015).
Background: This article shares lessons from four case studies, documenting experiences of 
evidence use in different public policies in South Africa, Kenya, Ghana and the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Objectives:  Most literature on evidence use in Africa focuses either on one form of 
evidence, that is, evaluations, systematic reviews or on the systems governments develop 
to support evidence use. However, the use of evidence in policy is complex and requires 
systems, processes, tools and information to flow between different stakeholders. In this 
article, we demonstrate how relationships between knowledge generators and users were 
built and maintained in the case studies, and how these relationships were critical for 
evidence use.
Method: The case studies were amongst eight case studies carried out for the book entitled 
‘Using Evidence in Policy and Practice: Lessons from Africa’. Ethnographic case studies drawn 
from both secondary and primary research, including interviews with key informants and 
extensive document reviews, were carried out. The research and writing process involved 
policymakers enabling the research to access participants’ rich observations.
Results: The case studies demonstrate that initiatives to build relationships between different 
state agencies, between state and non-state actors and between non-state actors are critical to 
enable organisations to use evidence. This can be enabled by the creation of spaces for dialogue 
that are sensitively facilitated and ongoing for actors to be aware of evidence, understand the 
evidence and be motivated to use the evidence.
Conclusion: Mutually beneficial and trustful relationships between individuals and 
institutions in different sectors are conduits through which information flows between sectors, 
new insights are generated and evidence used.
Keywords: evidence; evidence use; evaluation use; evidence use systems; relationships.
How relationship and dialogue facilitate evidence use: 
Lessons from African countries
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Relationships between stakeholders in policy ecosystems 
are shaped by what happens in both formal and informal 
networks. Weyrauch, Echt and Suliman (2016) argue that 
networks of relationships can be broadly classified into two 
categories. Firstly, there are the relationships between state 
agencies for policy design and implementation. These are 
formal networks dictated by statutory requirements either in 
the country’s constitution or in sectoral legislation that spells 
out roles and responsibilities and how different institutions 
of government should cooperate. These relationships are 
further shaped by the politics of the country as well as the 
nature and quality of democracy. For example, the South 
African constitution defines how national, provincial and 
municipal governments should cooperate in the delivery of 
services. However, within these formal networks, individual 
policy actors have agency to establish interpersonal 
relationships that can promote or hinder cooperation 
between institutions (Oliver & Faul 2018; Amisi et al. 2020).
The second category are relationships between state agencies 
and non-state actors such as researchers, civil society 
organisations (CSOs) and the public. In addition, the 
relationship between various non-state actors can also 
facilitate or impede the use of evidence (Amisi et al. 2021). 
Non-state actors can vary from small community-based 
organisations, local and international non-governmental 
organisations and those representing the voice of communites. 
Sherriff et al. (2019) stressed the importance of including 
communities in research processes designed to shape their 
lived experiences, particularly disenfranchised communities 
that are extensively researched.
Although the relationship between researchers and 
policymakers receives attention in studies on evidence-
informed policy and practice (Stewart et al. 2017), the 
relationships within government, between state and non-
state actors and amongst non-state actors are also important 
predictors of the degree to which different types of evidence 
are used and the quality of the use. This article takes a closer 
look at the relational aspects that enable evidence use by 
drawing on data from the four case studies to argue for the 
importance of relationships and dia logue in evidence use.
Background
This article shares lessons from four of eight case studies 
carried out to understand the facilitators of, and barriers to, 
evidence use in Africa. The case study research took place in 
five countries and one explored policymaking at the 
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). 
The eight case studies were published in a book edited 
by Goldman and Pabari (2020).
The research used an analytical framework (Figure 1) drawn 
from existing work by Langer et al. (2020) and Weyrauch 
et al. (2016). The framework recognises evidence use 
as behaviour change, meaning individual policy actors, 
implementers and researchers or evaluators need to act with 
intent (different from the traditional ways they do their work) 
for evidence to be used in practice. The framework further 
recognises and works with the complexity of evidence use, 
considers contextual influencers and breaks down  an 
Source: Langer, L., Goldman, I. & Pabari, M., 2020, Analytical framework used to guide case study research. In Using evidence for policy and practice - Lessons from Africa, Routledge, Taylor & Francis 
Group, New York, NY . 
FIGURE 1: Analytical framework.
Context
External dimension: Macro-context;
intra-rela/g415onships with state/non-state agents
Internal dimension: Culture; organisa/g415onal
capacity; management; and core resources
Evidence
genera/g415on
Use
interven/g415on
Change
mechanism
Individual/
organisa/g415onal/
systems change
Constant feedback between each step on the framework
Evidence
use
Development
impact
Examples of
dimensions to
consider:
• Type of
   evidence
• Quality/rigour
• Other, e.g
   /g415meliness
Examples to 
consider:
• Capacity-building
• Awareness
   raising
• Access
• Champions/
   mentors
• Organisa/g415onal
   change 
M1- Awareness
M2- Agree
M3- Access
M4- Interact/trust
M5- Ability
M6-
Ins/g415tu/g415onalising/
formalising 
• Mo/g415va/g415on to
   use evidence
• Capability to
   use evidence
• Opportunity to
   use evidence
• Individual/
   organisa/g415onal/
   system behaviour
   change
• Instrumental
• Conceptual
• Symbolic
• Process use
• Policy
   performance
   and impact
• Wider
    systems
    change
Demand for evidence
-Ins/g415tu/g415onalised in system, e.g. NEP
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
evidence journey into the ways in which evidence is 
generated, the interventions made to ensure evidence use, 
the change mechanisms that arise as a result and the 
relationships between the evidence journey and the 
immediate and wider outcomes that emerge.
An important element of the framework is the recognition 
that context matters and that relationships are a core 
contextual factor influencing evidence use in policymaking 
and decision-making. The framework acknowledges 
that relationships function within broader systems of 
organisations, values, incentive mechanisms, culture, and 
so on, which influence decisions taken. This article will 
illustrate how relationships and dialogue mediate, and 
moderate evidence use in the selected case studies. 
The article will explore use interventions implemented 
through the evidence journey that strengthened and built 
relationships between stakeholders, how that activated 
different mechanisms to produce individual, organisational 
and system changes.
The article departs from a tendency to focus on evidence 
generation tools (Stewart & Smith 2015) to understand how 
evidence is used in policy. It also offers a different perspective 
to evidence use literature that has focued on institutional 
arrangements or forms of systems government implement to 
support evidence use (Chirau, Blaser-Mapitsa & Amisi 2021; 
Goldman et al. 2015).
Methods
The eight case studies were from countries linked to the 
Twende Mbele programme. Twende Mbele is a partner ship 
of African governments promoting the collaboration in 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems to improve 
the government performance. Focusing on countries 
collaborating in Twende Mbele offered the research ready 
access to policymakers and the potential to use the book itself 
as a change intervention in these countries (Goldman & 
Pabari 2020). Researchers of the original case studies and this 
article worked with policymakers who played an active role 
in the research and writing of case studies. This provided 
insights to the internal working of the policy environment 
that would otherwise not be possible.
We draw on four case studies: (1) the ethnographic case study 
of the diagnostic review of South African government’s 
response to violence against women and children (VAWC); 
(2) the case study traced how the evaluation commissioned 
under the National Evaluation System by the Department of 
Planning Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) and Department 
of Social Development (DSD) was used (Amisi et al. 2020); 
(3) the Kenya case study focused on the role of a Parliamentary 
committee in the revision of Kenya’s Wildlife Conservation and 
Management Act of 2013 (Pabari et al. 2020) and (4) the Ghana 
case study looked at the role that civil society at district level 
can have in enabling use of data in the improvement of 
sanitation services (Smith et al. 2020). Unlike the other case 
studies, the EVOWAS case study focused on policymaking at 
regional level. The case study traces a policy process to get a 
new directive on tobacco taxation adopted (Mane, Diagne & 
Tiemtore 2020).
These four case studies were selected as relational aspects to 
evidence use had been identified. Each of these case studies 
were reanalysed using the analytical framework ( Figure 1) 
with a focus on identifying inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral 
relational aspects that enabled evidence use. We focused on 
the external context dimension of the framework to identify 
significant relationships, use interventions implemented and 
change mechanisms activated and how they enable use. In 
addition, the authors were involved in various roles in the 
original research teams and were able to draw on their 
insights from the research process.
Limitations
Most of the data collected in the case studies were qualitative 
and relied on self-reporting from the research participants. 
Efforts were made to triangulate self-reported data with 
other records and existing literature where possible. The 
intention of the research was not to arrive at definitive 
‘causes’ of evidence use, but rather to understand and explain 
the facilitators and barriers to evidence use. Therefore, in this 
article, we do not present any quantitative measures but 
draw on reflections of key stakeholders interviewed and 
other available records.
Findings: The relational aspect of 
evidence use
We present findings and lessons from the four case studies 
about how relationships can be pathways through which 
policy actors and practitioners acquire evidence, evaluate its 
usefulness and act on it while also enriching the process of 
empirical knowledge generation.
Collaborative management of 
knowledge generation
One of the findings from the case studies is that evidence use 
must be considered during the design of the evidence 
production process. For example, in the tobacco control in 
West Africa case study, where action research in ECOWAS 
countries was commissioned to support tobacco tax reforms. 
The Consortium for Economic and Social Research, in 
Senegal, was hired to lead the action research. Participatory 
approaches were used, involving several stakeholders, 
particularly influential actors such as the chairperson of the 
Customs Commission of ECOWAS. Structures were 
established to enable stakeholders’ effective participation. 
Steering committees were set up in each country and 
regionally to oversee the project, and a scientific committee 
was set up as the validation body for the documents and 
procedures. The different committees held several meetings 
and discussions as and when needed and these discussions 
were facilitated to ensure that participation of all stakeholders 
and productive engagements and committees provided
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
space for ongoing dialogue and debate on the research and 
the policy at hand. Interaction between researchers and 
policy actors was weaved into the methods of the action 
research, with officials from the tax administration, customs 
administration and statistical bodies participating in 
the research. The diversity of the participating voices 
demonstrated political commitment to solving the problem 
of tobacco use, and open communication and trust between 
the stakeholders enabled the action research process to shape 
individual countries’ tobacco policies and their collaboration 
within the ECOWAS.
In the Ghana sanitation case study, a consultative group was 
set up to facilitate the co-creation of methodologies and 
approaches used to generate the evidence as well as jointly 
engage in making sense of the evidence. A consultative group 
of government data-producing agencies at the central 
government level was formed, which were responsible for all 
sectors assessed in the District League Table (DLT), together 
with the Ghana Centre for Democratic Development (CDD-
Ghana) and UNICEF, Ghana. The group meets annually 
to review the indicators used in the DLT performance 
assessment. This annual review enables the building of 
relationships and creates a sense of ownership,  ultimately 
strengthening evidence uptake from the findings of the DLT.
These case studies demonstrate that formalised multi-
stakeholder project-management processes such as steering 
committees, reference groups and advisory groups can be 
valuable use interventions that build relationships and 
ensure that the voices of important stakeholders are included 
in the evidence-generation process. The involvement of 
different stakeholders during evidence generation enabled a 
sense of ownership and built trust. This created opportunity 
to use knowledge from different sectors and stakeholders in 
shaping the way in which a problem is understood, and 
policy questions framed.
Relationships between state agencies
In many policy areas, there are a range of policy actors and 
implementers who need to agree on policy changes, allocate 
resources, implement the policy and monitor the 
implementation. One of the observations from the VAWC 
case study is that the different ways in which the social 
sector departments and the criminal justice sector 
understood the causes of violence and how to respond to the 
problem shaped much of policy and the prevailing policy 
fragmentation in South Africa’s response. The evaluation 
steering committee offered a space for some of the different 
institutional interpretations of the problem and policy 
positions to be debated. Although these discussions were 
not adequate to produce alignment of policies implemented 
by different ministries, it was an important starting point 
that this contestation was addressed and documented in the 
evaluation report.
This experience highlighted the need for government 
departments, who should be working together to address 
complex social problems, to have ongoing intersectoral, 
evidence-informed policy discussions on the nature of the 
problem, how it is changing, what is working and not 
working and how to strengthen collaborative responses.
In the Kenyan case, the relationship between influential 
leaders in the executive and the legislature was central to the 
successful review of wildlife management legislation that 
resulted in the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act of 
2013. Attempts to update the legislation had previously 
failed on multiple occasions. The two arms of government 
worked closely together throughout all stages of the review 
process, enabling meaningful consideration of evidence from 
a variety of different sources.
Relationships between non-state actors
Contradictory evidence from a diversity of sources can be a 
significant barrier to evidence use in policymaking processes 
(Goldman & Pabari 2020). In the case of Kenya, non-state 
actors were required to engage with one another during 
different unsuccessful attempts over the course of many 
years to revise out-of-date wildlife management legislation. 
Consequently, they were given the opportunity to engage 
with one another, exchange and negotiate evidence from 
different sources and perspectives and to build relationships. 
Relationships previously established between non-state 
actors meant that they were able to present shared evidence 
and positions to the policymakers. Establishing trust between 
non-state actors was the change mechanism that enabled 
them to reach agreement on the position to be tabled. This 
provided an opportunity and motivation to use the evidence 
because it made it easier for policymakers to act on 
the evidence. It also meant that time and energy could be 
focused on the policy questions as opposed to negotiating 
conflicting positions.
The importance of dialogue
The framework identifies interaction between stakeholders 
as needed mechanism to facilitate evidence use. In the long 
process of developing and implementing policy, stakeholders 
need to interact regularly. In these interactions, effective 
dialogue is important to ensure that different perspectives 
and a range of evidence are considered, and differences 
handled constructively. Dialogue between stakeholders 
provides a process for thinking together that creates new 
knowledge beyond individuals’ understanding of an issue.
The four case studies found that interactions between 
individuals who are doing research and or evaluation, 
generating data, making policy, working with communities, 
and so on, allowed for mutual sharing of knowledge which 
were crucial for evidence use. Such interactions increased the 
likelihood that different forms of evidence would inform the 
thinking of policy actors and implementers, and that 
experiences from policy and implementation would, in turn, 
shape the kinds of questions researchers were asking. In the 
VAWC, the policy officials who participated in the evaluations
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
steering committee were participated in crafting the purpose, 
questions and scope of the evaluation. The team that was 
developing the terms of reference for the evaluation will consult 
with the policy units to understand the policy needs and invited 
inputs on the actual evaluation questions. Though this process 
was laborious, it took more than 6 months to agree on the 
questions and scope, and this was an important use intervention. 
The officials who participated in the evaluation steering 
committee later promoted the evaluation, and the process built 
agreement on the evaluation evidence to be generated and 
strengthened the capacity of policy units to demand evaluations.
In the Kenya case study, stakeholder forums were carefully 
facilitated to ensure that all participants had an equal voice 
and to avoid influencing the submissions to parliament. The 
Parliamentary Committee also used interventions such as 
convening debates between individuals with opposing views 
and arranging breakfast meetings to provide policymakers 
from both the executive and legislature the opportunity to 
engage with experts and to broaden their understanding of 
the realities and needs of the sector.
The sanitation case study in Ghana also demonstrates that 
the facilitation of regular meetings and engagements at 
multiple government levels to discuss the evidence allowed 
the development and fostering of relationships between 
researchers and policy actors. Consequently, it strengthened 
trust in the evidence and built abilities and confidence to use 
the research evidence. The findings reaffirmed the importance 
of interaction to build trust, and the role dialogue played in 
generating common knowledge.
Relationships enable information flow
The case studies found that interpersonal and organisational 
relationships that are trusting, appreciative and reciprocal 
facilitate intersectoral information sharing that is crucial for 
different types of evidence to be used in policy and practice. 
Trust between stakeholders is often cultivated in interactions 
that happen outside of the formal discussions. One of 
the reasons why bringing people together for dialogue 
facilitates use of evidence is that it allows people to 
make connections beyond the professional aspects through 
informal conversations and other such opportunities.
The VAWC case study demonstrated the importance of 
interpersonal networks in how the diagnostic review was 
interpreted and used. One of the respondents indicated how 
getting access to spaces of engagement is about relationships:
‘This is all about relationships, who you know and who have 
access to, how much energy you have and how much you wish 
to engage, and how useful it is for you to engage, and how much 
they listen to you’. (Think tank)
A good example of this is how the DPME and the DSD were 
invited to share lessons from the VAWC diagnostic review 
and participate in several CSO dialogue spaces like the Soul 
City social innovation process and the Violence Prevention 
Forum. The invitations were often facilitated by individual 
researchers and CSO representatives who participated in the 
evaluation process at different stages. These individuals 
often shared information about the evaluations in their 
interactions with other civil society actors, researchers and 
donors. This type of sharing was better targeted and, together 
with other evidence-sharing tools used by DPME and DSD, 
ensured that the evaluation was well known and became an 
important input to the process for developing the National 
Strategic Plan on Gender-Based Violence and Femicide.
Information flow is also important within a sub-sector. The 
Ghana sanitation case study demonstrates how established 
relationships between non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs)  enabled flow of information between international, 
national and local CSOs. The Coalition of NGOs in Water and 
Sanitation (CONIWAS) coordinated international and local 
alliances for advocacy purposes, ensuring that information is 
not concentrated in big CSOs. Also, the DLT project is a 
process of translating and transferring complex government 
performance data into information that can be understood by 
local actors and community members.
An instructive lesson from the Ghana case is the importance 
of an empowered citizenry in evidence use. Civil society 
organisations hold workshops on DLT data with communities, 
providing data in infographics and other means which 
communities can understand. In addition, there is an SMS 
service through which communities can text requests for 
information and the information can be sent to their phone. 
Information flows to citizens communicate government 
performance, and they are given space to interrogate the data 
and interact with policy actors at district levels. This was 
found to improve the quality of the evidence generated by 
government and create pressure for policy actors to use the 
available knowledge.
Effective use of evidence requires flows of knowledge and 
information between different actors. As the case studies 
show, this should be understood as multidirectional. It is a 
dynamic process whereby different forms of knowledge are 
shared, made sense of and acted upon, and this is facilitated 
by improved relationships between actors in different 
sectors.
The important role of policy analysis or 
monitoring and evaluation units in facilitating 
relationships
Establishing relationships is demanding and an ongoing 
process. Even when trust has been established, it can be 
eroded easily if lines of communications are not kept open or 
problems are not addressed. From the case studies, we found 
that individuals and units responsible for research or policy 
analysis or M&E within public institutions often mediated 
relationships within government and between government 
and non-state stakeholders in the evidence journey. In the 
VAWC case study, the Chief Director of M&E within the 
DSD and an evaluation director at DPME mediated and 
facilitated relationships between evaluators, policymakers
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
and implementers, CSOs and other stakeholders. This 
included meeting different stakeholders outside of official 
steering committee meetings to identify needs, solve problems, 
keep policymakers engaged and promote the use of findings.
Similarly, in the case of Kenya, the Parliamentary Research 
Services played a critical role in establishing and maintaining 
relationships between the different stakeholders in the 
evidence journey. The Principal Research Officer supporting 
the Committee responsible for the revision of the Wildlife 
Act regularly and proactively reached out to stakeholders of 
the Act to ensure that they were informed about the process 
and about opportunities to provide submissions. In addition, 
the Committee chair was fastidious in ensuring transparency 
in the process – documenting the outcome of dialogue 
and debate and ensuring that the reasons for accepting or 
rejecting evidence and positions were communicated 
widely.
Discussion and implications
The findings demonstrate how interaction between 
stakeholders, both amongst state actors and between state 
actors and non-state actors, facilitates the use of evidence. 
However, interaction goes beyond actors coming together, 
and research being translated or transmitted from producers 
to users. Interaction implies a dynamic exchange between 
actors that allows information flow between actors and 
institutions. This process influences both the production of 
research evidence and its utilisation.
Quality relationships between state institutions, between 
state and non-state actors and between non-state actors are 
pathways through which policy actors and practitioners 
acquire evidence, evaluate its usefulness and act on it while 
also enriching the process of empirical knowledge generation 
(Amisi 2020). However, relationships are not always positive; 
a country’s historical context, competition for resources and 
influence, politics, personalities, organisational cultures that 
encourage operating in silos and different beliefs can all 
militate against trusting relationships, particularly between 
sectors.
The case studies found that relationships can be, and must 
be, cultivated. Relationship building requires both quality 
and quantity of interactions and formal and informal 
meetings (Sherriff et al. 2019). In their work with Aboriginal 
communities, Sherriff et al. (2019) found that stakeholders 
often need frequent, small and informal interactions to build 
trust and mutual understanding. This was supported by 
Ward et al., quoted in Oliver and Faul (2018), who found that 
frequency of interactions and encounters was the key factor 
that led to agreement of goals and consensus on the meaning 
of evidence.
Attending meetings, responding to phone calls, meeting 
people for coffee or lunch and meeting to resolve problems, 
all of which are important to build and sustain professional 
relationships, takes working time. This is something that 
much of evidence-generation planning and funding does not 
cover, neither is it recognised as legitimate use of time in 
government nor NGOs.
The required level of investment in relationships cannot 
happen unless there is institutional commitment to 
collaborating with other agencies, where working together to 
solve complex problems is seen as a necessity not an 
inconvenience. Investment in collaboration and building 
relationships must be desired, valued, planned for and 
resourced. Policies can set the tone by demonstrating the 
value placed on collaboration. For example, the South African 
National Evaluation Policy Framework (2011) set necessary 
conditions to encourage collaborative evaluative processes 
(Chirau et al. 2021; Goldman et al. 2015). This enabled the 
evaluation of government’s response to VAWC to be carried 
in ways that maximised relationship building.
Funders can also structure evaluation and research funding 
to allow researchers or evaluators to invest in building 
connections with programme implementers, participants 
and other stakeholders who will use the evidence. As 
the Ghana case study demonstrates, even government 
monitoring systems can be opened to collaborative generation 
and evidence interpretation. However, there must be the 
will and concomitant investment in changing the culture 
because organisational planning and delivery systems 
inadvertently encourage pursuit of narrowly defined 
products often at the cost of relationship building.
The case studies demonstrate that spaces for multi-sector 
dialogue need to be created to overcome organisational 
tendencies to work in silos and draw from limited sources of 
evidence. Dialogue is a deeper form of information sharing, 
and it is the direct relation between people, sharing thoughts 
and knowledge, collective thinking in a context where 
participants put aside their opinions and conclusions to fully 
understand the intended message (Jenlink & Benathy 2005; 
Rallis & Rossman 2000). This requires far more than having 
seminars, meetings or workshops where researchers or 
evaluators present their findings followed by a hurried 
discussion. It requires creating space for different voices to be 
heard, deliberately flattening knowledge hierarchies and 
cultivating trust. It also goes beyond evidence generators 
using their authority to push a specific evidence-generation 
tool to creating space for different forms of evidence and 
ways of knowing to equally shape what is known about a 
problem and potential solutions. This form of dialogue is a 
function of established relationships that allows professionals 
from different sectors to interact and constructively engage 
on complex problems where facts and values may be in 
dispute (Amisi 2020).
Creating spaces for dialogue means creating spaces for 
contemplation and engagement which can allow actors in a 
policy ecosystem to engage more directly with others that 
they otherwise might not engage with (Amisi 2020; Stewart & 
Smith 2015). Such spaces for interaction can be created as
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
part of the research process, such as the steering committees 
and discussion forums used in the tobacco and VAWC case 
studies. The case studies found that the involvement of 
different stakeholders during evidence generation can enable 
a sense of ownership and trust. This is supported by Sherriff 
et al. (2019) who also found that involvement of diverse 
stakeholders in research processes increased appreciation of 
the process and the outcomes. Also, research into the South 
African DPME evaluation system found that involving 
policymakers in the evaluation process increased integration 
of experiences and knowledge from implementation in the 
interpretation of evaluation findings and produced more 
actionable recommendations (Amisi 2015). Creating space 
for collaborative management of the evidence generation 
process can build on existing relationships in a sector and 
facilitate new ones as people get to know each other over the 
course of the evidence journey.
Collaborative evidence management can also be established 
through a policy coordination platform, as was the case with 
the DLT in Ghana. If connections between stakeholders are 
facilitated, actors exercise agency in pursuing relationships 
and communicating beyond the meetings in ways that 
influence policy changes (Oliver & Faul 2018). For interactions 
to be catalysts for further connections and information 
sharing, it is important to be conscious of the power dynamics 
between actors, different values, expectations, and so on. 
Language that assumes deficiency in government or 
communities or language that is too technical can also be a 
barrier to effective dialogue and therefore evidence use 
(Amisi 2020; Sherriff et al. 2019; Stewart et al. 2017).
Having a steering committees and reference groups, 
although important, is not adequate to enable relationships 
based on trust. There must be demonstrated commitment to 
collaboration, particularly from the chairperson or facilitator 
of the process and from the political leadership. Decisive, 
but empathetic, leadership and inclusive facilitation of the 
steering committee meetings was found to be crucial to 
elicit both subject matter knowledge and the relational 
expertise of participants in collaborative research processes. 
High levels of relational expertise, which refers to 
understanding one’s own motivation, values and beliefs, 
and that of others (Rickinson & Edwards 2021), enable 
stakeholders to fully participate in the process and share 
their individual and organisational institutional knowledge. 
When motivations and expectations are articulated or are 
clear, it is easier for participants to find areas where they 
connect and enables them to trust the motives of others. 
Trust is a key ingredient for relationships that allow for 
knowledge exchange.
Effective interaction that facilitates dialogue that is meaningful 
enough to shift how actors and their institutions understand 
the issue at hand requires attention to issues of power and 
hierarchy. Therefore, it is important that such dialogue spaces, 
be it policy coordination platforms or evaluation steering 
committees, are sensitively convened and facilitated.
Sensitively facilitated dialogue that recognises and manages 
power can be facilitative of evidence use because individuals 
make sense of new information through a social sense-
making process. Meaning and sense-making inherently is a 
result of sharing and testing emerging ideas with others 
(Ancona 2012). As the case studies show, people (institutions) 
use knowledge cumulatively. When coming across new 
information, individuals rely on existing mental structures 
that simplify and guide their understanding of a complex 
reality. They use existing cognitive frameworks to structure 
information and situations to foster understanding 
(Schoemaker & Russo 2016). These frames assist in the 
sense-making process but in cases where there are limited 
intersectoral or intercultural interactions, these frames can 
also lead to narrow interpretation and use of evidence. The 
Kenya and Ghana case studies demonstrate how dialogue 
and relationships of trust across sectors can enable 
individuals and institutions to draw on a range of sources of 
information and personal experience when acting on an 
issue, assisted by a social process of making sense of the 
evidence. This is supported by Palazzo, Krings and Hoffrage 
(2012) quoting Weick (1995) who argues that in the process 
of sense-making, people pull from several vocabularies 
that are mainly shaped by the dominant ideology of their 
society, by organisations they work for and their professional 
education.
It is important to recognise that researchers and policy actors 
do not always have the skills to facilitate dialogue and build 
cross-sectoral relationships. Researchers, evaluators and 
other knowledge generators often have a good understanding 
of research and their evidence-generation tools and methods; 
however, these tools are not capable of providing the 
technical and supply-side solutions policy actors are looking 
for (Stevens 2010; Stewart & Smith 2015). Yet, to effectively 
ensure use of knowledge generated through these different 
tools requires an understanding of the policy environment. 
It is not possible for those producing evidence to have all the 
knowledge of the policymaking departments (Amisi 2015; 
Stewart et al. 2019). At the same time, policy actors and 
implementers cannot be expected to have expertise in all 
evidence-generation processes. Therefore, skilled facilitators 
need to be used in intersectoral interactions particularly 
when dealing with complex social issues where there can be 
differing evidence, competing interests, differing values, 
and so on, which are rarely acknowledged or talked about 
(Amisi 2020). For example, having skilled facilitators (not 
researchers or government) in CSO-driven process in the 
VAWC case study enabled actors to be aware of different 
forms of evidence which informed decisions made by 
government.
All the case studies show that relationships must be built at 
an individual level and institutionalised at organisational 
level. Individual interpersonal relationships are the 
mechanisms through which individuals build trust, share 
information, and so on. However, if the established 
relationships are to have a sustained effect on how the
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
organisation accesses and uses information, it is important 
that there are institutional mechanisms established to 
sustain relationships.
The case studies also question the place of community 
voice and experience in current debates on evidence use in 
policy and practice. Traditional evidence-use interventions 
that focus on pushing research to policy actors can 
undermine non-research-based evidence (Du Toit 2012; 
Parkhurst 2017). Traditional research approaches have 
been shown to contribute to further marginalisation of 
disadvantaged communities through culturally inappropriate 
data collection and decontextualised interpretation (Sherriff 
et al. 2019), or the use of measurements that are deficient 
and inapplicable to certain contexts (Boswell et al. 2019) 
or the exploitative nature of the research processes 
(Margaret 2005). The four case studies demonstrate that 
platforms for dialogue that allow for interaction between 
researchers, CSOs, government and international NGOs 
can democratise evidence-generation processes and 
mitigate against any one stakeholder having undue 
influence in policy. As the Ghana and Kenya cases show, 
these spaces can offer means to elevate communities’ 
experiences and voice and avoid essentialising researcher 
or evaluator perspectives.
Conclusion
This article shares lessons from four African case studies 
that sought to explore the importance of relationship in 
evidence use. The research on which the policy brief is based 
used an analytical framework that recognises evidence use 
as a form of behaviour change. The article illustrated that to 
effectively shape the behaviour of policy actors and evidence 
generators in ways that support evidence-informed policy 
requires trusting relationships between individuals and 
organisations.
Interpersonal and organisational relationships that are 
trusting, appreciative and reciprocal facilitate intersectoral 
information sharing that is crucial for different types of 
evidence to be used in policy and practice. Relationship-
building interventions can be implemented during the 
evidence-generation process and as part of follow-up and 
learning. Processes to build relationships must recognise 
and manage power and hierarchies of knowledge to limit 
domination of one form of evidence. The article shows how 
sensitively facilitated policy dialogue spaces are essential for 
building relationships between knowledge producers and 
users, as well as between users.
Monitoring and evaluation or research units within 
government and parliament can facilitate relationships 
between knowledge producers and policymakers and 
implementers, and this needs to be considered more explicitly 
in the management of these units. The article concludes with 
the caution that it is important to ensure that emphasis on 
evidence does not circumvent community choice and voice, 
as well as practitioners’ experience.
Because of the methods used in the case studies, it is not 
possible to know if the level of evidence use could have 
been achieved without efforts to build relationships and 
spaces for dialogue. Perhaps, this can be a focus of 
future research. What the article does indicate is that 
where there are positive inter-sectoral and intra-sectoral 
relationships it makes sharing evidence and integrating 
that evidence to policies and decisions much easier. 
Therefore, in efforts to improve evidence use, it is 
important to pay attention to individual and organisational 
relations.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to appreciate all the researchers and 
authors of the original case studies. South Africa – Buthelezi 
and Siza Magangoe; Kenya – Yemeserach Tessema, Amina 
Abdalla, Judi Wakhungu, Ahmed Hassan Odhowa and Ali 
Kaka. Ghana – Laila Smith and Anthony Mensah. ECOWAS – 
Papa Yona Boubacar Mane, Abdoulaye Diagne and Salifou 
Tiemtore.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them 
in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
M.M.A. is the lead author and contributed to the VAWC case 
study; M.S.A is co-author and contributed to the Ghana 
sanitation case study. M.P. is co-author and co-editor of 
the book from which the cases are drawn, and contributed 
to the case on civil society engagement in the Wildlife 
Conservation and Management Act, Kenya. D.B-A. is co-author 
and contributed to the Ghana sanitation case study.
Ethical considerations 
This article followed all ethical standards for research without 
direct contact with human or animal subjects.
Funding information 
This research was funded by the Hewlett Foundation and 
closely linked to the work of the Twende Mbele partnership 
supporting African governments to undertake effective 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
Data availability 
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data 
were created or analysed in this study.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or 
position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Page 9 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
References
Amisi, M.M., 2015, ‘Development of South Africa’s national evaluation policy and 
system 2011−2014’, African Evaluation Journal  3(1), 7. https://doi.org/10.4102/
aej.v3i1.109
Amisi, M.M., 2020, The Violence Prevention Forum: A model for intersectoral collaboration 
to prevent violence, The Violence Prevention Forum, viewed n.d, from https://www.
violence-prevention.org/docrepo/VPF%20-%20A%20model%20for%20
intersectoral%20collaboration%20to%20prevent%20violence%2012.1.21.pdf.
Amisi, M.M., Awal, M., Pabari, M. & Bedu-Addo, A.D., 2021, How relationships and 
dialogue facilitate evidence use, CLEAR-AA. Results, Johannesburg, p. 6.
Amisi, M.M., Buthelezi, T. & Magangoe, S., 2020, ‘Use of evidence in a complex 
social programme: Case of an evaluation of the state’s response to 
violence  against women and children in South Africa’, in I. Goldman & M. 
Pabari (eds.), Using evidence in policy and practice: Lessons from Africa , 
pp. 92–132, Routledge, London.
Ancona, D., 2012, The handbook for teaching leadership: Knowing, doing, and being,  
SAGE Publications, Los Angeles, CA.
Boswell, B., Erasmus, Z., Johannes, S., Mahomed, S. & Ratele, K., 2019, ‘Racist science: 
The burden of black bodies and minds’, The Thinker: A Pan-African Quarterly for 
Thought Leaders 81, 4–8.
Chirau, T., Blaser-Mapitsa, C. & Amisi, M.M., 2021, ‘Policies for evidence: A comparative 
analysis of Africa’s national evaluation policy landscape’, Evidence and Policy 17(3), 
535–548. https://doi.org/10.1332/174426421X161048262 56918
Du Toit, A., 2012, ‘Making sense of “evidence”: Notes on the discursive politics of 
research and pro-poor policy making’, PLAAS Working Paper, 76, s.n., Bellville.
Goldman, I., Mathe, J.E., Jacob, C., Hercules, A., Amisi, M., Buthelezi, T. et al., 2015, 
‘Developing South Africa’s national evaluation policy and system: First lessons 
learned’, African Evaluation Journal 3(1), a107. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v3i1.107
Goldman, I. & Pabari, M., 2020, Using evidence in policy and practice: Lessons from 
Africa, London, Routledge.
Jenlink, P .M. & Benathy, B.H., 2005, ‘Dialogue: Conversation as culture building and 
consciousness evolving’, in P .M. Jenlink & B.H. Benathy (eds.),  Dialogue as a 
means of collective communication , p. 162, Kluwer Academic and Plenum 
Publishers, New York.
Langer, L., Goldman, I. & Pabari, M., 2020, Analytical framework used to guide case 
study research. In Using evidence for policy and practice  - Lessons from Africa , 
Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, New York, NY . 
Mane, P .Y .B., Diagne, A. & Tiemtore, S., 2020, ‘Using evidence for tobacco control in 
West Africa’, in I. Goldman & M. Pabari (eds.), Using evidence in policy and 
practice: Lessons from Africa, pp. 206–223, London, Routledge.
Margaret, K., 2005, ‘Emerging from the margins: Indigenous methodologies’, in 
L. Brown & S. Strega (eds.), Research as resistance: Critical, indigenous 
and anti-oppressive approaches , pp. 19–36, Canadian Scholars’ Press/
Women’s Press, Toronto.
Oliver, K. & Faul, M., 2018, ‘Editorial: Networks and network analysis in evidence, 
policy and practice’, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and 
Practice  14(3), 369–379. https://doi.org/10.1332/174426418X1531403722  
4597
Pabari, M., Tessema, Y ., Abdalla, A., Wakhungu, J., Odhowa A.J. & Kaka, A., 2020, 
‘Parliament and public participation in Kenya: The case of the Wildlife Conservation 
and Management Act’, in I. Goldman & M. Pabari (eds.), Using evidence in policy 
and practice: Lessons from Africa, pp. 169–187, London, Routledge.
Palazzo, G., Krings, F. & Hoffrage, U., 2012, ‘Ethical blindness’, Journal of Business 
Ethics 109(3), 323–338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-011-1130-4
Parkhurst, J., 2017, The politics of evidence: From evidence-based policy to the good 
governance of evidence, Routledge, Abingdon.
Rallis, S.F. & Rossman, G.B., 2000, ‘Dialogue for learning: Evaluator as critical friend’, 
New Directions for Evaluation 2000(86), 81–92. https://doi.org/10.1002/ev.1174
Rickinson, M. & Edwards, A., 2021, ‘The relational features of evidence use’, 
Cambridge Journal of Education 51(1), 1–18.
Schoemaker, P . & Russo, J., 2016, Decision-making, The Palgrave Encyclopedia of 
Strategic Management. https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-349-94848-2
Sherriff, S., Miller, H., Tong, A., Williamson, A., Muthayya, S., Sally, R. et al., 2019, 
‘Building trust and sharing power for co-creation in Aboriginal health research: 
A stakeholder interview study’, Evidence & Policy A Journal of Research Debate 
and Practice  15(3), 371–392. https://doi.org/10.1332/174426419X1552  
4681005401
Smith, L., Bedu-Addo, D., Awal, M. & Mensah, A., 2020, ‘The contribution of civil 
society generated evidence to the improvement of sanitation services in Ghana’, 
in I. Goldman & M. Pabari (eds.), Using evidence in policy and practice: Lessons 
from Africa, pp. 188–205, London, Routledge.
Stevens, A., 2010, ‘Telling policy stories: An ethnographic study of the use of evidence 
in policy-making in the UK’, Journal of Social Policy  40(2), 237–255. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0047279410000723
Stewart, E. & Smith, K., 2015, ‘“Black magic” and “gold dust”: The epistemic and 
political uses of evidence tools in public health policy making’, Evidence and Policy 
11(3), 415–437. https://doi.org/10.1332/174426415X14381786400158
Stewart, R., Dayal, H. & Langer, L., 2017, ‘Terminology and tensions within evidence-
informed decision-making in South Africa over a 15-year period’, Research for All 
1(2), 252–264. https://doi.org/10.18546/RFA.01.2.03
Stewart, R., Dayal, H., Langer, L. & Van Rooyen, C., 2019, ‘The evidence ecosystem in 
South Africa: Gresilience and institutionalisation of evidence use’, Palgrave 
Communications 5, 90. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0303-0
Weber, E., Belsky, J., Lach, D. & Cheng, A., 2014, ‘The value of practice-
based  knowledge’, Society and Natural Resources 27(10), 1071–1088. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08941920.2014.919168
Weyrauch, V., Echt, L. & Suliman, S., 2016, Knowledge into policy: Going beyond 
‘Context matters’ , vi ewed n.d., from https://www.inasp.info/sites/default/
files/2018-04/Going%20beyond%20context%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20
framework.pdf