<<<PAGE=1>>>
Management Decision
Emerald Article: Toward a theory of evidence based decision making
Vishwanath V. Baba, Farimah HakemZadeh
Article information:
To cite this document: Vishwanath V. Baba, Farimah HakemZadeh, (2012),"Toward a theory of evidence based decision making", 
Management Decision, Vol. 50 Iss: 5 pp. 832 - 867
Permanent link to this document: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00251741211227546
Downloaded on: 31-08-2012
References: This document contains references to 203 other documents
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
This document has been downloaded 148 times since 2012. *
Users who downloaded this Article also downloaded: *
Sandy Bond, (2011),"Barriers and drivers to green buildings in Australia and New Zealand", Journal of Property Investment & 
Finance, Vol. 29 Iss: 4 pp. 494 - 509
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14635781111150367
Hui Chen, Miguel Baptista Nunes, Lihong Zhou, Guo Chao Peng, (2011),"Expanding the concept of requirements traceability: The role 
of electronic records management in gathering evidence of crucial communications and negotiations", Aslib Proceedings, Vol. 63 
Iss: 2 pp. 168 - 187
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00012531111135646
François Des Rosiers, Jean Dubé, Marius Thériault, (2011),"Do peer effects shape property values?", Journal of Property 
Investment & Finance, Vol. 29 Iss: 4 pp. 510 - 528
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14635781111150376
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by MCMASTER UNIVERSITY                               
                                                  For Authors: 
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service. 
Information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit 
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald  www.emeraldinsight.com
With over forty years' experience, Emerald Group Publishing is a leading independent publisher of global research with impact in 
business, society, public policy and education. In total, Emerald publishes over 275 journals and more than 130 book series, as 
well as an extensive range of online products and services. Emerald is both COUNTER 3 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is 
a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive 
preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Toward a theory of evidence
based decision making
Vishwanath V. Baba and Farimah HakemZadeh
DeGroote School of Business, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to integrate existing body of knowledge on evidence-based
management, develop a theory of evidence, and propose a model of evidence-based decision making.
Design/methodology/approach – Following a literature review, the paper takes a conceptual
approach toward developing a theory of evidence and a process model of decision making. Formal
research propositions amplify both theory and model.
Findings – The paper suggests that decision making is at the heart of management practice. It
underscores the importance of both research and experiential evidence for making professionally
sound managerial decisions. It argues that the strength of evidence is a function of its rigor and
relevance manifested by methodological ﬁt, relevance to the context, transparency of its ﬁndings,
replicability of the evidence, and the degree of consensus within the decision community. A
multi-stage mixed level model of evidence-based decision making is proposed with suggestions for
future research.
Practical implications – An explicit, formal, and systematic collaboration at the global level
among the producers of evidence and its users akin to the Cochrane Collaboration will ensure sound
evidence, contribute to decision quality, and enable professionalization of management practice.
Originality/value – The unique value contribution of this paper comes from a critical review of the
evidence-based management literature, the articulation of a formal theory of evidence, and the
development of a model for decision making driven by the theory of evidence.
Keywords Evidence based management, Theory of evidence, Mixed level model of decision making,
Global collaboration, Management strategy, Management theory
Paper typeConceptual paper
1. Introduction
The study of evidence-based practices has become popular over the last few decades
and there is a considerable body of literature targeted at promoting evidence based
practices (Holloway, 2007; Reid and Spinks, 2007). While the available literature has
added extensively to our knowledge about the beneﬁts of evidence based practices in
general and how evidence must be obtained, classiﬁed, and disseminated, ﬁndings
have not been integrated systematically.
Decision making is arguably at the core of managerial tasks but often managers
make decisions under pressure and with incomplete information. While some
managers justify their choices on the basis of facts and evidence, many rely on
out-dated information, personal experience, individual observation, or gut feelings
(Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006). In addition, managers are confronted by an overload of
information and engage in practices which are hard to evaluate and sometimes
irrelevant to the organization and context (Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006). The results of
poorly supported decisions are choices that waste company resources and even risk the
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0025-1747.htm
The names of the authors are listed alphabetically.
MD
50,5
832
Management Decision
Vol. 50 No. 5, 2012
pp. 832-867
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0025-1747
DOI 10.1108/00251741211227546
<<<PAGE=3>>>
future of the organization. Many managers simply need guidance to make decisions
based on reliable evidence. However there is no systematic yardstick to clue the
decision maker as to what evidence is most reliable. What exactly is evidence? What
evidence should be considered, under which circumstances, and why?
Sackett et al.(2000) deﬁne two separate stages for evidence-based practice: ﬁrst, it is
the stage of generating evidence, which relies on the academic body of a profession,
and second, the stage of using that evidence in practice, and making informed
decisions based on those practices. This paper attempts to review existing knowledge
on evidence-based decision making and proposes a theory of evidence that will allow
managers to sort out the information needed for them to make a decision and place
appropriate conﬁdence in those decisions. Moreover this paper focuses on the process
of evidence-based decision making and illustrates how constructs from different levels
affect this process at each stage.
2. A critical review of the evidence-based management literature
While the ﬁeld of evidence-based management is fairly young, it has become
increasingly popular over the past few years. The existing literature is dominantly
prescriptive, suggesting remedies to narrow the gap between research and practice in
the ﬁeld of management. The prescriptions are mainly in the areas of research
methodology and management education and training, but very few attempt to
explicitly describe and address the issue within the ﬁeld of management. The literature
is largely reﬂective of the authors’ personal experience and perspective and generally
lacks a solid empirical foundation. In addition, much of the literature draws on the
philosophy of evidence-based medicine and examples of success from within the health
care sector. While this research can be useful, it is important to note that
recommendations on evidence-based medicine tend to be context independent and
implicitly universal, while managerial prescriptions are contingent and sensitive to
variation in the organizational context (Dean and Bowen, 1994). What seems to be
lacking in the existing literature is a proper deﬁnition of evidence, and an agreed on
theory and framework of evidence. Furthermore, the process of evidence-based
decision making and the effects of authority, organizational politics, and context on
that process, although acknowledged (Rousseau and McCarthy, 2007), are not
conceptualized and theorized.
The main focus of the existing literature is on the role of researchers and educators
who enable and facilitate the process of evidence-based management. There are
discussions about the similarities and differences between health care professionals
and management practitioners. Whatever evidence is available in the ﬁeld, the role of
the manager and how the evidence can be used as a foundation for decision making are
issues that are not often discussed.
The origin of evidence-based approaches can be traced back to the 1980s when the
British government increasingly emphasized the need for informed policy and
practices based on an accurate and challenging foundation of evidence (Tranﬁeld et al.,
2003). In particular it was the focus on the effectiveness of public services that
gradually led to the development of detailed guidelines and best practices manuals in
many disciplines (Tranﬁeld et al., 2003). The evidence-based approach became
particularly inﬂuential in medical science and health care by critiquing the implicit and
eccentric data collection and interpretation methods (Cook et al., 1997b; Greenhalgh,
Evidence based
decision making
833
<<<PAGE=4>>>
1997). Moreover, evidence-based medicine also resulted in identifying the most
important and needed areas of research in medical practice through deﬁning national
level research strategies and encouraging effective dissemination and diffusion of
research ﬁndings (Peckham, 1991). One of the most signiﬁcant achievement of the
evidence-based movement in the medical ﬁeld was the improvement in the quality of
the review process through systematic reviews that synthesize research in a
transparent and reproducible manner (Cook et al., 1997a,b; Wolf et al., 2001). The
literature then evolved by incorporating the systematic review and meta-analysis as
key tools in developing evidence for practice through reducing bias by means of
exhaustive literature searches of both published and unpublished studies (Cook et al.,
1997b). The literature on evidence-based management also suggests that a shift from
traditional narrative reviews to systematic, context-sensitive research would be the
appropriate methodology for developing evidence for the discipline (Tranﬁeld et al.,
2003). While acknowledging this need, Tranﬁeld et al. (2003) compare management
research with medical research on dimensions such as the nature of the discipline,
research culture, research design, review protocol, etc. They claim that the nature of the
management discipline is divergent while that of medicine is convergent (Tranﬁeld
et al., 2003). Consequently, the research culture in the ﬁeld of medicine is subject to
rigorous scientiﬁc evaluation while management research has a culture that is a split
between positivist and phenomenological perspectives (Tranﬁeld et al., 2003). They
acknowledge the similarities and differences between research in the two practices and
prescribe systematic reviews and certain dissemination and reporting methods as the
remedy for closing the gap between research and practice (Tranﬁeld et al., 2003).
However, they do not sufﬁciently emphasize the role of formal international bodies
such as Campbell and Cochrane Collaborations that regulate the main steps of
planning the review, conducting reviews, and reporting and dissemination of results in
the ﬁeld of medicine. Their prescriptions lament the absence of similar independent
institutions within the ﬁeld of management to act as key agents to implement research
into practice, which puts the burden solely on the shoulders of the researchers. In fact,
there is no guidance in the management literature as to what passes as evidence and
who is responsible for assessing the body of knowledge and evaluating the evidence
that needs to be diffused to practitioners.
Another main focus of the literature on evidence-based management is educating
managers. Rousseau and McCarthy (2007) suggest that if management education is
focused on evidence, managerial decision making will improve and organizations will
achieve better outcomes. This suggestion is mainly based on Peter Drucker’s (1966)
assertion of the repetitive nature of most business issues. It follows that for solving
problems, managers can use related evidence-based principles to make effective
decisions (Rousseau and McCarthy, 2007). Rousseau and McCarthy (2007) combine
experiences in management education with those in the healthcare and offer
descriptions of key features of teaching evidence-based management. They encourage
educators to focus on principles where the science is clear and convergent (e.g. goal
setting principles of Locke and Latham(1990). Moreover Rousseau and McCarthy
(2007) acknowledge that management research is fragmented, which makes it difﬁcult
to keep current with research ﬁndings. They further suggest that educators should
develop decision awareness in management students so that they understand that
every small action or non-action is itself a decision and an opportunity to implement
MD
50,5
834
<<<PAGE=5>>>
evidence. However, there are several barriers for an evidence-based management
education. For example, there exists no clear idea or rule for evidence in social science
(Westen and Bradley, 2005). Furthermore, while medical education is extremely
standardized, this is not the case for MBAs and other forms of management education.
Having a degree in management is neither a guarantee for management competency
nor a requirement for practicing management (Pfeffer and Fong, 2002; Ghoshal, 2005;
Mintzberg, 2005). Organizations such as Association for the Advancement of
Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) do not yet have the power to enforce a training
paradigm or methodology that would standardize management education.
Comparing the use of evidence in management and medical practice, it has been
suggested that culture, research base, and decision making processes are very different
in these two ﬁelds. In the ﬁeld of medicine, the process of making evidence-based
decisions is considered to be a multi-stage process that is affected by constructs from
different levels. For example, the Promoting Action on Research Implementation in
Health Services (PARIHS) framework proposes that for a successful implementation of
evidence-based practice, there needs to be “clarity about the nature of the evidence
being used, the quality of context, and the type of facilitation needed to ensure a
successful change process” (Rycroft-Malone, 2004). While emphasizing the role of
researchers as creators of evidence, and physicians as the main decision makers and
users of evidence within the health care sector, Rycroft-Malone (2004) also takes the
patient into consideration as the key stakeholder of the process and recognizes the
importance of contextual constructs such as culture in both decision making and the
implementation process. In an attempt to clarify the ﬁrst stage of evidence-based
management, a theory of evidence is proposed that offers a set of dimensions against
which evidence can be evaluated such as methodological ﬁt, contextualization,
replicability, transparency, and consensus. The theory is driven by the principles of
quality in social science research.
Focusing on the second stage of evidence-based management- using evidence to
make informed decisions- a model is proposed based on a number of basic principles.
First, the decision making process in organizations is not viewed from a purely rational
perspective. There is no presumption of an ideal world in which rational decision
making requires a complete search of all available practices and information about
their consequences (Choo, 1996). It is, however, assumed that in reality, after the
problems are simpliﬁed due to the capacity of human mind for formulating and solving
complex problems (Simon, 1997), decision making in organization would be conducted
by the principle of bounded rationality, rather than by comprehensive, objective
rationality. Three categories that are mainly identiﬁed as bounds to human rationality
are the decision maker’s mental skills, habits, and reﬂexes (Simon, 1997). Based on
similar logic, in order to understand managers’ perception of evidence and their use of
it in decision making, the model also takes the effects of experience and judgment on
the process of decision making at the individual level. It discusses how available
evidence will be used as the basis for decision making in the context of experience and
bounded awareness. Bounded awareness refers to the “common tendency to overlook
obvious, important, and readily available” evidence (Bazerman and Moore, 2008).
Second, the model adopts a multi-level perspective and postulates a cross-level
effect of contextual factors on the process of evidence-based decision making. In health
care practice, the context is considered to be limitless as it can include communities and
Evidence based
decision making
835
<<<PAGE=6>>>
cultures that are in turn inﬂuenced by social, economic, political, historical, and
psychosocial factors (Rycroft-Malone, 2004). In the proposed model, the term context is
used to refer to the organization, which is the relevant environment for pushing
research evidence into practice. It is suggested that these contextual factors at higher
levels of analysis can facilitate or conﬁne the process of evidence-based decision
making.
Third, the model discusses how demand for transparency of decisions and the
decision process as well as the growth of public-interest and advocacy organizations
have resulted in demands for higher levels of accountability on the part of decision
makers (Gregory and Keeney, 1994). As a result, the decision process is also affected by
the need to consider the often-conﬂicting objectives of different stakeholders. Decision
makers need to generate alternatives that are based on stakeholders’ values to achieve
a certain balance (Gregory and Keeney, 1994). According to Clarkson’s (1995)
Stakeholder Framework, this perspective brings factors from various levels of analysis
(institutional, organizational, and individual) into the model. The model incorporates
the concept of agency theory in the process of decision making and includes the
moderating effect of the decision maker’s preferences and values. Finally, it
acknowledges that choosing the ﬁnal decision from the generated alternatives is a
process that is ethically bounded. Before developing the model and building
propositions, a discussion on the concept of evidence-based practice along with some
deﬁnitions are provided. In addition, the critical steps that the ﬁeld of medicine has
taken toward evidence based practice are presented as a success story that can be used
in benchmarking evidence-based management. The discussion is followed by a
deﬁnition of what passes as evidence. Finally, based on the principles mentioned
previously, a theory of evidence-based decision making is proposed.
3. Evidence-based practice
In medical practice, evidence-based medicine evolved as a way to minimize the gap
that existed between research and clinical practice. This gap had serious consequences
and often resulted in suboptimal medical care and procedures, as well as potential for
unnecessary and avoidable harm to patients due to the lack of efﬁciency and
effectiveness of incorporating the latest ﬁndings and procedures in practice (Sackett
and Rosenberg, 1995a). In the ﬁeld of medicine the gap between research and practice
was particularly obvious due to the existence of large unwarranted variations in the
provision of medical care (Wennberg, 1996). This claim is supported by studies which
showed that some people were receiving more medical care than they actually needed
while some were receiving less than required (Schuster et al., 1998). Studies also argue
that the gap between research and medical practice is brought to light due to the
growing observance of cases of overuse, underuse, and misuse of speciﬁc medical
procedures (Chassin and Galvin, 1998). These studies and reports were all proof of the
need for a practice which enables doctors to trace, decisively evaluate, and integrate
evidence into their clinical practice. Sackett and Rosenberg (1995b) name such practice
as evidence-based medicine. Sackett (1997) deﬁnes evidence-based medicine as a “way
of thinking” that can be used to promote the implementation of research ﬁndings in
clinical routines and practice and suggests that the best available knowledge about
what actually works should be used in a “conscientious, explicit and judicious” manner
in order to make decisions in medical care (Sackett, 1997). To make it more simple and
MD
50,5
836
<<<PAGE=7>>>
practical, evidence-based medicine can be deﬁned as integrating physician’s individual
clinical expertise with the best external clinical evidence obtained from systematic
research.
The existence of a gap between research and practice holds true in management and
organizational science (Rynes et al., 2001; Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006). Similar to
evidence-based medicine, evidence-based management is an approach that tries to
enhance the quality of decisions made to solve organizational problems by deriving
principles from external, systematic research to guide management practices
(Rousseau, 2006). Although there is no strong proof and systematic research yet
suggesting evidence-based management actually improves organizations’ performance
and helps managers make better decisions (Reay et al., 2009), the absence of proof
cannot be used to discount evidence-based management’s beneﬁts to organizations
(Briner et al., 2009). The generation of proof however, can convince people that
evidence-based management approach can lead to better decisions within
organizations.
Abrahamson and Eisenman (2001) describe the ﬁeld of management as a market in
which knowledge is the main commodity that is bought and sold. From their point of
view, on the supply side of this market, there are consultants, journalists, and
management scholars. These are the people who produce and disseminate knowledge
which is consumed by those on the demand side of this market such as managers,
students, executives, etc. (Abrahamson and Eisenman, 2001). Management scholars
are also on the demand side of this market, in that they expand and explore the
knowledge that is already disseminated into the market.
What is of concern, however, is that the state of this market is rather gloomy.
According to Pfeffer and Sutton (2006), parts of the knowledge available out there
consist of “deeply ﬂawed standards” that are sometimes counterproductive.
Evidence-based management, simply put, is a way to regulate methods of gathering
and assessing management and business knowledge to produce better standards and
guidelines. It is a way of steering the marketplace of management ideas (Pfeffer and
Sutton, 2006) to achieve a higher quality of business knowledge which has been
regulated, controlled, evaluated, and therefore considered more reliable.
The argument that evidence-based management is effective can be drawn from a
rational interpretation based on the effectiveness of evidence-based medicine for curing
patients and for structuring efﬁcient public health policies. Pfeffer and Sutton (2006)
argue that companies which base their decisions on evidence have a competitive
advantage. This is mainly because management by intuition, the alternative approach
to basing decisions on evidence (Gaynard, 2010), is hardly defensible. The traditional
approach to decision making either relies largely on personal experience or blindly
follows the advice of business books or consultants which are mostly driven by
traditional beliefs or weak evidence (Rousseau, 2006). Thus, when there is little or no
reliable information available to make decisions, the managers with the evidence-based
management way of thinking, try to act on the basis of logic and evidence, rather than
on guesswork and hope (Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006).
Although the term evidence-based management is relatively new, the basic idea is
not. The notion that management research can and should be transferred into practice
so that practitioners can beneﬁt from it has been in the literature for a long time
(Rousseau, 2006). However, it has not yet found its way to the heart of the practice, and
Evidence based
decision making
837
<<<PAGE=8>>>
for several reasons, practitioners still prefer to rely on their own judgment or
traditional beliefs. Several researchers have investigated the reasons that have
precipitated this sad state of disconnect between research and practice in the ﬁeld of
management.
Explanations such as the fear of losing authority, the preference for only hearing
good news rather than the truth, or the inefﬁciency and messiness of the marketplace
of business ideas (Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006) have all been suggested as reasons for the
unpopularity of evidence-based management among managers. The gap between
research and practice in the ﬁeld of management is particularly bothersome because
the academic world of management and its research exist primarily to further the
management profession. If the link between these two is nonexistent or broken, the
legitimacy of the academy in this ﬁeld will be under scrutiny.
4. Evidence-based medicine to evidence-based management
In addition to the explanations provided by scholars as to why decisions in
organizations are not yet based on research ﬁndings and evidence, another valid
argument is that the ﬁeld of evidence-based management is suffering from the very
illness it is trying to cure. That is, while the paradigm of evidence-based management
is trying to encourage the adoption of a cumulative body of knowledge in the
management ﬁeld that is validated, veriﬁed, and ready to use by managers, it does not
boast of a strong body of knowledge of its own. One reason for this may be due to the
lack of an agreed-on theory and framework in the ﬁeld (Baba, 2004).
Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) suggested that in order for evidence-based management to
become a practice in real organizational context, management can learn from the
successful steps that other professions, such as medicine, have taken toward
evidence-based practice. Although it has been discussed in medical literature over the
past two decades, the movement of evidence-based medicine likely has its roots in an
essay published in the 1970s by Archibald Leman Cochrane in which he criticized the
medical profession for not having an “organized critical summary [ ... ] of all
randomized controlled trials” (Cochrane, 1989). The challenge that Cochrane put on the
medical profession later resulted in an independent international organization with the
mission of establishing a knowledge base of up-to-date and accurate health care
information – the Cochrane Collaboration- (Cochrane, 1989). Half a century after
Cochrane’s critical review of the medical profession and decades after Sackett’s
movement, evidence and evidence-based practice has become popular, even
fashionable (Shortell et al., 2001), and has found its way through other ﬁelds such as
education, policy making (Shortell et al., 2001), and management. However there are
some speciﬁc steps that the profession of medicine has taken toward an evidence-based
practice, especially toward establishing a strong cumulative body of knowledge that
seems to be the Achilles’ heel of management.
The ﬁeld of management in particular suffers from the absence of intellectual
coherence in many of its subﬁelds (Baba, 2004). Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) point out
some of these incoherencies such as whether companies should really pursue
excellence (Peters and Waterman, 2004) or is the whole notion just a myth (Crawford
and Mathews, 2003)? Should we avoid conﬂicts or not? Is charismatic leadership the
key to success or is it quite the opposite? There are even contradicting ideas on the
most researched and studied theories of management such as goal theory. While many
MD
50,5
838
<<<PAGE=9>>>
argue that a challenging goal enhances performance, others imply that it can
systematically reduce productivity. In the end, it may come down to which book one
had read or which business school one had attended.
The management literature is also suffering from signiﬁcant variation in which
research is integrated into textbooks (Stambaugh and Trank, 2010) and course syllabi
(Charlier et al., 2011) which makes it more challenging to achieve intellectual coherence.
In the ﬁeld of medicine, physicians are to some extent equipped with comprehensive
and cumulative databases of the latest research and evidence in health care, such as the
Cochrane Collaboration. Through this collaboration, health care providers, policy
makers, and even patients are constantly preparing, updating, and facilitating access
to a comprehensive database of latest research and clinical evidence through
systematic reviews (Bero and Rennie, 1995). The timing is right for the ﬁeld of
management because researchers, practitioners, and other parties in organizational
and management studies now have access to advanced technologies, research
methods, bibliographic systems, and software (Chalmers and Altman, 1995), thus
rendering the development of a comprehensive database of evidence possible.
Learning from the profession of medicine, one recommended approach is a
paradigm shift which imposes changes on part of the researchers, publishers,
facilitators, and organizations (Walshe and Rundall, 2001). For example, at the
academic level, Walshe and Rundall (2001) call for a change away from a fragmented
research strategy to one that is more coherent at national and global levels. They also
suggest a research direction that is more need-led and practice-oriented rather than
research-led (Walshe and Rundall, 2001). They further recommend that research
quality be enhanced through funding larger scale research and investing more in
training researchers to provide more appropriate research methods (Walshe and
Rundall, 2001). At the publisher and facilitator level, they recommend more modern
ways of disseminating research ﬁndings (such as online databases), along with
simplifying research ﬁndings in summaries and clinical guidelines, and pushing the
research ﬁndings to their probable users rather than waiting for practitioners to pull
the information toward themselves ( Walshe and Rundall, 2001). This is a
comprehensive guideline that focuses on the integrated aspects of a profession and
calls for change in many different segments that can be a model for evidence-based
management. The questions that still remain are: What is it that should be “pushed” to
the probable users? How should the summaries and guidelines be prepared? How can
the quality of research be improved? What passes as evidence?
5. Meaning of evidence
In the ﬁeld of medicine, evidence is deﬁned as the interpretation of empirical data
which results from “formal research or systematic investigations using any type of
science or social science methods” (Rychetnik et al., 2002). Fortunately the quality of
research and the characteristics of evidence in the ﬁeld of evidence-based medicine
have been well established (Fletcher and Sackett, 1979; Woolf et al., 1990). One of the
main approaches to deﬁning what qualiﬁes as evidence in evidence-based medicine is
through the use of categories of quality at different levels (Tillett et al., 1998;
Sutherland, 2001). For example, a very well-known categorization is based on a
hierarchy of study design (Campbell et al., 1963). Based on this grading scheme, the
strongest evidence is derived from at least “one systematic review of multiple
Evidence based
decision making
839
<<<PAGE=10>>>
well-designed randomized controlled trials”, in the lower levels there are evidences
“from at least one properly designed randomized controlled trial of appropriate size”,
“well-designed trials such as pseudo-randomized or non-randomized trials, cohort
studies, time series or matched case-c ontrolled studies”, “well-designed
non-experimental studies from more than one centre or research group or from case
reports”, and “opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical evidence, descriptive
studies or reports of expert committees” (Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine,
2011).
The systematic logic behind the grading schemes and guidelines for evaluating
evidence is mostly based on the rules established by the Canadian Task Force on the
Periodic Health Examination (Fletcher and Sackett, 1979), which suggests speciﬁc
criteria for evaluating and grading information including quality of study methods,
number of studies, magnitude of effect, consistency, and generalizability of the
ﬁndings. Therefore, a higher level of evidence results from a greater number of studies
with better quality in design and methodology and with greater magnitudes. These
experiences in evidence-based medicine suggest that the management profession
should establish an independent organization for reviewing and grading all the
ﬁndings in management and organizational studies and create a cumulative body of
knowledge for managers.
6. Toward a theory of evidence
In order to address the challenge of what evidence is in managerial ﬁelds and the
framework against which evidence can be evaluated and graded, a theory of evidence
is proposed. “Evidence” is an ambiguous word (Miller and Safer, 1993). The most
relevant deﬁnition for our purposes is evidence as a fact, organized body of
information, or observation, which is presented to support or justify beliefs or
inferences (Goodman and Royall, 1988; Sackett et al., 1996). In our view, in order for
evidence to be useful it has to be rigorous and it has to be relevant to the context where
it is invoked. In other words, rigour and relevance are at the heart of generating and
evaluating evidence. That said, Briner et al.(2009) argue that it is both unfeasible and
undesirable to copy the hierarchical evaluation system of the Cochrane model for
grading evidence in management research. Briner et al.(2009) reason that all academic
ﬁelds are different and what counts as “best” evidence is contingent on its
appropriateness to the question being asked (Boaz and Ashby, 2003). This contingent
nature seems to be captured in Upshur et al.’s (2001) ‘inclusive model’ of evidence. This
model illustrates evidence through two dimensions of method and context.
Methodology is mainly concerned with how observations are conducted, collected,
aggregated, analyzed, and interpreted. Context of the evidence, which in the medical
ﬁeld may range from individual care to population health and social policy, captures
the extent to which evidence is tailored to the need of individuals or generalizable to the
scope of population (Upshur et al., 2001). The main contribution of this model is that it
takes a step further from the purely hierarchical approach to evidence and
acknowledges that evidence should be understood “as a mediation between the context
of its use and method of its production” (Upshur et al., 2001). This understanding of
evidence is particularly important b ecause while quantitative research and
measurement is essential for reasoning in the physical sciences (Vineis, 1997),
MD
50,5
840
<<<PAGE=11>>>
qualitative research and meaning is also required for implementing the preferences and
values of different stakeholders in the context of the practice.
As Briner et al.(2009) suggest, for the question of “what effect does intervention X
have on outcome Y?”, a meta-analysis of randomized trials may produce the best
possible evidence, while for answering the question of “how do women interpret their
role on male-dominated boards?”, qualitative methods may be more appropriate to
generate evidence. Furthermore, there are questions which require theory as well as
evidence from which processes can be inferred. Therefore, for more complex
management decisions, different forms of evidence need to be integrated (Briner et al.,
2009). Consequently, unlike the Cochrane’s hierarchical grading of evidence, the best
evidence in the managerial ﬁeld can be quantitative, qualitative, theoretical or any
combination of the three. In addition to the academic research ﬁndings, managers also
need other sources and types of evidence depending on the circumstances and the type
of decision they are making such as ﬁnancial information, surveys, public opinion,
practical experience, and internal organizational research.
While Upshur et al.’s (2001) model of evidence is focused on evidence in the ﬁeld of
medicine and deﬁnes method and context related to health care related practices, its
foundation can be a strong base for a theory of evidence in the ﬁeld of management. In
the proposed model, there are three main assumptions. First, evidence is that which is
assumed to have a contingent nature. Based on this assumption, it is argued that the
best evidence is the evidence which is produced with the proper methodology and from
a context as close as possible to the context the evidence is to be implemented in. The
second assumption is that the process by which evidence is generated should be
replicable and transparent. Third, it is assumed that the probability of the accuracy of
evidence is higher when consensus about that research evidence is higher. Therefore,
we argue that the best evidence needs to be evaluated against methodological ﬁt,
contextualization, transparency, replicability, and consensus.
The issue of methodological ﬁt in managerial and organizational studies, deﬁned as
“internal consistency among elements of a research project” (Edmondson and
McManus, 2007) plays a signiﬁcant role in enhancing the quality and reliability of
research ﬁndings (Bouchard, 1976; Campbell et al., 1982; Lee, 1999; McGrath, 1984).
More importantly, methodological ﬁt results in a more convergent body of knowledge
(Edmondson and McManus, 2007). Simply put, methodological ﬁt emphasizes not only
selecting the right research method but also asking the right question, and using the
most powerful approach to answer it (Bouchard, 1976). Overall, while the philosophical
world view of the researcher affects the choice of methodology, the nature of the
research question at hand is believed to be a signiﬁcant factor in determining the
appropriate research method (Creswell, 2009). In the ﬁeld of organizational studies,
research is categorized into the three general categories of quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed method research (Creswell, 2009). Qualitative research strategies follow a
postpositivist world view and challenge the traditional scientiﬁc belief of the existence
of the absolute truth or knowledge, particularly when studying human behaviour
(Phillips and Burbules, 2000). Survey research and experimental research are known to
be the most common forms of quantitative studies that focus on describing behaviours
and attitudes of a population by studying a sample of that population or studying how
speciﬁc treatments can result in a certain outcome (Creswell, 2009). Qualitative
research strategies, which have become more visible during the past few decades,
Evidence based
decision making
841
<<<PAGE=12>>>
adopt methods such as ethnography (LeCompte and Schensul, 1999), which studies
individuals in their natural settings over a period of time and collects data through
observation and interview, case studies, phenomenological, and narrative research
(Creswell, 2009). Qualitative studies rely on social constructive (Crotty, 1998) and
participatory (Kemmis and Wilkinson, 1998) world views that are based on the
assumption that individuals develop subjective understandings and meanings from
their experiences. Finally, mixed method or hybrid research strategies function under a
pragmatic world view (Cherryholmes, 1992; Creswell, 2009) that is not necessarily
committed to any one system of philosophy and reality and uses both quantitative and
qualitative methods with different approaches to collect and analyze data. Creswell
(2009) claims that different problems call for different approaches and points out that
previous research and known facts about the phenomenon and problem play an
important role in determining the appropriate research method (Creswell, 2009). For
example, qualitative and exploratory research is useful when there is yet no clear
understanding of which variables and constructs need to be studied. Furthermore,
qualitative studies may provide a deeper perspective on a particular group of
individuals.
In another important work on the subject of methodological ﬁt, McGrath (1964)
categorizes how different research methods such as experimental simulations,
laboratory experiments or computer simulations are appropriate for answering
different questions. McGrath (1964) also emphasizes the importance of the “state of
prior knowledge” for determining the right research method and stresses that ﬁeld
studies are very appropriate methods in validating established theories in the real
world setting.
Edmondson and McManus (2007) deﬁne four key elements in determining the right
methodology for ﬁeld research, namely research question, prior work, research design,
and contribution to literature. The foundation of their framework is deﬁning the state
of different theories in management research along a continuum from mature theories
to nascent ones (Edmondson and McManus, 2007). According to their framework,
mature theories are well developed and usually have broader points of agreement over
constructs and the relationship among them. Nascent theories on the other end propose
new connections between phenomena. By describing theories on a spectrum of
maturity, Edmondson and McManus (2007) recommend which types of questions need
to be asked at different levels and whether qualitative, quantitative, or mixed method
research strategies are the most appropriate way of tackling the research question. In
addition, they make suggestions on the appropriate data collection techniques and
analytic approaches. The signiﬁcant contribution of this framework is a notion of
methodological ﬁt that systematically recognizes how previous studies affect the
research methodological decisions and the ways in which they will contribute to the
literature. It is a valuable tool that can steer the body of knowledge in management to a
more convergent state. A poor methodological ﬁt may result in the re-invention of the
wheel under a new name, losing the opportunity of generating new knowledge, and
engendering some unevenness in the evidence (Edmondson and McManus, 2007) that
would lead to a divergent body of knowledge and produce unreliable pieces of
information.
P1. In the context of evidence-based management, evidence is more reliable when
its method of production ﬁts with the type of managerial question.
MD
50,5
842
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Another aspect that affects the accuracy and reliability of the generated evidence is the
issue of contextualization. The Merriam-Webster dictionary deﬁnes context as “the
interrelated conditions in which something exists or occurs” (2011). It refers to the
environment and setting that surrounds the phenomenon under investigation.
Contextualization helps to link observation to “relevant facts, events, and points of
view” (Rousseau and Fried, 2001).
Attention to contextualization has signiﬁcantly increased over the past 30 years
(Roberts et al., 1978; Cappelli and Sherer, 1991; Johns, 2006). One reason for this
increasing interest in contextualized research is globalization. Globalization is a term
mainly used to describe the increasing integration of political, informational, and
ﬁnancial domains of regional economies around the world. As Friedman (2005) states:
“The World is [now] ﬂat”. In business terms, this means that markets are being
integrated and a new economy is emerging in which businesses function across
boundaries and borders. In such an environment, organizations are faced with new
dynamics of different cultures and business settings, and managers need evidence
from other cultures and environments to be able to make the right decisions. This calls
for more comparative studies that simultaneously look for emergent universality and
cultural speciﬁcity (Adler, 1983, 2002). Studies across different cultures and
environments call for special attention to the process through which constructs and
research methodologies are transformed across national borders (Rousseau and Fried,
2001; Adler and Gundersen, 2008;). This issue highlights the importance of including
contextual factors in different stages of research in order to achieve more convergence
and acknowledge contextual differences as a major source of conﬂicting ﬁndings in the
management literature (Rousseau and Fried, 2001).
Another factor that makes the role of contextualization essential for ensuring the
reliability of evidence is that the nature of work is changing and is signiﬁcantly
modifying the nature of the relationship between the worker and the organization
(Rousseau and Fried, 2001). First of all, the political context of employment is shifting
as governments are increasingly regulating the relationship between employers and
employees which has led to an increase in lawsuits against organizations (Howard,
1995). While some believe that the power of unions and labor organizations tend to
weaken during globalization (Wallerstein and Western, 2000), others argue that labor
unions can actually be strengthened in developing economies because of the urban
wage rate and globalization (Beladi et al., 2011). This suggests that organizations and
employees are increasingly striving toward either synergy or compromise between
their interests. Second, today’s economic environment is extremely technology-driven
(West, 2011). This has resulted in the emergence of virtual businesses, the elimination
of many intermediaries, an increase in the speed of transactions, and signiﬁcant
changes in the power distribution within organizations. Third, workers and their skills
have also changed dramatically. The signiﬁcant boost in life expectancy at birth shows
that the working-age of the population and the number of elderly employed has
increased (Perry, 2010). Immigration has also resulted in dramatic changes in the work
force and has resulted in a multicultural workplace in which individuals come from
varied cultural backgrounds, with different values, and degrees from a variety of
educational systems around the world (Mare´ et al., 2010). The changes in the structure
of jobs have also been advantageous to women and have lessened the sex segregation
of the labor market (Barnes, 2010). Now Millennials and the children of Generation X
Evidence based
decision making
843
<<<PAGE=14>>>
and the Baby Boomers are gradually entering the work force. This generation is
believed to be the ﬁrst “digital native” generation (Prensky, 2001; Tufts, 2011) for who
the computer and the Internet is considered to be an integral part of life rather than just
task-enabling technology. As Millennials enter the workforce in large numbers, the
business rules are bending to accommodate them (Twenge and Campbell, 2008; Wey
Smola and Sutton, 2002).
According to Rousseau and Fried (2001), contextualization of research would make
it possible to face the previous challenges as it would facilitate comparison of
constructs of a particular study in a particular site to those of previous research. It also
helps to specify the frame of reference and point of view that a particular study focuses
on (Rousseau and Fried, 2001). Moreover, contextualization allows researchers to
understand how historical events and time may affect results, and to compare different
characteristics of their samples of workers, units, or organizations to those of previous
researchers (Rousseau and Fried, 2001). More importantly, it would provide a new
perspective through which researchers can explain similarities or differences between
their ﬁndings and that which exists in the literature. This would provide more
sophistication and contextual ﬁnesse to the managerial body of knowledge. In essence,
contextualization of organizational research acknowledges the complexity of social
reality under investigation and produces more reliable evidence by understanding the
dynamic interplay between contextual factors and the constructs and relationships of
interest (Bamberger, 2008).
P2. In the context of evidence-based management, evidence is more reliable when
its method of production includes more contextual factors.
One of the concerns regarding the reliability of evidence and research ﬁndings for the
purpose of evidence-based decision making is the widespread deﬁciencies in social
science research (Van de Ven, 2007). The medical ﬁeld had also faced a similar concern
(Simera et al., 2009) especially as research became more commercialized and funded by
different organizations who beneﬁtted from particular results privileging their
products and services rather than from true and accurate results (Sharpe, 2002). To
address this issue and to also strengthen the conﬂict of interest policies and procedures
in medical research, academic institutions and inﬂuential journals have taken steps to
make it possible for editorial boards and authorized government agencies to have
access to the data used in research reports (Sharpe, 2002). An international network,
Enhancing the Quality and Transparency of Health Research (EQUATOR) has also
been launched (Simera et al., 2009), with the aim of promoting transparent and accurate
reporting (Groves, 2008). EQUATOR network provides authors and journals with
speciﬁc guidelines on requirements of transparent reports tailored for different
research methods (Groves, 2008). Similar guidelines need to be developed for the ﬁeld
of management in order to ensure the accuracy of research ﬁndings by allowing
funding agencies, editorial boards, and eventually the Collaboration, when it is in place,
to access the data. These guidelines need to specify the type and amount of information
required in a research report that would make replication of the research possible.
Therefore it is proposed that:
P3. In the context of evidence-based management, evidence is more reliable when
its method of production is more transparent.
MD
50,5
844
<<<PAGE=15>>>
The purpose of evidence-based management is to boost conﬁdence in research ﬁndings
by making explicit their context, methodology, and their applicability to the context of
their development. Another dimension against which evidence needs to be evaluated is
the replicability and consistency of results. Replication is argued to be “at the heart of
any science” (Utts, 1999) and is known to be a critical test of objectivity (Chaplin and
Krawiec, 1979; Fiorentine and Hillhouse, 2003). It is also an important means through
which theories can either be conﬁrmed or falsiﬁed (Lamal, 1990). Management theories
are often argued to be challenging in this matter as organizations are inherently
complex, open, and functioning in constantly changing contexts (Astley and Van de
Ven, 1983; Fabian, 2000). As a result, organizational researchers have been more
focused on theory building (Weick, 1989; Lewis and Grimes, 1999; Pentland, 1999;
Locke, 2007) than on testing the theories (Davis and Marquis, 2005; Hambrick, 2007).
This is unfortunate because although social science theories have limited scope and
limited predictive and explanatory power compared to other disciplines, they are at
least to some extent, empirically testable (Lamal, 1990). Like other sciences, they can
make propositions that can be conﬁrmed by experience. In other words, replications
promote external validity, as long as the ﬁndings are in agreement with those of the
study being replicated (Lamal, 1990). Furthermore, replication can be particularly
useful when there are disagreements over previous ﬁndings (Sidman, 1960).
Replicability is about producing similar results in similar settings (Sekaran, 2006).
For quantitative studies, replicability of research and convergence of managerial
knowledge can be improved by clearly identifying the sources of errors such as in
measurement, sampling, internal validity, and statistical conclusion (Malhotra and
Grover, 1998). As surveys are known to be a common form of data collection in
quantitative studies, “replication of experiment” can be obtained from deriving a
“coefﬁcient of agreement” between different tests of a measurement (Maxwell and
Pilliner, 1968; Mellenbergh, 1977). Eventually, these should become part of the
methodology of the Collaboration.
For qualitative studies, the story is somewhat different. For example, Janesick
(1994) suggests generalizability may indeed be an issue. She argues that the value of
case studies, as an example of qualitative studies, is in their uniqueness and therefore
replicability is pointless (Janesick, 1994). Huberman and Miles (1994), on the other
hand suggest that replication in case studies is possible through successive waves of
data collection. This form of replication is not for the sake of generalizability but rather
for understanding the conditions under which a particular ﬁnding appears and
operates (Huberman and Miles, 1994).
The issue of replication is of particular concern in the ﬁeld of organizational
research as most journals are more interested in reporting novel studies and ﬁndings
rather than replications for conﬁrmation studies. Therefore, there is not much incentive
in conducting this type of research (Lubin, 1957). Theory testing is less glamorous and
the reward structures are skewed toward theory building. Management research
programs are funded for theoretical impact as opposed to replication of existing
theories. This is a challenge for evidence-based management as it discourages large
scale development of evidence. In the context of evidence-based management,
replication is particularly valuable as it not only helps to take management science to a
more convergent state through replication of quantitative studies, but also helps to
contextualize research ﬁndings through replication of qualitative studies. This calls for
Evidence based
decision making
845
<<<PAGE=16>>>
a different view of research in management with appropriate recognition and reward
system.
P4. In the context of evidence-based management, evidence is more reliable when
its method of production is more replicable.
It is logical to expect evidence to be evaluated and assessed before being disseminated
to managers and implemented into practice. In the inefﬁcient marketplace of
managerial ideas and practices, systematic reviews are one way to condense evidence
into a manageable and readable format (Chalmers and Altman, 1995; Cook et al.,
1997b). In addition, they can provide practitioners with an overview of the extent to
which researchers and scholars agree or disagree on certain research ﬁndings.
According to GreenFact foundation, a not-for proﬁt organization with the mission of
bringing complex scientiﬁc consensus reports on health and environmental studies to
the reach of non-specialists, scientiﬁc consensus represents the experts’ and specialists’
collective position and opinion on a subject at a given time (GreenFact, n.d.). While
scientiﬁc consensus is not always an articulation of “truth” and not all scientists are
unanimous about results and research ﬁndings, consensus is still the best bet for
practitioners. A high level of consensus among particular practices can be used as an
indicator of the reliability and dependability of research ﬁndings (Pfeffer, 1993).
Scholarly consensus has long been used to evaluate paradigm development in different
disciplines (Kuhn, 1970). Furthermore, higher consensus results in more efﬁcient
communication between researchers that can lead to shared deﬁnition of concepts,
agreement on the frontiers of the discipline (Lodahl and Gordon, 1972), and
collaborative research (Pfeffer, 1993). In general, while different subspecialties of
organizational studies have different levels of consensus on evidence, the ﬁeld itself is
known to have a low level of paradigm development (Pfeffer, 1993). That said,
scientiﬁc consensus can still be used as a basis for accepting the reliability and validity
of evidence in managerial science as it is the case for other disciplines such as
environmental policies, medicine, etc. (Devlin and Williams, 1992; Lindzen, 1992;
Hauschild et al., 2008; Kahan et al., 2011).
P5. In the context of evidence-based management, evidence is more reliable when
there is greater consensus.
As was discussed, evidence-based management suggests that managers need to base
their decision on sound evidence in order to increase the probability of making the
right decision. However, for evidence to be reliable and of a high quality there needs to
be a systematic assessment of the research ﬁndings. Learning from the discipline of
medicine and Cochrane guidelines for generating evidence, we propose that these
assessment and reviews need to be the output of an independent organization with the
aim of producing high-quality, evidence-based management databases. These reviews
need to be updated frequently and take the most recent research into consideration
(Higgins and Green, 2011).
We propose that the initial step in conducting these reviews is to clearly deﬁne the
review question, determine an appropriate methodology, (Higgins and Green, 2011)
and use methodological ﬁt as the main criterion for selecting, reviewing, and
evaluating related studies. In order to generate the best evidence from the selected
research, studies should be ranked according to their degree of contextualization,
MD
50,5
846
<<<PAGE=17>>>
replicability, and transparency. The evidence becomes stronger when there is scholarly
and expert consensus and agreement over the ﬁndings. In essence, what the theory of
evidence seeks is convergence among the dimensions. It is this convergence that
ensures optimization of rigour and relevance. This convergence is engineered through
a formal collaboration (similar to the Cochrane model) of management scholars, editors
of management journals, and practicing managers (see Figure 1). In other words, a
strong collaboration among both the producers and users of evidence is likely to
enhance the quality and strength of evidence.
P6. The evidence is stronger when there is a greater degree of overlap between the
dimensions of methodological ﬁt, c ontextualization, replicability,
transparency and consensus. The overlap is engineered and enhanced by
an established collaboration among the producers and users of evidence.
7. A mixed-level theory of evidence-based decision making
After the initial stage of generating and evaluating evidence, the next stage is the
process of evidence-based decision making, for which a model is proposed. In the
model, evidence-based decision making is viewed as a dynamic process through which
evidence is obtained, interpreted, and used as a basis for decision making. The theory
does not take the common six-step rational decision making process perspective of
deﬁning the problem, identifying the criteria, weighing the criteria, generating
alternatives, rating the alternatives on each criterion, and making the optimal decision.
This is because rational decision making has rarely been observed in actual
organization settings (Rode, 1992; Bazerman and Moore, 2009), owing to the limitations
Figure 1.
Theory of evidence
Evidence based
decision making
847
<<<PAGE=18>>>
in human informational and computational rationality (March, 1978). The model
focuses on how evidence is transformed into management decisions within the
organizational context. Regardless of whether evidence is disseminated to managers
through their education and training or is sought by them according to their own
chosen methods, it is not always used in a rational manner. The model views
evidence-based decision making as a multi-level phenomenon expressed at the
individual level, but inﬂuenced by cross-level constructs at individual, organizational,
and institutional levels independently and interactively. At the individual level, what
managers use as evidence for generating decision options is a function of their
education, training, experience, and judgment. Furthermore, the process of
evidence-based decision making is inﬂuenced by managers’ preferences and values
as well as stakeholders’ preferences within institutional, organizational, and individual
contexts. Finally, managers may also face ethical constraints at both organizational
and individual levels in making the ﬁnal decision from the generated decision options.
7.1 A mixed-level model
Based on the previous argument a mixed-level model of evidence based decision
making is presented in Figure 2:
P1. Evidence-based decision making is a multi-level phenomenon expressed at
the individual level, inﬂuenced by cross-level constructs at individual,
organizational, and institutional levels independently and interactively.
Highlighting the importance of decisions managers make on the performance of their
ﬁrms, Rousseau (2006) argues that managerial competence is an important and vital
factor for organizations. The debate over ways to evaluate training and competency for
practitioners is far more consistent in the medical ﬁeld than in the ﬁeld of management
(Shaneyfelt et al., 2006). One possible reason is that medicine is better developed as a
profession than management. For example, the profession of medicine involves the
application of a specialized body of knowledge and an effort to continuously enlarge
that knowledge (Swick, 2000). Moreover, those in the medical profession are educated
with a unique and agreed on body of knowledge (Cruess and Cruess, 1997). They also
Figure 2.
Model of evidence based
decision making
MD
50,5
848
<<<PAGE=19>>>
go through long periods of training subsequent to their education (Cruess and Cruess,
1997). While it is well-known that sound management practices are crucial for the
survival and success of organizations (Rubin and Dierdorff, 2011), there are concerns
about the accuracy, reliability and relevancy of what is actually taught in MBA
programs and other business education curricula (Datar et al., 2011; Rubin and
Dierdorff, 2011). This is quite unlike the practice in medical education.
Looking at the history of management, business schools have recently been
promoting the idea of management as a profession and are taking steps toward
becoming the primary custodians of management training (Khurana, 2010). They also
have the means of disseminating research evidence to future managers through formal
management education programs. Nevertheless, having a formal education by itself is
not a guarantee that management students have actually been exposed to the best
available evidence and are familiar with the strongest research ﬁndings. Even
textbooks do not incorporate important research ﬁndings and many who are teaching
in business schools are not fully aware of scientiﬁc evidences in the ﬁeld (Trank and
Rynes, 2003). In fact, many management education programs do not focus on research
evidence at all (Trank and Rynes, 2003). There are studies that suggest that what is
taught in business schools is not strongly related to what is actually important for
successfully leading a business. Consequently the schools are not very effective in
training their graduates toward professional competence and subsequent career
success (Pfeffer and Fong, 2002). This is largely due to the absence of rigorous and
relevant evidence, gathered systematically and available readily.
Some ﬁndings show that business schools over-emphasize quantitative analytical
techniques and underestimate the importance of leadership, interpersonal and
communication skills (Porter and McKibbin, 1988, p. 65). Some even argue that
management education re-enforces the “technicist and commonsensical
understandings” of those enrolled in these programs (Grey and Mitev, 1995), which
are not necessarily backed by evidence. However, this is not the case for all business
schools, and graduates from schools that actually expose their students to
research-based evidence may have higher probability of transferring their learning
into practice and base their decisions on this information.
In addition to the formal education that is offered in business schools, managers
have the opportunity to be enrolled in various continuing education programs such as
executive or enterprise education programs and workshops. In medicine, the
continuing education programs are widely used in order to enhance the
implementation of evidence by practitioners, and to expose them to the best
available practices supported through research ﬁndings (Kitson et al., 1998; Sackett
et al., 1996; Cullenet al., 2011). Although the effectiveness of this method in increasing
the quality of care is still under question (Davis et al., 1992), the evidence shows that it
substantially increases physician’s knowledge (Davis et al., 1992).
Ideally, managers can be exposed to best evidence through related management
journals and specialty periodicals. However, in a study conducted among nearly 1,000
human resources vice presidents, Rynes et al.(2002) noted that there is a widespread
disagreement or lack of knowledge about some effective HR practices in spite of the
strong foundation of evidence they are built on. In a later study, Rynes et al. (2007)
reported that these effective HR practices are also under-represented in the periodicals
and journals available to these managers. Such fragmentation of knowledge and
Evidence based
decision making
849
<<<PAGE=20>>>
balkanization among its adherents render evidence-based decision making difﬁcult if
not impossible.
Another individual difference that seems to affect the decision making process is an
individual’s prior experience. Experts are considered to be experienced, capable within
a speciﬁc domain, and are believed to have superior ability to identify relevant
information, and employ effective information-gathering strategies (Shanteau, 1992). In
the case of evidence-based decision making, it would then be logical to assume that
experts are able to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant evidence pertaining to
the decision on hand. In addition, experts appear to be more knowledgeable, not only
due to their highly developed perceptual/attentional abilities, ability to simplify
complex problems, and greater creativity when faced with novel problems – but also
because they possess up-to-date content knowledge (Shanteau, 1988). Experts have the
cultivated ability to recall patterns of relevant information from their domain (Chase
and Simon, 1973). From this we can see that expert managers would be more capable of
recalling relevant evidence to their area of decision making compared to
less-experienced managers.
That said, experts are also considered to be overconﬁdent and poorly calibrated
(Christensen-Szalanski and Bushyhead, 1981). An individual is highly calibrated when
there is a good ﬁt between the quantity of his/her correct responses and his/her
probability estimate of that quantity (Spence, 1996). Research has distinguished
calibration in experts in different domains. For example, it is suggested that expert
weather forecasters are very well calibrated (Murphy and Winkler, 1977), while doctors
seem to be poorly calibrated and overconﬁdent (Christensen-Szalanski and Bushyhead,
1981). Because of this overconﬁdence, experts may become “cognitive misers” who cut
their evidence seeking short (Mahajan, 1992; Shepherd et al., 2003).
While managers’ experience, including their formal education, involvement in
continuous learning, and exposure to the evidence base of their ﬁeld through specialty
periodicals may affect their utilization of evidence in the decision making process, their
rationality is bounded like any other human being. In their book “Judgment in
Managerial Decision Making”, Bazerman and Moore (2009) offer an overview of
limitations of management rationality and its effects on managerial decision making.
For example, the availability heuristic – relying on readily available knowledge in order
to make decisions (Tversky and Kahneman, 1973) – suggests that managers are more
likely to utilize information and evidence that they have been recently exposed to or have
encountered an example of and therefore can easily recall. The vividness of experience
also affects managers’ decision making. Therefore, it is logical to expect that managers
are more likely to utilize evidence they can easily retrieve not only because they have
recently became familiarized with it but also because that evidence has been exposed to
them more vividly in training sessions introducing a new technique. However, vividness
is no substitute to veracity. As Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) suggest there are many false
practices and “absolute nonsense” that are widely implemented by managers because
they are made more appealing through persuasive promotions presented as
“breakthrough” ideas. Managers may also selectively search and use evidence that is
more likely to conﬁrm their beliefs or the conclusion they desire to reach (Pfeffer and
Sutton, 2006). In addition, a manager may choose to discard or accept evidence because
of escalation of commitment (Bazerman et al., 1984; McCarthy et al., 1993; Rutledge,
2011) and a desire to stick with a previous course of action.
MD
50,5
850
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Based on the ideas and discussions presented here, the proposed model suggests
that managers’ implementation of evidence in the process of decision making in
organizations depends on several individual level characteristics such as manager’s
training and education, experience, and judgment. These characteristics affect the
managers’ level of exposure to and knowledge of evidence, re-evaluation of scientiﬁc
evidence, and their tendency to accept or discard it.
P2. At the individual level, what managers use as evidence for generating
decision options is a function of their training and education, experience, and
judgment.
Another issue that needs close attention is that in many organizations the management
(the agent making the decision) is separate from the owners and shareholders
(principals). Agency theory explores the effects of this reality on the actions and
performance of managers. Through the lens of agency theory, the ﬁrm is viewed as a
system in which complex written and unwritten contracts exist between individuals
(Fama and Jensen, 1983). The main argument here is that both managers and owners of
a ﬁrm strive to maximize their utility, while their interest may at times be conﬂicting. It
is suggested that the principal (owner) would seek to control the agent (manager)
through contracts that specify each party’s rights, rewards, and incentive structure
(Fama and Jensen, 1983). This reality affects the process of evidence-based decision
making as managers tend to utilize evidence according to their ability to maximize
their interests, while the controlling, monitoring, and incentive systems in place would
impose a structure to protect the owners’ interests.
In the ﬁeld of medicine, the effect of economic incentives on the physicians’ actions
have been discussed through several studies (Held and Reinhardt, 1979; Gaynor and
Pauly, 1987; Conrad et al., 1998; Grumbach et al., 1998; Pauly, 1992). The discussion
expanded into the literature of evidence-based medicine, suggesting that when
ﬁnancial incentives are designed to reward cutting cost, physicians tend to use fewer
tests or order less expensive tests, procedures, and treatments (Shortell et al., 2001).
Using the same line of argument, when incentives to increase productivity are in place,
physicians tend to produce more units of service or see more patients (Shortell et al.,
2001). Moreover, incentives promoting quality achievement are known to be associated
with behaviors targeting quality, which include prevention or early detection
procedures such as immunization, mammography screening, etc. (Shortell et al., 2001).
Although some of these incentive policies may result in one stakeholder’s satisfaction
under certain circumstances, they may also result in unsupported and suboptimal
medical practices and the tendency to ignore evidence.
Evidence shows that compensation plans that link pay to performance and are
approved by a ﬁrm’s board of directors are positively related to shareholders’ wealth
(Smith and Watts, 1986). Examples of this type of incentive plan include compensating
managers with company stock, salaries, and/or bonuses (Jensen et al., 2010). Although
linking executives’ pay to performance seems like a logical way of approaching
managerial level incentives, there are still examples of publicly held companies in
which executives are compensated regardless of their performance (Bebchuk and
Fried, 2006; Jensen et al., 2010). There is a concern that top managers may act more like
bureaucrats rather than the value-maximizing agents in those organizations (Jensen
et al., 2010). In addition, it is well-known that monetary incentives do not always work
Evidence based
decision making
851
<<<PAGE=22>>>
as the central motivator for peoples’ behaviors (Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006). Beneﬁts such
as authority and power, status and prestige, and even public visibility affect the level
and effectiveness of monetary compensation necessary for motivating managers to
make decisions aligned with the interest of their ﬁrms’ owners (Jensen et al., 2010).
One factor that seems obvious in analyzing the extent to which evidence-based
practice is implemented is the degree to which individuals are held responsible for the
decisions they are making. This is at least the case in evidence-based medicine. Some
scholars even argue that dismissal threats can play the same role in holding managers
responsible for the decisions they make for the ﬁrm (Jensen et al., 2010). Although the
intensity of such threats is fundamentally different in the medical ﬁeld and managerial
ﬁeld, the cost of disclosure can also be considered high.
Apart from the efforts of economic alignment between managers and the
organization, the ﬁrm’s compensation policies should be perceived as fair in order for
managers to be motivated and willing to participate in courses of actions that beneﬁt
the owner (Lind and Tyler, 1988; Kim and Mauborgne, 1993; Korsgaard et al., 1995). In
the context of executive payment, the incentive policies are considered to be fair if they
are tied to the external market (Coughlan and Schmidt, 1985; Deckop, 1988; Finkelstein
and Hambrick, 1989; Jensen et al., 2010). However, this “fairness” is often achieved
through negotiation rather than through deﬁned salary grades and ranges which are
linked to the external market information (Bebchuk and Fried, 2006). Hence, one can
infer that a just and reasonable incentive policy is more likely to motivate managers in
implementing evidence-based management. Thus managers’ values and preferences
affect the process of evidence-based management as managers would be motivated to
make decisions that serve their interests.
P3. The process of generating decision options is inﬂuenced by managers’
preferences and values at the individual level.
One issue that takes the decision making process in organizations beyond the conﬂict
of interest between ownership and management is that there are various other
stakeholders whose objectives are often contradictory. For example, managers are
increasingly adopting environmentally-friendly strategies. Delmas and Toffel (2004)
suggest that government, regulators, customers, competitors, community and
environment interest groups, and industry associations have their own preferences
and values that impose pressure on organizations and inﬂuence the process of decision
making. The values, preferences, and power these principals and society have over the
organization and the way they inﬂuence organizational practices can be studied
through institutional theory at the institutional level (Delmas and Toffel, 2004).
As was discussed, within agency theory there are incentive systems, control
strategies and reward mechanisms (Fama, 1980; Tosi et al., 1997) that inﬂuence the
process of evidence-based decision making at the organizational level. Moreover,
employees are also considered to be stakeholders who inﬂuence the decision making
process (Hill and Jones, 1992). For example, their individual preferences toward change
implementation may affect the process. Managers may re-evaluate their decision
options because of the pressure and power of stakeholders with conﬂicting values and
preferences, at institutional, organizational and individual levels.
P4. The process of generating decision options is inﬂuenced by stakeholders’
preferences from institutional, organizational, and individual levels.
MD
50,5
852
<<<PAGE=23>>>
The process of translating evidence into practice also known as research utilization
happens within an organizational context (Stetler, 2003). The context of an
organization has a great impact on the process of research adoption and can either
ease or hinder that process (Solberg et al., 2000; Brendan McCormack et al., 2002).
There are many different aspects of an organization’s context that may affect the
implementation of evidence-based practice. Culture not only plays an important role in
deﬁning the context of an organization but also affects the way it operates. For
example, even though compensation incentives seem like a necessary condition to
promote evidence-based practice in an organization, they do not seem sufﬁcient. While
compensation systems and procedures are considered to be a way of managing and
inﬂuencing the culture of an organization and shaping it in the desired manner (Kerr
and Slocum, 1987), the culture itself inﬂuences the way compensation systems are
designed (Schuler and Rogovsky, 1998), especially how CEOs and managers are
rewarded (Tosi and Greckhamer, 2004). Therefore, it can be seen that a ﬁrm’s
compensation policies and procedures do not function independently of its culture.
Thus, implementing evidence-based management and achieving an evidence-based
organization needs some cultural and collective actions (Shortell et al., 2001).
There are several approaches to exploring the culture of an organization based on
the nature of the problem at hand. In their book “Hard facts, dangerous half-truths and
total nonsense”, Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) point out two important sets of values that
can contribute to the implementation the evidence-based practice: readiness to change
beliefs and conventional wisdom, and obligation to collect facts and information
required to formulate well-informed and intelligent decisions (Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006).
Therefore, it can be concluded that cultural aspects associated with change and the
organization’s value system should be explored in studying the characteristics of an
evidence-based organization..
Pfeffer and Sutton (2006) further suggest that one of the reasons managers do not
use evidence as the basis of their decision making is that it changes the power
dynamics inside the organization. In a culture supportive of evidence-based decision
making, decision power would be distributed according to individuals’ competency
and mastery of evidence as a critical resource for decision making rather than
organizational politics and structural power. Furthermore, adequate management
information and decision support systems are essential for managers to make informed
decisions and identify the relevance of the evidence to a particular problem. It is
therefore proposed that:
P5. The process of generating decision options is inﬂuenced by the context in
which the decision is being made through structural, environmental, cultural,
and political constraints.
One aspect of decision making that has received substantial attention from researchers
in the ﬁeld of organizational studies is the issue of ethical considerations. Kohlberg
(1969) proposed a theory of cognitive moral judgment for understanding the ethical
decision making process. He suggested that individuals identify and reason out ethical
dilemmas according to their moral cognitive development (Kohlberg, 1969). Based on
Kohlberg’s (1969) theory, Rest and Barnett (1986) developed a model of moral or ethical
decision making that explored the link between moral reasoning and moral behaviour
through the stages of moral awareness, evaluation, intention, and behaviour. Using
Evidence based
decision making
853
<<<PAGE=24>>>
their model as a base, Trevino (1986) proposed an interactional model of ethical
decision making in which the moral reasoning process was explained through
interactions of individual and situational components. Subsequently, Jones (1991)
further developed a framework of moral intensity in which he characterized an ethical
issue based on six dimensions: magnitude of consequences, social consensus,
proximity, probability of effect, concentration of effect, and temporal immediacy.
From another perspective, scholars such as Haidt (2001) and Gibbs (1991) suggested
that the moral judgment and ethical decision making are intuitive and sometimes
unconscious rather than controlled reasoning processes. Bazerman and Moore (2009)
suggested that individuals’ moral decision making is bounded ethically, and that they
sometimes engage in ethically questionable behaviours that are even inconsistent with
their own preferred values and moral cognitive development. The main reason they
offer this type of unethical decision making is the ethical biases at different levels of
analysis (e.g. over-claiming credit at the individual and organizational level, in-group
favoritism at the individual and group level, and discounting the future) (Bazerman
and Moore, 2009).
In the case of evidence-based decision making, ethics is mainly of concern where
evidence-based practices may lead to decisions that seem at odds with common
morality (Kerridge et al., 1998). For example, in health care decision making, evidence
may result in decisions that rationally beneﬁt the population while at the same time
may harm the interests of the individual and hence impose an ethical dilemma to the
decision maker (Kerridge et al., 1998). The proposed model here suggests that the
process of evidence-based decision making is consciously or unconsciously inﬂuenced
by ethical constraints at different levels, particularly when the decision maker needs to
choose the ﬁnal decision from the generated decision options. For example, research
ﬁndings suggest that an individual’s personal attributes such as religion (Hegarty and
Sims, 1978; McNichols and Zimmerer, 1985), nationality (Hegarty and Sims, 1978;
Becker and Fritzsche, 1987; Abratt et al., 1992; White and Rhodeback, 1992), gender
(Beltramini et al., 1984; Chonko and Hunt, 1985; Ferrell and Skinner, 1988; Whipple and
Swords, 1992) and age (Browning and Zabriskie, 1983; Izraeli, 1988; Callan, 1992) may
affect the moral cognitive preferences or intuitive ethical decision making. Individual
educational background (Beltramini et al., 1984; Chonko and Hunt, 1985) and
personality (Hegarty and Sims, 1978) may also impose ethical constraints at the
individual level. Organizational level constraints such as the organization’s ethical
climate (Ferrell and Skinner, 1988), size (Weber, 1990), and the level at which the
decision is being made (Chonko and Hunt, 1985) also affect the process. Industry
ethical standards (Laczniak and Inderrieden, 1987) and the overall level of business
environment competitiveness (Hegarty and Sims, 1978) would impose ethical
constraints on the ﬁnal choice at the institutional level.
P6. The process of making a ﬁnal decision from generated decision options is
inﬂuenced by ethical constraints at institutional, organizational, and
individual levels.
One last issue that needs to be taken into consideration is how constructs at different
levels of analysis inﬂuence dynamics of the process. For example, the effect of ethical
constraints on the decision making process may be impacted by the interaction
between several individual and contextual variables (Trevino, 1986). These contextual
MD
50,5
854
<<<PAGE=25>>>
constructs can either arise from the nature of the decision problem and ethical dilemma
at hand or the broader organizational culture (Trevino, 1986). The nature of the ethical
dilemma itself or its existence may also vary based on organization’s normative
structure, responsibility for consequences and other pressures (Trevino, 1986). At the
individual level, manager’s education, experience, and training may also inﬂuence the
moderating effect of ethical constraints on the decision making process, mainly
because of their effects on manager’s moral reasoning and development (Elm and
Nichols, 1993; Wimalasiri et al., 1996).
Another interesting interaction effect occurs between the contradictory interests
and values of stakeholders across varying levels of analysis. As discussed by Evan
and Freeman (1988), there is no preference of one stakeholder over others deﬁned in the
agency theory, and what actually inﬂuences the decision making process is a balance
between their conﬂicting values and preferences. This balance may be better
understood as a contingent phenomenon as the pressure, power, and inﬂuence of
different stakeholders may vary due to situational and contextual factors.
P7. The process of evidence-based decision making is inﬂuenced not only by the
main effects of its constituent constructs but also by the interactive effect of
those constructs at individual, organizational, and institutional levels.
8. Conclusion
As the preceding discussion suggests, managers need reliable evidence in order to be
able to make solid and effective decisions. The theory of evidence proposed in this
paper suggests that rigour and relevance of evidence as revealed in its quality and
reliability can be assessed on ﬁve dimensions: methodological ﬁt, contextualization,
replicability, transparency, and scholarly and experts’ consensus. The greater their
alignment, the stronger is the evidence. We recommend that an independent
organization needs to be established to review and evaluate most updated research
ﬁndings against these dimensions and determine the strength of evidence, based on the
degree of overlap between these different dimensions. The result of these reviews need
to be at the core of management education and training in order to increase their
exposure to best evidence and enhan ce evidence-based decision making in
organizations. However, we also acknowledge that in reality the process of decision
making may not be a purely rational process and managers may perceive and utilize
evidence differently based on their experience and judgment. The context in which the
decision is being made and the preferences and values of management and various
stakeholders of the organization, across different levels of analysis, also inﬂuence the
process of evidence-based decision making. In addition, there are different ethical
constraints at the individual, organizational, and institutional levels that may affect the
ﬁnal choice.
This work contributes to the literature of evidence-based management by clearly
deﬁning what evidence is in the ﬁeld of management and how it needs to be reviewed
and evaluated. It also justiﬁes the need for an independent organization for taking over
the task of systematically reviewing the research ﬁndings and knowledge produced in
the management discipline by academics and researchers. Moreover, we propose a
multi-stage, cross-level model of evidence-based decision making which provides a
comprehensive overview of the decision making process within organizations and
takes constructs from different levels of analysis into consideration while
Evidence based
decision making
855
<<<PAGE=26>>>
acknowledging the interactive effects of these constructs on the decision making
process. Its contribution to the practice of management is the framework it offers for
achieving a more convergent state of knowledge in the discipline and promoting
professionalism by recommending a yardstick for the core body of knowledge that
facilitates competent professional practice.
The main limitation of the proposed theory is the absence of empirical work that
support the propositions and its heavy reliance on logic and argumentation. This
highlights the need for future work testing the theory of evidence, empirically
clarifying and operationalizing different evaluation dimensions, and assessing the
rigour and relevance of evidence, based on the degree of overlap between the different
dimensions. The model of evidence-based decision making must be tested in order to
verify and validate the effect of various constructs on the decision making process
from different levels of analysis. Testing this model would also shed light on the
usefulness of the proposed collaboration similar to the Cochrane collaboration for the
ﬁeld of management.
References
Abrahamson, E. and Eisenman, M. (2001), “Why management scholars must intervene
strategically in the management knowledge market”, Human Relations, Vol. 54 No. 1,
pp. 67-75.
Abratt, R., Nel, D. and Higgs, N.S. (1992), “An examination of the ethical beliefs of managers
using selected scenarios in a cross-cultural environment”, Journal of Business Ethics,
Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 29-35.
Adler, N.J. (1983), “A typology of management studies involving culture”, Journal of
International Business Studies, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 29-47.
Adler, N.J. (2002), International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior , Thomson Higher
Education, Mason, OH.
Adler, N.J. and Gundersen, A. (2008), International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior,
South-Western, Mason, OH.
Astley, W.G. and Van de Ven, A.H. (1983), “Central perspectives and debates in organization
theory”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 245-73.
Baba, V.V. (2004), “Toward a paradigm for management”, Metamorphosis: A Journal of
Management Research, Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 132-42.
Bamberger, P. (2008), “Beyond contextualization: using context theories to narrow the
micro-macro gap in management research”,Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 5 No. 5,
pp. 839-46.
Barnes, S.A. (2010), Gender Proﬁle of Workforce by Industry (2006), National Guidance Research
Forum, available at: www.guidance-research.org/
Bazerman, M.H. and Moore, D.A. (2008), Judgment in Managerial Decision Making, 7th ed.,
Wiley, New York, NY.
Bazerman, M.H. and Moore, D.A. (2009), Judgment in Managerial Decision Making, Wiley, New
York, NY.
Bazerman, M.H., Giuliano, T. and Appelman, A. (1984), “Escalation of commitment in individual
and group decision making”, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, Vol. 33
No. 2, pp. 141-52.
MD
50,5
856
<<<PAGE=27>>>
Bebchuk, L.A. and Fried, J.M. (2006), Pay without Performance: The Unfulﬁlled Promise of
Executive Compensation, Harvard University Press, Boston, MA.
Becker, H. and Fritzsche, D.J. (1987), “Business ethics: a cross-cultural comparison of managers’
attitudes”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 289-95.
Beladi, H., Chao, C.-C. and Hollas, D. (2011), “Does globalization weaken labor unions in developing
countries?”,Journal of International Trade and Economic Development,p p .1 - 1 0 .
Beltramini, R.F., Peterson, R.A. and Kozmetsky, G. (1984), “Concerns of college students
regarding business ethics”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 195-200.
Bero, L. and Rennie, D. (1995), “The Cochrane Collaboration: preparing, maintaining, and
disseminating systematic reviews of the effects of health care”, Journal of the American
Medical Association, Vol. 274 No. 24, pp. 1935-8.
Boaz, A. and Ashby, D. (2003), “Fit for purpose? Assessing research quality for evidence based
policy and practice”, ESRC UK Centre for Evidence Based Policy and Practice, London.
Bouchard, T.J. (1976), “Field research methods: interviewing, questionnaires, participant
observation, systematic observation, unobtrusive measures”, in Dunnette, M.D. (Ed.),
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Wiley, New York, NY, pp. 363-413.
Briner, R.B., Denyer, D. and Rousseau, D.M. (2009), “Evidence-based management: concept
cleanup time?”, Academy of Management Perspectives (formerly Academy of Management
Executive), Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 19-32.
Browning, J. and Zabriskie, N.B. (1983), “How ethical are industrial buyers?”, Industrial
Marketing Management, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 219-24.
Callan, V.J. (1992), “Predicting ethical values and training needs in ethics”, Journal of Business
Ethics, Vol. 11 No. 10, pp. 761-9.
Campbell, D.T., Stanley, J.C. and Gage, N.L. (1963),Experimental and Quasi-experimental Designs
for Research, Vol. 84, Rand McNally, Chicago, IL.
Campbell, J.P., Daft, R.L. and Hulin, C.L. (1982), What to Study: Generating and Developing
Research Questions, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Cappelli, P. and Sherer, P.D. (1991), “The missing role of context in OB: the need for a meso-level
approach”, Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 13, pp. 55-110.
Chalmers, E.I. and Altman, D.G. (1995), Systematic Reviews, BMJ Publishing Group, London.
Chaplin, J. and Krawiec, T. (1979), Systems and Theories of Psychology, Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, New York, NY.
Charlier, S.D., Brown, K.G. and Rynes, S.L. (2011), “Teaching evidence-based management in
MBA programs: what evidence is there?”, Academy of Management Learning and
Education, Vol. 10 No. 2, pp. 222-36.
Chase, W.G. and Simon, H.A. (1973), “Perception in chess”, Cognitive Psychology, Vol. 4 No. 1,
pp. 55-81.
Chassin, M.R., Galvin, R.W. and The National Roundtable on Health Care Quality (1998),
“The urgent need to improve health care quality: Institute of Medicine National
Roundtable on Health Care Quality”, Journal of American Medical Association, Vol. 280
No. 11, pp. 1000-5.
Cherryholmes, C.H. (1992), “Notes on pragmatism and scientiﬁc realism”, Educational
Researcher, Vol. 21 No. 6, pp. 13-17.
Chonko, L.B. and Hunt, S.D. (1985), “Ethics and marketing management: an empirical
examination”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 339-59.
Evidence based
decision making
857
<<<PAGE=28>>>
Choo, C.W. (1996), “The knowing organization: how organizations use information to construct
meaning, create knowledge and make decisions”, International Journal of Information
Management, Vol. 16 No. 5, pp. 329-40.
Christensen-Szalanski, J.J. and Bushyhead, J.B. (1981), “Physicians’ use of probabilistic
information in a real clinical setting”, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, Vol. 7 No. 4, pp. 928-35.
Clarkson, M.B.E. (1995), “A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social
performance”, The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 92-117.
Cochrane, A. (1989), Effectiveness and Efﬁciency: Random Reﬂections on Health Services, BMJ
Books, New York, NY, Memoir Club Publications Series.
Conrad, D.A., Maynard, C., Cheadle, A., Ramsey, S., Marcus-Smith, M., Kirz, H., Madden, C.A.,
Martin, D., Perrien, E.B., Wickizer, T., Zierler, B., Ross, A., Noren, J. and Liang, S.-Y. (1998),
“Primary care physician compensation method in medical groups: does it inﬂuence the use
and cost of health services for enrollees in managed care organizations?”, Journal of the
American Medical Association, Vol. 279 No. 11, pp. 853-8.
Cook, D.J., Mulrow, C.D. and Haynes, R.B. (1997), “Systematic reviews: synthesis of best evidence
for clinical decisions”, Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 126 No. 5, pp. 376-80.
Cook, D.J., Greengold, N.L., Ellrodt, A.G. and Weingarten, S.R. (1997), “The relation between
systematic reviews and practice guidelines”, Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 127 No. 3,
pp. 210-6.
Coughlan, A.T. and Schmidt, R.M. (1985), “Executive compensation, management turnover, and
ﬁrm performance: an empirical investigation”,Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 7
Nos 1-3, pp. 43-66.
Crawford, F.A. and Mathews, R.A. (2003), The Myth of Excellence, Three Rivers, New York, NY.
Creswell, J.W. (2009), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
Approaches, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Crotty, M. (1998), The Foundations of Social Research: Meaning and Perspective in the Research
Process, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Cruess, S.R. and Cruess, R.L. (1997), “Professionalism must be taught”, British Medical Journal,
Vol. 315 No. 7123, pp. 1674-7.
Cullen, L., Titler, M.G. and Rempel, G. (2011), “An advanced educational program promoting
evidence-based practice”, Western Journal of Nursing Research, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 345-64.
Datar, S.M., Garvin, D.A. and Cullen, P.G. (2011), “Rethinking the MBA: business education at a
crossroads”, Journal of Management Development, Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 451-62.
Davis, D.A., Thomson, M.A., Oxman, A.D. and Haynes, R.B. (1992), “Evidence for the
effectiveness of CME. A review of 50 randomized controlled trials”, Journal of the
American Medical Association, Vol. 268 No. 9, pp. 1111-7.
Davis, G.F. and Marquis, C. (2005), “Prospects for organization theory in the early twenty-ﬁrst
century: institutional ﬁelds and mechanisms”, Organization Science, Vol. 16 No. 4,
pp. 332-43.
Dean, J.W. Jr and Bowen, D.E. (1994), “Management theory and total quality: improving research
and practice through theory development”,Academy of Management Review, Vol. 19 No. 3,
pp. 392-418.
Deckop, J.R. (1988), “Determinants of chief executive ofﬁcer compensation”,Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 215-26.
MD
50,5
858
<<<PAGE=29>>>
Delmas, M. and Toffel, M.W. (2004), “Stakeholders and environmental management practices: an
institutional framework”,Business Strategy and the Environment, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 209-22.
Devlin, J.T. and Williams, C. (1992), Foods, Nutrition and Sports Performance: An International
Scientiﬁc Consensus held 4-6 February 1991, organized by Mars, Inc., with International
Olympic Committee Patronage, E. & F.N. Spon, London.
Drucker, P.F. (1966), The Effective Executive, Harper and Row, New York, NY.
Edmondson, A.C. and McManus, S.E. (2007), “Methodological ﬁt in management ﬁeld research”,
Academy of Management Review Archive, Vol. 32 No. 4, pp. 1155-79.
Elm, D.R. and Nichols, M.L. (1993), “An investigation of the moral reasoning of managers”,
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 12 No. 11, pp. 817-33.
Evan, W.M. and Freeman, R.E. (1988), “A stakeholder theory of the modern corporation: Kantian
capitalism”, in Beauchamp, T. and Bowie, N. (Eds), Ethical Theory and Business, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 75-93.
Fabian, F.H. (2000), “Keeping the tension: pressures to keep the controversy in the management
discipline”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 350-71.
Fama, E.F. (1980), “Agency problems and the theory of the ﬁrm”, The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 88 No. 2, pp. 288-307.
Fama, E.F. and Jensen, M.C. (1983), “Separation of ownership and control”, Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 301-25.
Ferrell, O.C. and Skinner, S.J. (1988), “Ethical behavior and bureaucratic structure in marketing
research organizations”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 103-9.
Finkelstein, S. and Hambrick, D.C. (1989), “Chief executive compensation: a study of the
intersection of markets and political processes”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 10
No. 2, pp. 121-34.
Fiorentine, R. and Hillhouse, M.P. (2003), “Replicating the addicted-self model of recovery”,
Addictive Behaviors, Vol. 28 No. 6, pp. 1063-80.
Fletcher, S. and Sackett, D.L. (1979), “Canadian task force on the periodic health examination: the
Periodic Health Examination”, Canadian Medical Association Journal , Vol. 121,
pp. 1193-254.
Friedman, T. (2005), The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Globalized World in the 21st
Century, Allen Lane/Penguin Group, London.
Gaynard, J. (2010), “Creativity, innovation, KM and French management”, available at: http://
johngaynardcreativity.blogspot.com/2010/0 1/intuitive-manageme nt-vs-evidence-based.
html (accessed November 14, 2011).
Gaynor, M. and Pauly, M. (1987), “Alternative compensation arrangements and productive
efﬁciency in partnerships: evidence from medical group practice”, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Washington, DC.
Ghoshal, S. (2005), “Bad management theories are destroying good management practices”,
Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 75-91.
Gibbs, J.C. (1991), “Toward an integration of Kohlberg’s and Hoffman’s moral development
theories”, Human Development, Vol. 34 No. 2, pp. 88-104.
Goodman, S.N. and Royall, R. (1988), “Evidence and scientiﬁc research”, American Journal of
Public Health, Vol. 78 No. 12, pp. 1568-74.
GreenFact (n.d.), “Glossary: scientiﬁc consensus”, available at: www.greenfacts.org/glossary/
abc/consensus.htm (accessed November 25, 2011).
Evidence based
decision making
859
<<<PAGE=30>>>
Greenhalgh, T. (1997), “How to read a paper: papers that summarise other papers (systematic
reviews and meta-analyses)”, British Medical Journal, Vol. 315 No. 7109, pp. 672-5.
Gregory, R. and Keeney, R.L. (1994), “Creating policy alternatives using stakeholder values”,
Management Science, Vol. 40 No. 8, pp. 1035-48.
Grey, C. and Mitev, N. (1995), “Management education”, Management Learning, Vol. 26 No. 1,
pp. 73-90.
Groves, T. (2008), “Enhancing the quality and transparency of health research”, British Medical
Journal, Vol. 337 No. 7661, p. 66.
Grumbach, K., Osmond, D., Vranizan, K., Jaffe, D. and Bindman, A.B. (1998), “Primary care
physicians’ experience of ﬁnancial incentives in managed-care systems”, The New
England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 339 No. 21, pp. 1516-21.
Haidt, J. (2001), “The emotional dog and its rational tail: a social intuitionist approach to moral
judgment”, Psychological Review, Vol. 108 No. 4, pp. 814-34.
Hambrick, D.C. (2007), “The ﬁeld of management’s devotion to theory: too much of a good
thing?”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 50 No. 6, pp. 1346-52.
Hauschild, M.Z., Huijbregts, M., Jolliet, O., Macleod, M., Margni, M., van de Meent, D.,
Rosenbaum, R.K. and McKone, T.E. (2008), “Building a model based on scientiﬁc
consensus for life cycle impact assessment of chemicals: the search for harmony and
parsimony”, Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 42 No. 19, pp. 7032-7.
Hegarty, W.H. and Sims, H.P. (1978), “Some determinants of unethical decision behavior: an
experiment”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 63 No. 4, pp. 451-7.
Held, P.J. and Reinhardt, U. (1979), Analysis of Economic Performance in Medical Group
Practices, Mathematica Policy Research, Princeton, NJ.
Higgins, J.P. and Green, S. (2011), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions
(Version 5.1.0) , The Cochrane Collaboration, March, available at: www.cochrane-
handbook.org/
Hill, C.W.L. and Jones, T.M. (1992), “Stakeholder-agency theory”, Journal of Management
Studies, Vol. 29 No. 2, pp. 131-54.
Holloway, J. (2007), “Where’s the evidence for evidence based management?”, paper presented at
the ESRC Seminar Series “Advancing Research in the Business and Management Field”,
Oxford Brookes Business School, Oxford, 18 May.
Howard, A.E. (1995), The Changing Nature of Work, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Huberman, A.M. and Miles, M.B. (1994), “Data management and analysis methods”, in Denzin,
N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds), Handbook of Qualitative Research , Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 428-44.
Izraeli, D. (1988), “Ethical beliefs and behavior among managers: a cross-cultural perspective”,
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 7 No. 4, pp. 263-71.
Janesick, V.J. (1994), “The dance of qualitative research design: metaphor, methodolatry, and
meaning”, in Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds),Handbook of Qualitative Research, Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 209-19.
Jensen, M.C., Murphy, K.J. and Field, S. (2010), “CEO incentives – it’s not how much you pay, but
how”, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 64-76.
Johns, G. (2006), “The essential impact of context on organizational behavior”, Academy of
Management Review Archive, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 386-408.
MD
50,5
860
<<<PAGE=31>>>
Jones, T.M. (1991), “Ethical decision making by individuals in organizations: an issue-contingent
model”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 366-95.
Kahan, D.M., Jenkins-Smith, H. and Braman, D. (2011), “Cultural cognition of scientiﬁc
consensus”, Journal of Risk Research, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 147-74.
Kemmis, S. and Wilkinson, M. (1998), “Participatory action research and the study of practice”,
Action Research in Practice: Partnerships for Social Justice in Education, Routledge,
London, pp. 21-36.
Kerr, J. and Slocum, J.W. (1987), “Managing corporate culture through reward systems”,
Academy of Management Executive, Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 99-107.
Kerridge, I., Lowe, M. and Henry, D. (1998), “Ethics and evidence based medicine”, British
Medical Journal, Vol. 316 No. 7138, pp. 1151-3.
Khurana, R. (2010), From Higher Aims to Hired Hands: The Social Transformation of American
Business Schools and the Unfulﬁlled Promise of Management as a Profession, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Kim, W.C. and Mauborgne, R.A. (1993), “Procedural justice, attitudes, and subsidiary top
management compliance with multinationals’ corporate strategic decisions”, Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 36 No. 3, pp. 502-26.
Kitson, A., Harvey, G. and McCormack, B. (1998), “Enabling the implementation of evidence
based practice: a conceptual framework”, Quality in Health Care, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 149-58.
Kohlberg, L. (1969), “Stage and sequence: the cognitive-developmental approach to socialization”,
in Goslin, D.A. (Ed.), Handbook of Socialization Theory and Research, Rand McNally,
Chicago, IL.
Korsgaard, M.A., Schweiger, D.M. and Sapienza, H.J. (1995), “Building commitment, attachment,
and trust in strategic decision-making teams: the role of procedural justice”, Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 60-84.
Kuhn, T.S. (1970), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 2nd ed., University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Laczniak, G.R. and Inderrieden, E.J. (1987), “The inﬂuence of stated organizational concern on
ethical decision making”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 297-307.
Lamal, P. (1990), “On the importance of replication”, Journal of Social Behavior and Personality,
Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 31-5.
LeCompte, M.D. and Schensul, J.J. (1999), Designing and Conducting Ethnographic Research,
Vol. 1, AltaMira Press, Lanham, MD.
Lee, T.W. (1999), Using Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research, Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Lewis, M.W. and Grimes, A.J. (1999), “Metatriangulation: building theory from multiple
paradigms”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 672-90.
Lind, E.A. and Tyler, T.R. (1988),The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice, Plenum Press, New
York, NY.
Lindzen, R.S. (1992), Global Warming: The Origin and Nature of Alleged Scientiﬁc Consensus,
Environmental Policy Unit, Institute of Public Affairs, London.
Locke, E.A. (2007), “The case for inductive theory building”, Journal of Management, Vol. 33
No. 6, pp. 867-90.
Locke, E.A. and Latham, G.P. (1990), A Theory of Goal Setting and Task Performance, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Evidence based
decision making
861
<<<PAGE=32>>>
Lodahl, J.B. and Gordon, G. (1972), “The structure of scientiﬁc ﬁelds and the functioning of
university graduate departments”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 57-72.
Lubin, A. (1957), “Replicability as a publication criterion”, American Psychologist, Vol. 12 No. 8,
pp. 519-20.
McCarthy, A.M., Schoorman, F.D. and Cooper, A.C. (1993), “Reinvestment decisions by
entrepreneurs: rational decision-making or escalation of commitment?”, Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 9-24.
McCormack, B., Kitson, A., Harvey, G., Rycroft-Malone, J., Titchen, A. and Seers, K. (2002),
“Getting evidence into practice: the meaning of ‘context’”, Journal of Advanced Nursing,
Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 94-104.
McGrath, J.E. (1964), “Toward a ‘theory of method’ for research on organizations”, in Cooper,
W.W., Leavitt, H.J. and Shelly, M.W. (Eds), New Perspectives in Organizational Research,
Wiley, New York, NY, pp. 533-47.
McGrath, J.E. (1984), Groups: Interaction and Performance, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
McNichols, C.W. and Zimmerer, T.W. (1985), “Situational ethics: an empirical study of
differentiators of student attitudes”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 4 No. 3, pp. 175-80.
Mahajan, J. (1992), “The overconﬁdence effect in marketing management predictions”,Journal of
Marketing Research, Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 329-42.
Malhotra, M.K. and Grover, V. (1998), “An assessment of survey research in POM: from
constructs to theory”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 407-25.
March, J.G. (1978), “Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the engineering of choice”, The Bell
Journal of Economics, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 587-608.
Mare´, D.C., Fabling, R. and Stillman, S. (2010), “The impact of immigration and local workforce
characteristics on innovation”, New Zealand Department of Labour, Wellington, Economic
Impacts of Immigration Working Paper Series.
Maxwell, A. and Pilliner, A. (1968), “Deriving coefﬁcients of reliability and agreement for
ratings”, British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , Vol. 21 No. 1,
pp. 105-16.
Mellenbergh, G.J. (1977), “The replicability of measures”, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 84 No. 2,
pp. 378-84.
Miller, S.I. and Safer, L.A. (1993), “Evidence, ethics and social policy dilemmas”,Education Policy
Analysis Archives, Vol. 1, pp. 9-24.
Mintzberg, H. (2005), “The magic number seven: plus or minus a couple of managers”, Academy
of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 4 No. 2, pp. 244-7.
Murphy, A.H. and Winkler, R.L. (1977), “Reliability of subjective probability forecasts of
precipitation and temperature”, Applied Statistics, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 41-7.
Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine (2011), “Levels of evidence”, available at: www.
cebm.net/index.aspx?o¼1025 (accessed March 10, 2011).
Pauly, M.V. (1992), “Effectiveness research and the impact of ﬁnancial incentives on outcomes”,
in Shortell, S.M. and Reinhardt, U.E. (Eds), Improving Health Policy and Management:
Nine Critical Research Issues for the 1990s, Health Administration Press, Ann Arbor, MI,
pp. 151-93.
Peckham, M. (1991), “Research and development for the National Health Service”, The Lancet,
Vol. 338 No. 8763, pp. 367-71.
MD
50,5
862
<<<PAGE=33>>>
Pentland, B.T. (1999), “Building process theory with narrative: from description to explanation”,
Academy of Management Review, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 711-24.
Perry, L. (2010), “The aging workforce”, Professional Safety, Vol. 55 No. 4, pp. 22-8.
Peters, T.J. and Waterman, R.H. (2004), In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best-run
Companies, HarperCollins, New York, NY.
Pfeffer, J. (1993), “Barriers to the advance of organizational science: paradigm development as a
dependent variable”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 599-620.
Pfeffer, J. and Fong, C.T. (2002), “The end of business schools? Less success than meets the eye”,
Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 78-95.
Pfeffer, J. and Sutton, R.I. (2006), Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-truths, and Total Nonsense:
Proﬁting from Evidence-based Management, Harvard Business Press, Boston, MA.
Phillips, D.C. and Burbules, N.C. (2000), Postpositivism and Educational Research, Rowman and
Littleﬁeld, Lanham, MD.
Porter, L.W. and McKibbin, L.E. (1988), Management Education and Development: Drift or
Thrust into the 21st Century?, McGraw-Hill, Hightstown, NJ.
Prensky, M. (2001), “Digital natives, digital immigrants”, On the Horizon, Vol. 9 No. 5, pp. 1-6.
Reay, T., Berta, W. and Kohn, M.K. (2009), “What’s the evidence on evidence-based
management?”, Academy of Management Perspectives (formerly The Academy of
Management Executive), Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 5-18.
Reid, B. and Spinks, N. (2007), “Effacing the facts: critical realism and the politics of evidence”,
paper presented at the 3rd International Congress of Qualitative Inquiry, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Ubana and Champaign, IL, 2-5 May.
Rest, J.R. and Barnett, R. (1986), Moral Development: Advances in Research and Theory, Praeger,
New York, NY.
Roberts, K.H., Hulin, C.L. and Rousseau, D.M. (1978), Developing an Interdisciplinary Science of
Organizations, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Rode, D. (1992), Managerial Decision Making, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
pp. 1-12.
Rousseau, D.M. (2006), “Is there such a thing as evidence-based management”, Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 256-69.
Rousseau, D.M. and Fried, Y. (2001), “Editorial: Location, location, location: contextualizing
organizational research”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 1-13.
Rousseau, D.M. and McCarthy, S. (2007), “Educating managers from an evidence-based
perspective”, Academy of Management Learning and Education Archive, Vol. 6 No. 1,
pp. 84-101.
Rubin, R.S. and Dierdorff, E.C. (2011), “On the road to Abilene: time to manage agreement about
MBA curricular relevance”, Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 10
No. 1, pp. 148-61.
Rutledge, R.W. (2011), “Escalation of commitment in groups and the moderating effects of
information framing”, Journal of Applied Business Research, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 17-22.
Rychetnik, L., Frommer, M., Hawe, P. and Shiell, A. (2002), “Criteria for evaluating evidence on
public health interventions”,Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 56 No. 2,
pp. 119-27.
Rycroft-Malone, J. (2004), “The PARIHS framework: a framework for guiding the implementation
of evidence-based practice”, Journal of Nursing Care Quality, Vol. 19 No. 4, pp. 297-304.
Evidence based
decision making
863
<<<PAGE=34>>>
Rynes, S.L., Bartunek, J.M. and Daft, R.L. (2001), “Across the great divide: knowledge creation
and transfer between practitioners and academics”, Academy of Management Journal,
Vol. 44 No. 2, pp. 340-55.
Rynes, S.L., Colbert, A.E. and Brown, K.G. (2002), “HR professionals’ beliefs about effective
human resource practices: correspondence between research and practice”, Human
Resource Management, Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 149-74.
Rynes, S.L., Giluk, T.L. and Brown, K.G. (2007), “The very separate worlds of academic and
practitioner periodicals in human resource management: implications for evidence-based
management”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 50 No. 5, pp. 987-1008.
Sackett, D.L. (1997), “Evidence-based medicine”, Seminars in Perinatology, Vol. 21, pp. 3-5.
Sackett, D.L. and Rosenberg, W. (1995a), “On the need for evidence-based medicine”, Journal of
Public Health, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 330-4.
Sackett, D.L. and Rosenberg, W.M. (1995b), “The need for evidence-based medicine”, Journal of
the Royal Society of Medicine, Vol. 88 No. 11, pp. 620-4.
Sackett, D.L., Rosenberg, W., Gray, J.A., Haynes, R.B. and Richardson, W.S. (1996), “Evidence
based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t”, British Medical Journal, Vol. 312 No. 7023,
pp. 71-2.
Sackett, D.L., Straus, S.E., Richardson, W.S., Rosenberg, W. and Haynes, R.B. (2000),
Evidence-based Medicine: How to Practice and Teach EBM, Churchill Livingstone, New
York, NY.
Schuler, R.S. and Rogovsky, N. (1998), “Understanding compensation practice variations across
ﬁrms: the impact of national culture”, Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 29
No. 1, pp. 159-77.
Schuster, M.A., McGlynn, E.A. and Brook, R.H. (1998), “How good is the quality of health care in
the United States?”, Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 76 No. 4, pp. 517-63.
Sekaran, U. (2006), Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach, Wiley India, New
Delhi.
Shaneyfelt, T., Baum, K.D., Bell, D., Feldstein, D., Houston, T.K., Kaatz, S., Whelan, C. and Green,
M. (2006), “Instruments for evaluating education in evidence-based practice: a systematic
review”, Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 296 No. 9, pp. 1116-27.
Shanteau, J. (1988), “Psychological characteristics and strategies of expert decision makers”,Acta
Psychologica, Vol. 68 Nos 1-3, pp. 203-15.
Shanteau, J. (1992), “How much information does an expert use? Is it relevant?”, Acta
Psychologica, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 75-86.
Sharpe, V.A. (2002), “Science, bioethics, and the public interest: on the need for transparency”,
The Hastings Center Report, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 23-6.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A. and Baron, R.A. (2003), “VCs’ decision processes: evidence
suggesting more experience may not always be better”, Journal of Business Venturing,
Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 381-401.
Shortell, S.M., Zazzali, J.L., Burns, L.R., Alexander, J.A., Gillies, R.R., Budetti, P.P., Waters, T.M.
and Zuckerman, H.S. (2001), “Implementing evidence-based medicine: the role of market
pressures, compensation incentives, and culture in physician organizations”,Medical Care,
Vol. 39 No. 7, pp. 62-78.
Sidman, M. (1960), Tactics of Scientiﬁc Research, Basic Books, New York, NY.
MD
50,5
864
<<<PAGE=35>>>
Simera, I., Moher, D., Hoey, J., Schulz, K.F. and Altman, D.G. (2009), “The EQUATOR Network
and reporting guidelines: helping to achieve high standards in reporting health research
studies”, Maturitas, Vol. 63 No. 1, pp. 4-6.
Simon, H.A. (1997), Models of Bounded Rationality, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Smith, C.W. and Watts, R.L. (1986), “The investment opportunity set and corporate policy
choice”, William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration, Rochester, NY,
mimeograph.
Solberg, L.I., Brekke, M.L., Fazio, C.J., Fowles, J., Jacobsen, D.N., Kottke, T.E., Mosser, G.,
O’Connor, P.J., Ohnsorg, K.A. and Rolnick, S.J. (2000), “Lessons from experienced guideline
implementers: attend to many factors and use multiple strategies”, The Joint Commission
Journal on Quality Improvement, Vol. 26 No. 4, p. 171.
Spence, M.T. (1996), “Problem-problem solver characteristics affecting the calibration of
judgments”, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 67 No. 3,
pp. 271-9.
Stambaugh, J.E. and Trank, C.Q. (2010), “Not so simple: integrating new research into
textbooks”,The Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 663-81.
Stetler, C.B. (2003), “Role of the organization in translating research into evidence-based
practice”, Outcomes Management, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 97-103.
Sutherland, S.E. (2001), “Evidence-based dentistry: part IV. Research design and levels of
evidence”, Journal of Canadian Dental Association, Vol. 67 No. 7, pp. 375-8.
Swick, H.M. (2000), “Toward a normative deﬁnition of medical professionalism”, Academic
Medicine, Vol. 75 No. 6, pp. 612-6.
Tillett, H.E., De Louvois, J. and Wall, P.G. (1998), “Surveillance of outbreaks of waterborne
infectious disease: categorizing levels of evidence”, Epidemiology and Infection, Vol. 120
No. 1, pp. 37-42.
Tosi, H.L. and Greckhamer, T. (2004), “Culture and CEO compensation”, Organization Science,
Vol. 15 No. 6, pp. 657-70.
Tosi, H.L., Katz, J.P. and Gomez-Mejia, L.R. (1997), “Disaggregating the agency contract: the
effects of monitoring, incentive alignment, and term in ofﬁce on agent decision making”,
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40 No. 3, pp. 584-602.
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003), “Towards a methodology for developing
evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review”, British
Journal of Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 207-22.
Trank, C.Q. and Rynes, S.L. (2003), “Who moved our cheese? Reclaiming professionalism in
business education”, Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 2 No. 2,
pp. 189-205.
Trevino, L.K. (1986), “Ethical decision making in organizations: a person-situation interactionist
model”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 601-17.
Tufts, D.R. (2011), Digital Adults: Beyond the Myth of the Digital Native Generation Gap, Fielding
Graduate University, Santa Barbara, CA.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1973), “Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and
probability”, Cognitive Psychology, Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 207-32.
Twenge, J.M. and Campbell, S.M. (2008), “Generational differences in psychological traits and
their impact on the workplace”, Journal of Managerial Psychology, Vol. 2 No. 8, pp. 862-77.
Evidence based
decision making
865
<<<PAGE=36>>>
Upshur, R.E.G., VanDenKerkhof, E.G. and Goel, V. (2001), “Meaning and measurement: an
inclusive model of evidence in health care”,Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, Vol. 7
No. 2, pp. 91-6.
Utts, J. (1999), “The signiﬁcance of statistics in mind-matter research”, Journal of Scientiﬁc
Exploration, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 615-38.
Van de Ven, A.H. (2007), Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for Organizational and Social Research,
Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Vineis, P. (1997), “Proof in observational medicine”, Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, Vol. 51 No. 1, pp. 9-13.
Wallerstein, M. and Western, B. (2000), “Unions in decline? What has changed and why”,Annual
Review of Political Science, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 355-77.
Walshe, K. and Rundall, T.G. (2001), “Evidence-based management: from theory to practice in
health care”, Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 79 No. 3, pp. 429-57.
Weber, J. (1990), “Managers’ moral reasoning: assessing their responses to three moral
dilemmas”, Human Relations, Vol. 43 No. 7, pp. 687-702.
Weick, K.E. (1989), “Theory construction as disciplined imagination”, Academy of Management
Review, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 516-31.
Wennberg, J.E. (1996), The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care in the United States, The Center for
the Evaluative Clinical Sciences, Dartmouth Medical School, Chicago, IL, available at:
www.dartmouthatlas.org/publications/reports.aspx
West, D.M. (2011), Technology and the Innovation Economy, Center for Technology Innovation,
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Westen, D. and Bradley, R. (2005), “Empirically supported complexity”, Current Directions in
Psychological Science, Vol. 14 No. 5, pp. 266-71.
Wey Smola, K. and Sutton, C.D. (2002), “Generational differences: revisiting generational work
values for the new millennium”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 23 No. 4,
pp. 363-82.
Whipple, T.W. and Swords, D.F. (1992), “Business ethics judgments: a cross-cultural
comparison”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 11 No. 9, pp. 671-8.
White, L.P. and Rhodeback, M.J. (1992), “Ethical dilemmas in organization development: a
cross-cultural analysis”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 11 No. 9, pp. 663-70.
Wimalasiri, J.S., Pavri, F. and Jalil, A.A.K. (1996), “An empirical study of moral reasoning among
managers in Singapore”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 15 No. 12, pp. 1331-41.
Wolf, F.M., Shea, J.A. and Albanese, M.A. (2001), “Toward setting a research agenda for
systematic reviews of evidence of the effects of medical education”, Teaching and
Learning in Medicine, Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 53-60.
Woolf, S.H., Battista, R.N., Anderson, G.M., Logan, A.G., Wang, E. and Canadian Task Force on
the Periodic Health Examination (1990), “Assessing the clinical effectiveness of preventive
maneuvers: analytic principles and systematic methods in reviewing evidence and
developing clinical practice recommendations. A report by the Canadian Task Force on the
Periodic Health Examination”, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, Vol. 43 No. 9, pp. 891-905.
Further reading
Cochrane, A.L. (2000), “1931-1971: a critical review, with particular reference to the medical
profession”, Medicines for the Year, Vol. 2000, pp. 1-11.
MD
50,5
866
<<<PAGE=37>>>
About the authors
Vishwanath V. Baba is Professor of Management at the DeGroote School of Business, McMaster
University and its former Dean. A mechanical engineer by training, he received his PhD in
organizational behaviour from the University of British Columbia. His research interests focus
on employee-organization linkages, occupational mental health, and comparative management.
His work has been published in a number of journals including Journal of Applied Psychology,
Human Relations, and Journal of Organizational Behavior. He regularly teaches a doctoral
seminar on management theory and has a keen interest in cross-cultural and evidence based
management. Vishwanath V. Baba is the corresponding author and can be contacted at:
baba@mcmaster.ca
Farimah HakemZadeh is a Doctoral Candidate in Management at the DeGroote School of
Business, McMaster University. A civil engineer by training, she has an MBA from Sharif
University in Iran. Her research interests focus on organizational behavior. She is currently
working on a meta-analytic study of shift work and its consequences. She has a keen interest in
evidence-based management and its use in management practice.
Evidence based
decision making
867
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints