<<<PAGE=1>>>
Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the 
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu
aesearch@umn.edu
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only. 
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright 
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their 
employer(s) is intended or implied.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
INTERNATIONAL SERVICE FOR NATIONAL                                                                            September 2006 
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH (ISNAR) DIVISION  
  
 ISNAR Discussion Paper 9 
 Capacity Development as a Research Domain: 
Frameworks, Approaches, and Analytics  
 
 Suresh Chandra Babu and Debdatta Sengupta 
  
2033 K Street, NW, Washington, DC 20006-1002 USA • Tel.: +1-202-862-5600 • Fax: +1-202-467-4439 • ifpri@cgiar.org 
www.ifpri.org 
IFPRI Division Discussion Papers contain preliminary material and research results. They have not been subject 
to formal external reviews managed by IFPRI’s Publications Review Committee, but have been reviewed by at 
least one internal or external researcher. They are circulated in order to stimulate discussion and critical 
comment. 
Copyright 2005, International Food Policy Research Institute.  All rights reserved.  Sections of this material may be reproduce d for personal and not-for-
profit use without the express written permission of but with acknowledgment to IFPRI.  To reproduce the material contained her ein for profit or 
commercial use requires express written permission.  To obtain permission, contact the Communications Division at ifpri-copyrig ht@cgiar.org.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
ii
<<<PAGE=4>>>
iii 
Abstract 
Strengthening national capacity for designing public policies and program 
interventions is fundamental for achieving development goals. Yet results of capacity 
strengthening programs have shown mixed results in the last fifty years.  Capacity 
development, as a field of scientific enquirty still lacks a unified framework among 
development professionals. 
 
Capacity development is defined as the process by which individuals, groups, 
organizations, institutions, and societies increase their ability to perform core functions, 
solve problems, define and achieve objectives, and understand and sustainably deal with 
development issues. The concept of capacity as an integral component of development 
agendas is not new, yet it has only recently been acknowledged that development plans 
and goals cannot be achieved without adequate local capacity. Increased attention to the 
lack of capacity and the absence of relevant institutions has brought to light their 
importance in the successful design, implementation, and evaluation of development 
plans, programs, and policies. Despite this now common wisdom, research-based 
information on how to strengthen institutions and institutional capacity in developing 
countries is severely lacking. 
 
This paper attempts to review the emerging theories, frameworks, approaches, 
and analytics of capacity development. After developing a rationale for capacity 
development research, it presents potential research themes. Arguing for a new 
economics of capacity development, it concludes with some possible impacts of 
considering capacity strengtheingn as a research domain.  
 
Key words: Capacity development
<<<PAGE=5>>>
iv
<<<PAGE=6>>>
v 
Contents 
 
1.  Introduction.................................................................................................................... 1 
Capacity Strengthening Defined ..................................................................................... 2 
Capacity Strengthening in Broad Development Context ................................................ 3 
2. Rationale for Capacity Strengthening Research ............................................................. 5 
Capacity Strengthening and Economic Development..................................................... 6 
Capacity Strengthening Challenges at the National Level............................................ 12 
3. Broad Paradigms for Capacity Strengthening Research............................................... 13 
Paradigms of Capacity Strengthening ........................................................................... 14 
Nation/State Building through Capacity Development................................................. 15 
National Capacity for Governance................................................................................ 16 
Policy and Civil Society Reforms ................................................................................. 17 
Human Capital Development ........................................................................................ 20 
Institutional Development and Capacity Strengthening................................................ 21 
Historical Perspectives on Capacity Strengthening ...................................................... 22 
4. Framework for Analyzing Capacity Strengthening Process for Agricultural 
Development..................................................................................................................... 24 
The Systems Level ........................................................................................................ 26 
The Entity Level............................................................................................................ 27 
The Individual Level ..................................................................................................... 28 
Entry Points for Capacity Development Programs ....................................................... 29 
5. Theoretical Frameworks for Capacity Strengthening Research ................................... 29 
Theory of Optimal Capacity and Capacity Threshold .................................................. 30 
Theory of Capacity Sequencing .................................................................................... 30 
Systems Theory of Capacity Strengthening .................................................................. 31 
Theory of Networks and Social Learning ..................................................................... 31 
Theory of Capacity Destruction/Deprivation................................................................ 31 
6.  Potential Research Themes on Capacity Strengthening .............................................. 32
<<<PAGE=7>>>
vi 
The New Economics of Capacity Strengthening .......................................................... 32 
Institutional Capacity Building for Agricultural Development..................................... 33 
Capacity Strengthening for Food System Efficiency.................................................... 33 
Capacity Strengthening for Organization and Management of the NARS ................... 34 
Studying Technical Assistance/Cooperation for Capacity Strengthening .................... 34 
Does Foreign Aid Help Strengthen National Capacity? ............................................... 35 
Capacity for Institutional Change and Innovation Systems .......................................... 37 
Decentralization and Local Use of Capacity................................................................. 37 
Information and Communication Technology for Capacity Strengthening.................. 38 
Governance and Capacity Development ....................................................................... 39 
Science Policy Process and Capacity Strengthening..................................................... 39 
7. Approaches to Capacity Strengthening Research......................................................... 40 
Qualitative Approach for Capacity Strengthening Research ........................................ 41 
Quantitative Approach for Capacity Strengthening Research ...................................... 41 
Narratives Approach ..................................................................................................... 43 
Action Research ............................................................................................................ 43 
Results Oriented Approach to Capacity Development and Change ............................. 43 
8. Analytics for Capacity Strengthening Research ........................................................... 44 
Assessing Capacity Strengthening Needs in National Systems .................................... 46 
Implementing Capacity Strengthening Programs ......................................................... 46 
Institutional Development Through Capacity Strengthening........................................ 47 
Analytics for Developing a Solid Human Capacity Base ............................................. 48 
9. Limitations to Capacity Strengthening Research and Outreach Activities................... 49 
10. Possible Impacts of Capacity Strengthening Research and Outreach ........................ 50 
11. Concluding Remarks and Way Forward..................................................................... 51 
References......................................................................................................................... 53
<<<PAGE=8>>>
vii 
Figures 
Figure 1: Relation between Mean Years of Schooling and Per Capita Income.................. 7 
Figure 2: Relation between National Science Enrollment and Per Capita Income ............ 8 
Figure 3: Relationship between Capacity Development and Government Effectiveness .. 9 
Figure 4: Relationship between Capacity Development and Rule of Law....................... 10 
Figure 5: Relationship between Capacity Development and TAI .................................... 11 
Figure 6: Policy Reform and Capacity Development....................................................... 19 
Figure 7: The Process of Capacity Development ............................................................. 25
<<<PAGE=9>>>
viii
<<<PAGE=10>>>
1 
1.  Introduction 
The idea that capacity is a key ingredient for achieving development objectives is 
not new.  Yet, during the last ten years there has been increased recognition that without 
adequate local capacity, development plans and goals will not be fully achieved.  
Increased attention to missing institutions and capacity vacuums within existing 
institutions brought to light the need for, and the role of individual, organizational and 
institutional capacities for designing, implementing, and evaluating development plans, 
programs, and policies.  While it is now a common wisdom, at least in the development 
community, that without adequate capacity, development goals at the global, regional, 
and national levels cannot be realized, research-based information on how to strengthen 
capacity in developing countries is severely lacking.  
 
Though relatively new, the role of an enabling environment has also come to be 
recognized as a major contributor to capacity development at all levels within a country 
(OECD 2006).  Hence factors that influence the framework within which the government, 
the organization and the civil society interacts with one another also indirectly influence 
the ability of the institutions and the individuals within those institutions to perform at 
their best capacity.  
 
Capacity strengthening as a development process faces enormous challenges in 
developing countries.  The limited resources allocated to capacity strengthening programs 
compete with resources used for achieving the final outcome of development such as the 
provision of basic services like health, primary and secondary education, and poverty 
reduction programs (Fukuyama 2004).  Due to unfavorable work conditions and low 
incentives in the national systems, there has been an enormous erosion of capacity in the 
developing country institutions.  For example, the World Bank Africa Governors recently 
agreed that almost every African country has witnessed systematic erosion in capacity
<<<PAGE=11>>>
2 
during the last 30 years and the majority had better capacity during independence than 
what they possess now (van de Walle 2001).   
Capacity Strengthening Defined 
Capacity strengthening is defined as the process by which individuals, groups, 
organizations, institutions and societies increase their abilities to: perform core functions, 
solve problems, define and achieve objectives; and understand and deal with their 
developments in a broad context and sustainable manner (UNDP 1998).  According to the 
Organization for European Cooperation and Development (OECD), capacity 
development is understood as a process of unleashing, strengthening and maintaining of 
capacity, which goes beyond the conventional technical assistance or cooperation of the 
past (OECD 2006).  It is considered as an endogenous process of change that cannot be 
imported simply through donors’ involvement with development projects in developing 
countries.  Capacity strengthening then would essentially imply countries and institutions 
taking ownership of their change initiatives in a bid to improve their conditions and 
achieve their goals.   
 
This broad definition of capacity development is also useful for analyzing 
capacity challenges faced by institutions - global, national and regional- that focus on 
designing and implementing agriculture development programs and policies.  There has 
been scattered evidence on the role of capacity strengthening as a strong contributing 
factor to economic growth, poverty alleviation, and national development (Levy and 
Kpundeh 2004).  However, the process of integrating capacity strengthening as an active 
ingredient in designing programs and policies, and as a development outcome remains 
weak in many developing countries.   
 
A major portion of development projects and programs in developing countries 
continue to be funded by foreign aid.  The international aid community has recognized
<<<PAGE=12>>>
3 
local capacity strengthening as a key element for development success.  In spite of that, 
the intermediary process of building capacity for developing countries to sustainably 
implement projects and programs has not been given adequate attention.  This missing 
process may be due to the short-run emphasis of the donors on delivery of services and 
tangible outcomes of development projects (Fukuyama 2004).  The research on the role 
of capacity strengthening in agricultural development projects and programs has been 
grossly inadequate to guide the aid-community towards capacity strengthening as a 
serious investment goal for development.  Yet major development approaches, plans, and 
strategies conceived at the international level crucially depend on adequate national 
capacity for them to be translated into action on the ground in developing countries. 
Capacity Strengthening in Broad Development Context 
Over the past five decades global, regional, and national strategies have been 
developed for reducing poverty, food insecurity, and natural resource degradation.  They 
have accomplished various degrees of success depending on the countries and the context 
in which they have been implemented.  Recently, the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDG) developed by the United Nations have been promoted as a common platform for 
achieving improved social development in developing countries (UN 2002).  The MDGs 
identified a broad set of development objectives for developing countries.  In addition, 
the task force of the United Nations Millennium Project has developed a series of ten 
broad recommendations for the developing countries to adopt in order to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals (UN Millennium Project 2005).  Specifically, 
Recommendations 2 and 5 recognize the need for building capacity in developing 
countries to achieve development objectives.  For example, Recommendation 2 calls for 
scaling up public investments, building capacity, mobilizing domestic resource 
mobilization and official development assistance and providing a framework for 
strengthening governance.  Recommendation 5 specifically calls for massive training 
programs to build the capacity of community-based workers in health, education,
<<<PAGE=13>>>
4 
agriculture, nutrition, infrastructure, water supply, sanitation, and environmental 
management and for increasing the expertise in public sector management.  
 
The World Food Summit goal of reducing the number of undernourished people 
by half by 2015 (FAO 2003) corresponds to the primary goal of the MDG of halving 
hunger by the year 2015.  Regional and sector-specific strategies for achieving increased 
agricultural sector growth in Africa for example, calls for increased strengthening of 
institutional and human capacity for agriculture research and development 
(InterAcademy Council 2004).  Furthermore, new development initiatives such as The 
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and Blair Commission on Africa 
have also identified lack of capacity as a key development challenge in most African 
countries (NEPAD 2004; Commission for Africa 2005).   
 
New development challenges such as world trade negotiations that enable 
developing countries to benefit from the increased opening of global markets and new 
technological innovations such as biotechnology require adequate capacity at the national 
level for implementing programs and policies that can convert new global opportunities 
into economic growth and poverty reduction.  Emerging approaches to strengthening 
capacity for agricultural development in developing countries also call for improving 
institutional capacity for strengthening the food and agriculture innovation systems (Babu 
and Sengupta 2004).   
 
The current development challenge is to translate global development goals and 
policy declarations into policy and program initiatives that identify appropriate actions 
and investment of resources at the country level.  Transforming such actions and 
investments into impact on the ground will require appropriate human and institutional 
capacity at various stages from development goals to their outcomes (von Braun et al. 
2004).  Whatever the development goals, there are five sets of factors that contribute to 
the translation of these goals into outcomes: policy environment, technological
<<<PAGE=14>>>
5 
development, institutional growth and opportunities, infrastructure development, and 
human resources.  While human resource development is a contributing factor in itself for 
development, it also plays an important role in enabling all other factors identified above 
(Mosher 1966).   
 
Given the growing recognition that national institutional capacities are 
fundamental for the success of development programs and policies, IFPRI’s capacity 
strengthening research would generate information for increasing the effectiveness of 
institutional and capacity strengthening programs in developing countries with particular 
reference to agricultural innovation and food systems. 
 
The next section gives the rationale for capacity strengthening research.  It gives 
empirical evidence to show that capacity strengthening contributes to overall economic 
progress within a country.  Section three presents the broad paradigms for capacity 
strengthening research.  The following two sections give the various broad conceptual 
and theoretical frameworks for Capacity Strengthening research.  A broad overview of 
the potential research themes on Capacity strengthening is given in section six.  Section 
seven elaborates on the various approaches to capacity strengthening research.  Analytics 
of capacity strengthening research forms section eight.  A discussion of the limitations 
and the possible impacts of capacity strengthening research form sections nine and ten. 
Section eleven summarizes the paper and presents the way forward. 
2. Rationale for Capacity Strengthening Research 
Capacity strengthening research is now being recognized as an important area of 
research which is contributing to better understanding of the various pathways through 
which capacity strengthening improves the quality and performance of the various 
institutions within a country.  This document develops a rationale, framework and 
analytical approaches for capacity strengthening research.  Capacity strengthening as a
<<<PAGE=15>>>
6 
process of development competes with other development programs and policies for 
limited resources.  Yet, without adequate local capacity the probability of achieving 
development goals remains slim.  
 
Capacity has been shown to be a major limiting factor in several development 
programs and initiatives that have failed in the past (Eicher 2004).  Capacity, particularly 
in most of the Sub Saharan African (SSA) countries, remains a missing element in the 
process of development.  Capacity is also identified as a critical element in the process of 
agricultural development.  For example, due to lack of adequate capacity for converting 
and transferring appropriate technologies to smallholder farmers, many SSA countries 
have failed to achieve the level of agricultural development that several Asian countries 
achieved in the 1960s and 1970s (Swaminathan 2003).  Lack of institutional capacity has 
also been identified as a major element in the failure of the structural adjustment policies 
implemented in many SSA countries as part of the policy reforms in the 1980s and 1990s 
(Easterly 2005).  The failure of institutions that support food and agriculture innovation 
systems (FAIS) in Africa has also been a result of the capacity erosion in these 
institutions due to poor working environments and lack of funding for undertaking 
research and extension programs (Eicher 1989; 1999).   
 
Relating capacity indicators to the development outcomes could provide 
motivation to better understand the role of capacity in the development process. 
Capacity Strengthening and Economic Development 
New evidence on the relationship between improved capacity and economic 
development shows that countries that have improved their capacity to solve problems 
had higher levels of income and better capacity to govern themselves (Desai et al. 2002). 
Using the new data that have become available recently we present some analytical 
underpinnings for relating capacity strengthening to development outcomes.  Figures 1
<<<PAGE=16>>>
7 
and 2 respectively present the relationship between the number of years of schooling and 
the tertiary level science enrollment among selected countries in the late 1990s and their 
per capita income levels.  Figure 1 shows that per capita income levels are higher among 
countries that have invested in educating their population.  Figure 2 shows a similar 
relationship using science enrollment as an indicator of capacity.  Figure 2 also 
distinguishes the countries using a freedom index and shows that countries with better 
freedom to operate and to exercise freely will take better advantage of such capacity to 
increase their income levels.  While Figures 1 and 2 use rough indicators of capacity 
levels to understand the relationship of increased capacity and economic development, 
literature on the role of primary schooling and investment in education on economic 
development remains inconclusive (Pritchett 2003).   
 
Figure 1: Relation between Mean Years of Schooling and Per Capita Income
<<<PAGE=17>>>
8 
Figure 2: Relation between National Science Enrollment and Per Capita Income 
 
  
 
Building state capacity is also an important element to help improve overall 
capacities within a country.  Proper governance of the bureaucracy within the broader 
political environment influences economic development (Levy and Kpundeh 2004).  
There is also a recognition that better capacity will result in better governance of the 
country, indicating improvements in capacity will result in better implementation of 
programs and policies that reduce poverty and hunger (Kaufman et al. 2003).  Figures 3 
and 4 relate the capacity indicators to government effectiveness and rule of law 
respectively.  While there is a positive relationship between increased capacity and better 
governance at least for the selected indicators where the data is available, there is a need 
for better understanding of the nature and magnitude of the capacity needed to increase 
governance of development programs and policies that translate the development goals 
into development outcomes on the ground.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
9 
Figure 3: Relationship between Capacity Development and Government Effectiveness
<<<PAGE=19>>>
10 
Figure 4: Relationship between Capacity Development and Rule of Law 
 
 
Technological advancements depend on the quality and quantity of scientific 
capacity of the national institutions (Mashelkar 2005).  Figure 5 relates gross tertiary 
science enrollment to technology achievement index.  While, the positive relationship 
between science enrollment and technology achievement indexes is not surprising, it 
reinforces the conventional wisdom that increased investment in human capacity can 
result in better technological advancements.  Although this is true for scientific and 
technology achievements; such relationship has not been fully understood or analyzed in 
the development literature.  In general, there is a lack of analysis or questioning of the 
role of increased capacity in explaining growth performance of developing countries (Ul 
Haque and Khan 1997).
<<<PAGE=20>>>
11 
Figure 5: Relationship between Capacity Development and TAI 
 
 
The foregoing graphs show broad associations of selected indicators of capacity 
for which cross-country comparative data is available with selected development 
indicators.  Detailed analysis of causality of capacity strengthening on welfare outcomes 
will require identifying appropriate indicators that truly reflect institutional and human 
capacity that contributes to better and speedy development processes.  Analyzing this 
nature would be useful in addressing several capacity strengthening issues at the global 
level: What level of investment is needed for institutional and capacity strengthening to 
achieve the MDGs? Why do some countries invest more than others on capacity 
strengthening? How do some countries use their capacities more effectively than others? 
What complementary factors affect the nature, speed, and magnitude of capacity’s 
contribution to development process?
<<<PAGE=21>>>
12 
Global comparisons of contribution of capacity in agricultural innovation systems 
to agricultural development will require concerted effort to develop consistent and 
comparable data sets possibly expanding the existing Agricultural Science and 
Technology Indicators (ASTI 2005).  Similar analysis at the sectoral level could throw 
light on the optimal investment needs for institutional and human capacity strengthening 
(Archibugi, et. all, 1999).  
Capacity Strengthening Challenges at the National Level 
Capacity strengthening as a development process faces enormous challenges in 
developing countries.  The limited resources allocated to capacity strengthening programs 
compete with resources used for achieving the final outcome of development such as the 
provision of basic services like health, primary and secondary education, and poverty 
reduction programs.  Due to unfavorable work conditions and low incentives in the 
national systems, there has been an enormous erosion of capacity in the developing 
country institutions.  For example, the World Bank Africa Governors recently agreed that 
almost every African country has witnessed systematic erosion in capacity during the last 
30 years and the majority had better capacity during independence than what they possess 
now (Van de Walle 2002).   
 
The lower levels of capacity that are inherent in many national institutions in 
developing countries further aggravate the problem of capacity utilization.  Due to the 
fire-fighting nature of the capacity strengthening projects, systematic planning and 
utilization of their existing capacity has been poor.  There is also an urgent need to assist 
the countries to effectively transform their existing capacity to provide better outcomes 
through improved organizational and management skills including leadership quality.  
Lower levels of capacity combined with ineffective utilization has resulted in limited 
impact of existing capacities in the national institutions including agricultural innovation 
systems.  Yet, the role of such constraints in inhibiting better institutional capacities and
<<<PAGE=22>>>
13 
strategies for overcoming these challenges have not been adequately analyzed and 
understood in the development process. 
 
Capacity strengthening research is needed at the national level to generate 
information useful for addressing the above challenges.  Some examples of issues that 
remain unaddressed challenges in the context of agricultural innovation systems include: 
How to develop self-sustaining national institutions that would effectively promote high 
excellence in scientific research relevant for poverty reduction? How to retain the 
existing scientific capacity and put it to optimal use? Given the constant erosion of 
human capital through external migration, and internal challenges such as capacity loss to 
the private sector, what policies and incentives should be put in place for sustainable 
development of local scientific capacity? How to strengthen and support local academic 
institutions and universities that generate scientific capacity? What approaches are 
needed to increase the quality of capacity developed by national universities? How the 
existing but weak institutions could be revived with focused attention on capacity 
repatriation and investment in local capacity building? What levels of leadership skills 
are needed to better organize and manage national scientific institutions and how to put 
them in place quickly? Questions of this nature have not been systematically analysed 
either in science or in the development literature.  Yet, revival of national institutions for 
agricultural development requires information for decision-making on such crucial issues.  
3. Broad Paradigms for Capacity Strengthening Research 
Capacity strengthening research as an area that is of interest to a wide variety of 
development disciplines should necessarily draw from related disciplinary approaches. 
An inter-disciplinary conceptual framework that helps in unifying the issues, concerns, 
and challenges relevant to capacity strengthening from these varied approaches is 
necessary.  Yet, practical research issues need to be identified for enabling policy makers
<<<PAGE=23>>>
14 
to address the capacity strengthening challenges at the global, national, institutional and 
individual levels.  
 
In this section we introduce broad paradigms of capacity development that 
provides an entry point to identifying various approaches of capacity strengthening 
research from an array of social science disciplines.  This is followed by an introduction 
to capacity strengthening process that helps to provide a conceptual framework for 
translating development goals into development outcomes.   
Paradigms of Capacity Strengthening 
The challenge of building institutional and human capacity for development has 
been approached in the development literature from various perspectives and paradigms.  
A host of disciplines have approached and contributed to solving the problem of capacity 
strengthening in developing countries.  Still, the available literature on capacity 
strengthening is scanty partly due to its recent emergence as a legitimate research area. 
Nevertheless, several authors have approached the problem of capacity development 
from their own disciplinary perspective.  Collecting these perspectives thus provides the 
opportunity for identifying few broad paradigms for capacity strengthening that help to 
develop researchable areas and themes to answer several challenging questions regarding 
developing appropriate capacity that confront policymakers in developing countries.  A 
few of them are identified below. 
 
• Nation/state building (Fukuyama; Levy); 
• National capacity for governance (Dia; Grindle); 
• Policy and civil society reforms (Ul Haque and Aziz); 
• Human capital development (Mashelkar, UNDP); 
• Institutional development (Israel; Easterly); and 
• Historical perspectives (Eicher; Chang).
<<<PAGE=24>>>
15 
Nation/State Building through Capacity Development 
The nation building approach to capacity building originates from the premise 
that maintenance of world order requires state capacity in countries to better organize 
themselves to play their role in the global arena.  The state building approach as 
summarized by Fukuyama (2004) in his influential book consists of three important 
phases.  The first phase is post conflict reconstruction, which immediately follows war or 
civil conflict in countries.  Examples of this phase include the current efforts of countries 
like Afghanistan, Somalia, Kosovo, and more recently, Iraq.  In this phase, the occupying 
power or the intervening power invests heavily in developing infrastructure such as roads 
and telecommunication and builds up security and police forces to provide stability to the 
post-conflict situation.   
 
The second phase of nation building through capacity development is to create 
self-sustaining state institutions that will help in establishing mechanisms for provision of 
public services, particularly through sectoral ministries and institutions.  Establishment of 
new institutions that contribute to agricultural research and development, extension 
systems, and mechanisms for provision of safety nets to vulnerable populations are some 
examples of this phase.   
 
The third phase of capacity development for nation building relates to the 
strengthening of weak state institutions that were established prior to the civil conflict but 
currently lack adequate capacity.  Examples of this phase would include provision of 
primary education to wider regions of a country, protection of property rights, and 
strengthening governance institutions (USAID, 2005).  While the second phase is needed 
for graceful exit of the occupying force, the third phase is essential for successful 
establishment of the local and indigenous political system.  The nation building approach 
to capacity strengthening is relevant for the CGIAR, given the large number of countries
<<<PAGE=25>>>
16 
that are emerging from conflict particularly in Sub Saharan Africa (Varma and Winslow 
2005).    
National Capacity for Governance 
Over the past decade or so the development community has given increasing 
emphasis on better governance of public sector institutions in developing countries 
(Fukuyama 2004; Isimbabi 2005).  They recognize the detrimental role of inefficiencies 
in the public sector in the form of poor governance and argue for reforms of the 
government institutions in order to realign their existing capacity to meet development 
goals (Dia 1993).  This could be a starting point towards rejuvenation of growth in least 
developed countries.  The role of state and poor functioning of inefficient public sector 
are at the core of the analysis of this group of thinkers (Dia 1993; Grindle 1997).   
 
The literature on governance and public sector inefficiencies and its improvement 
through better institutional capacity of public sector institutions consider improved 
capacity as an input for better governance (Kernaghan 2004).  Good governance in 
research institutions, and agricultural innovation systems is an essential input for 
increasing institutional capacity for research in agriculture (Ul Haque and Aziz 1999).   
 
Governance can be modeled as a production function with a past set of factors 
that influence it with other socio, political, cultural, and historic factors playing their own 
roles in the current state of governance.   
 
X = f (U, X 
t-1, Z) 
 
where, X = the current state of governance; U = capacity to govern; Z = other factors.  
For the purposes of research on capacity strengthening in the agriculture innovation 
systems, pertinent questions to ask are: what level of capacity is required for better
<<<PAGE=26>>>
17 
organization and management of agriculture innovation systems? Also, what level of 
capacity will generate appropriate policy strategies for agriculture research and to 
identify institutional innovations within the research systems?   
 
With globalization, the role of the state has become more diverse.  Capacity 
building for governance is crucial if states are to smoothly perform their roles to 
minimize the risks and to prevent some of the population to take undue advantages of the 
opportunities from globalization.  The role of the state would then be enhanced to build 
capacity, set the rules, undertake reforms to better enable citizens to participate in the 
global economy and attract capital into the country (Rondinelli 2003).  Better governance 
capacity would also ensure better resource mobilization and distribution.  
Policy and Civil Society Reforms 
Economic and policy reforms have played a critical role in the process of 
development in many developing countries during the past two decades.  Some 
frequently asked questions in the policy and civil society reforms literature include: What 
role does local capacity play in enhancing the impact of economic reforms? Why has 
policy reforms failed in many developing countries? and how can such failures be 
explained with weak capacity of institutions?  A key issue raised in the literature relates 
to the structural adjustment policies implemented in developing countries that argued for 
reducing wastage in public sector through retrenching.  This cost-cutting policy led to 
low levels of human capacity in national institutions.  Emphasis on cost-cutting at the 
institutional level along with low quality of human capacity has been cited as one of the 
reasons for failure of the structural adjustment policies (Ul Haque and Aziz 2005).  
  
Another set of issues in addressing the reasons for failure of structural adjustment 
policies, particularly in Sub Saharan Africa relates to the external advisors who were 
appointed to key positions in ministries and public sector organizations.  In many
<<<PAGE=27>>>
18 
countries they essentially replaced the existing capacity in these sectors.  Such a 
replacement, while it contributed to immediate attention to the donor requirement of 
implementing policy adjustments, transferred considerable local capacity to international 
organizations and disenfranchised the institutions from becoming self sustaining (Kanbur 
1995).  As a result, there is a reemergence of recognizing the role of institutional and 
human capacity in policy reforms.  A key question that remains to be answered is, how to 
reform civil society by improving its capacity?   
 
From a theoretical perspective, structural adjustment programs could be 
considered to bring in two types of inputs to a development program (Fukuyama 2004). 
This could be in the form of better research services resulting in better capacities.  An 
example of producing an agricultural innovation is given in Figure 6.  The provision of 
resources for agricultural research innovation or agricultural research service is given on 
the Y axis while provision of resources for capacity strengthening to continue such 
innovations in the long run by building local capacity is given on the X axis.  In general, 
structural adjustment loans compete for these two sets of inputs and substitute one for the 
other.  In many cases, due to the donor requirement to show immediate results, 
development projects continue to focus on bringing in external technical assistance to 
implement the projects.  Such projects emphasizes investment in the delivery of service 
or the outcome directly without much emphasis on provision of local capacity.  If Q1 is a 
level of output coming out of structural adjustment programs, say an agricultural 
innovation or a new high yielding variety of a particular crop, then E1 would represent 
such a combination of research service and capacity strengthening inputs.  
 
On the other hand if the structural adjustment program provided better emphasis 
on capacity strengthening for long-term sustainability and less emphasis on external 
technical assistance for the delivery of outcomes, for the same level of output, the input 
combination would be represented by the point E2.
<<<PAGE=28>>>
19 
Figure 6: Policy Reform and Capacity Development 
Provision of research service 
 
 
 
 
      R1        E
1         E3 
        
         R4                                E4        
          R2                   E2                      E5                                    Q2 
                                                                                          Q1 
                                                      
    
      C1       C2    C4       C5  Provision of capacity © 
 
In the same figure the level of output indicated by Q
2 shows an increased level of 
output compared to Q1 with different combinations of resource inputs to the provision of 
final output and capacity strengthening.  Assuming increased resources are available that 
could be used to produce an increased level of agricultural innovation outcome such as at 
the level of Q2, the movement from E1 to E3 would represent a combination that 
emphasizes increased capacity strengthening with the same level of resources allocated to 
delivery of the final outcome. 
 
For the purposes of identifying appropriate research issues and for identifying 
optimal combination of local capacity strengthening and external technical assistance 
under the structural adjustment programs, it is useful to ask which combination of the 
inputs are more sustainable and contribute to better development outcomes.  A 
researchable hypothesis would be whether the allocation combination E
1 is less 
sustainable than E2.  Furthermore, related inquiries could be made to find if development
<<<PAGE=29>>>
20 
outcomes would be higher and sustainability of the development processed established if 
we go from E1 to E3 or from E2 to E4.  Of course, answering such questions would require 
empirical  analysis that would depend on the country and the context-specific nature of 
capacity strengthening activities.   
Human Capital Development 
Much of the development literature that address capacity strengthening through 
human capital building remain quintessentially a neoclassical economics in approach.  
The essential argument of this approach seems to stem from the poverty and capability 
postulates of Amartya Sen (1999) in the development literature.  Sen argues that higher 
levels of missing capacity in a society are associated with greater levels of poverty.  The 
same argument could be applied at the institutional level emphasizing that deprivation of 
capabilities within institutions will inhibit the institutions from functioning effectively.  
Although the growth literature still lacks successful analysis of the role of human capital 
in explaining growth performance, particularly in the least developed countries, emerging 
literature on the role of human capital in economic growth in general provides an entry 
point to measure the role of capacity in the development process (Ul Haque and Aziz 
2005).   
 
Recent approaches by Barro (1997, 1993, 1995) and Pritchett (1996) provide 
examples of a cross-country analysis to measure the role of human capital in economic 
growth. Nonetheless the human capital measures that are currently in use remain 
simplistic partly because they do not encompass the level of human capital employed in 
the public sector (Ul Hague and Khan 1997).  From the perspective of agricultural 
innovation systems such cross country analysis could provide insights into identifying 
appropriate levels of research capacity needed for generating agricultural growth.  
Identifying appropriate indicators of capacity within the agriculture innovations systems 
and measuring them for long term analysis would be useful.  The growth and
<<<PAGE=30>>>
21 
development literature, also under the rubric of human capital development, considers the 
human capital formation and its migration through brain drain (Bhagwati 1976).   
 
Recently, there has also been interest in repatriation of capacity to developing 
countries.  Human capital repatriation by encouraging diasporas of scientists and 
managers living in western countries to return to their native countries is also proposed as 
a capacity strengthening strategy.  Various approaches providing incentives for 
repatriation also attracted attention from researchers, particularly in countries that are 
rebuilding after conflict.  Yet, it is not clear under what conditions human capital could 
be repatriated and how such processes can be sustained in the long run (Mashelkar 2005).   
 
Identifying reasons for and developing appropriate solutions to reduce the human 
capital flight from developing countries has also been seriously addressed in the 
development literature (UNDP 1998).  From the agriculture innovation systems 
perspective and for strengthening policy analysis capacity for developing countries, it 
may be useful to think about institutional incentives and environment that provide 
opportunities for retaining and maintaining the existing level of capacity.  Approaches for 
attracting additional capacities from the region as well as from outside should also be 
studied.   
Institutional Development and Capacity Strengthening 
The structural adjustment programs emphasized reduction of wastage in 
institutions and policy reforms at the macro and sectoral levels through cost cutting and 
retrenching.  After implementing structural adjustment programs for a decade, the 
development community woke up to the fact that in least developed countries the public 
sector institutions have not been developed adequately and capacitated appropriately to 
absorb and implement policy reforms.  The result is the collective wisdom that 
institutions are critical for development.  Although institutions are recognized in the form
<<<PAGE=31>>>
22 
of informal rules and norms in institutional economics literature, the development and 
capacity improvement of the institutions in the public sector has been recognized as key 
ingredient for the effective functioning of institutions (Easterly 2001; Van De Walle 
2001).  
 
From the perspective of developing capacity for agriculture innovation systems it 
is important to understand the role of capacity in and for organizational design and 
management of national institutions.  Related to institutional development the speed of 
institutional adjustment to policy reforms and how such adjustments result in capacity 
enhancement or capacity reduction needs to be understood (Klitgaard 1995). 
Furthermore, institutional innovation for capacity strengthening with limited allocated 
resources to national institutions has received increased attention (Grindle 1997).   
Historical Perspectives on Capacity Strengthening 
Capacity strengthening as an input to development can also be seen from a 
historical perspective.  The historical perspective in analyzing what strategies to build 
quick capacities for development worked in the past will be highly useful to avoid 
mistakes.  Lessons learned from the past capacity building efforts documented from 
institutional memory would be highly useful.  Capacity strengthening approaches could 
form a part of these perspectives (Chang 2002).   
 
Capacity strengthening for agricultural development and building agricultural 
institutions has a history of its own.  Carl Eicher (1999) and his associates have been 
documenting such experiences over the past 40 years.  Documenting historical 
perspectives and lessons learned from institutional strengthening of the agricultural 
innovation systems would be highly useful for development of strategies, programs, and 
policies in strengthening national institutions that contribute to agriculture development 
(Easter et al. 1989 ).
<<<PAGE=32>>>
23 
In addition to the broad perspectives of capacity strengthening given above, 
several authors have raised the challenge of capacity strengthening from the supply and 
demand of human capital requirement in a particular country context.  There are two sets 
of ideas that dominate the supply and demand paradigm.  One assumes that supply of 
human capital will create its own demand and argues for generating just enough capacity 
as can be absorbed in the process of economic development.  The supply side argues for 
increasing the supply of capacity even though there is no apparent sector where they can 
be absorbed.  The buildup of science and technology capacity in India over the past 50 
years through advanced Indian Institute of Technology and Indian Institute of Science is 
an example of such an approach (Mashelkar 2004).  Such approach assumes that a certain 
level of capacity will be lost from the system through external migrations.  What 
remained would meet the local requirements although it may not be of high quality. 
   
The demand side approach argues that when there is not adequate demand for 
human capital and there is no absorption of existing qualified capacity into the economy, 
production of additional capacity takes resources away from other pressing development 
programs.  This approach is typical of several Sub-Saharan African countries wherein the 
capacity that has been generated has not been effectively utilized within the country 
context.  The demand side approach argues that the high quantity of capacity even if of 
high quality does not necessarily create its own demand.  Yet, there has been increasing 
demand for capacity when governments face a crisis situation.  For example, 
governments often form “dream teams” inviting high level capacity within and outside of 
the country that can contribute to development.  Such dream teams have been formed in 
Kenya, Uganda, Ghana, and most recently in Nigeria when new programs and policies 
were put in place for the revival of the economy (White 2005).
<<<PAGE=33>>>
24 
4. Framework for Analyzing Capacity Strengthening Process for Agricultural 
Development 
In order to identify specific research themes that would benefit decision-making 
for increased capacity and effectiveness of food and agriculture innovation systems in 
developing countries it is useful to understand the process of capacity strengthening as it 
relates to achieving development goals.  Figure 7 presents the pathways through which 
capacity strengthening helps in the translation of development goals to development 
outcomes.  Understanding the process of capacity strengthening would help in identifying 
the research needs.  
 
Once the development goals are set, there is a need for translating these goals into 
national-level strategies and implementing them through various national and sectoral 
programs and policies.  The task of developing and implementing national strategies 
requires adequate national and decentralized capacities.  Identifying capacity needs 
through needs assessment studies and gap analysis becomes imperative to guide capacity 
strengthening programs.  Understanding current levels of capacity and the capacity needs 
for developing and implementing new strategies and programs provides insights into the 
resource requirements for capacity strengthening.
<<<PAGE=34>>>
25 
Figure 7: The Process of Capacity Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Along with developing new capacities through various capacity strengthening 
programs, strategic efforts are needed to maintain and retain the existing capacity.  The 
new capacity should be created so that it complements the existing capacity.  This 
process requires an understanding of the incentives and work environment in which the 
capacities are put to use.  Capacity utilization as a managerial and operational skill needs 
a fuller understanding by the institutional leadership in developing countries.  Effective 
capacity utilization will translate development goals into effective development outcomes 
on the ground.  Monitoring existing capacity and reorganizing its effective use based on 
various roles individuals play in the development process is essential.  Such monitoring 
Development 
Goals 
Current Levels of 
Capacity
Identifying Gaps
Capacity Monitoring
Capacity Development/ Creation
Capacity/ Impact Evaluation
Capacity 
Maintenance/Retention
Development 
Outcomes
Capacity 
Utilization
Capacity needs
<<<PAGE=35>>>
26 
will also be useful in the evaluation of capacity’s impact on translation of development 
goals into development outcomes.   
 
Appropriate methods to undertake capacity strengthening research are not well 
developed.  One place to start is to examine the process described in Figure 7 and 
combine the paradigms of capacity strengthening described earlier with the processes 
through which the capacities are created, strengthened, and maintained.  Such an 
approach could provide broad insights into potential research themes and questions that 
would require research-based information for better and effective use of capacities in the 
process of development.   
 
Another framework popularized by the United Nations for capacity assessment 
uses a systems framework wherein the process of capacity development is analyzed at 
three levels: The Systems Level, The Entity or the Organizational Level and the 
Individual Level. 
The Systems Level 
This is the broadest and the highest level within which capacity can be analyzed. 
Depending on the context (e.g. national, institutional, etc) this would include the entire 
country or society. For initiatives at the sectoral level it would include only those sectors 
that are relevant (UNDP 1998).  The system factors would include the socio-political 
factors, the government, the economic/technological and the physical environment. 
 
Analysis at the Systems Level would have to begin with the broad policy 
environment within which the system is defined.  This could be the national level, 
involving a country, its laws and its institutions.  It could also be at the regional, state or 
local level depending on the capacity strengthening program objective.  This Level 
includes the formal boundaries of the system as defined by its laws, norms and standards 
within which the capacity strengthening initiative has to function.  The value system
<<<PAGE=36>>>
27 
governs the relationship of each element within the system.  Capacity strengthening 
initiatives undertaken for the different elements within the broad system depends on key 
people who are responsible for the management and are accountable to the system.  
 
The Accountability Dimension thus identifies the key stakeholders who are 
responsible for the design, management, implementation, coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation of the system.  At the national level these would refer to policy makers, key 
people in ministries, and directors of the NARS.  The Systems Level also takes into 
consideration the various resources, such as, human, financial, and informational, that are 
available within the particular system before a capacity strengthening activity is initiated. 
Finally the Process Dimension at this Level refers to the various interrelationships which 
are forged and help in the capacity development process.  
The Entity Level 
 Also called the organization level, the Entity Level represents a formal 
organization within the system within which capacity development activities can be 
performed.  This level can be best thought of as an institution like the NARS.  
 
An analysis of capacity at the Entity level has to take into consideration the 
Mission/ Strategy of the organization.  This helps in identifying the existing capacity and 
also the capacity gaps within the organization (Kay, 2005).  An understanding of the 
culture and standards of the organization as well as the standards of measurement for 
achievements needs to be undertaken before embarking on capacity strengthening 
activities within the organization. 
 
The Process Dimension within the Entity Level can refer to both the internal and 
external processes.  Those that govern interactions within the various divisions as well as
<<<PAGE=37>>>
28 
those the organization has with rest of the system should be looked into for a better 
understanding of the position of the organization within the System.  
 
The Resource Dimension is an analysis of the existing resources which are at the 
disposal of the organization.  Current available human, financial and informational 
resources determine existing capacity.  Whether capacity strengthening would involve 
bringing in external resources or train and develop internally available capacities depend 
on the outcome objectives of capacity strengthening projects.  Failure of structural 
adjustment programs to develop local capacities brings out clearly the importance of this 
dimension of capacity strengthening. 
 
 The Infrastructure Dimension is gaining importance in recent times as it 
determines the physical and other forms of assets which are available.  This determines 
the level of capacity that an organization can achieve without investing in building 
additional infrastructure. 
The Individual Level 
This is the major dimension of capacity strengthening and most of the prior 
activities in the capacity strengthening literature have been concentrated on this level 
without assessments of the other dimensions.  Capacity assessments at this level are 
designed according to the individual’s function within the organization.  This level also 
involves people who are not directly involved in the organization but are beneficiaries 
from the various activities of the organization.  Assessment of capacity at this level 
depends on the individual’s role and assignments within this framework.  The skill 
assessment of the individual and the requirement for the job enables an assessment of the 
“capacity gap.”  This gap can then be addressed through training and development plans.
<<<PAGE=38>>>
29 
Entry Points for Capacity Development Programs 
Most capacity development efforts focus on the organizational level as the entry 
point for capacity development programs and activities.  However, to be successful, any 
capacity strengthening program should address all the three levels.  Organizations require 
an enabling environment to perform the additional responsibilities which come with 
enhanced capacities.  Also, capacity building done at the individual level requires 
enabling infrastructure at the organization level and enabling policy environment at the 
systems level to be successful.  Hence we can think of starting a capacity strengthening 
program focusing on the individual and then zooming out to perform related capacity 
development at the organization and the systems level.  Another strategy could be to first 
develop favorable environment through policy reforms and then create capacities at the 
subsequent levels to be able to make use of the favorable policy environment (UNDP 
1998). 
5. Theoretical Frameworks for Capacity Strengthening Research 
Various theoretical frameworks that provide opportunities to develop conceptual 
thinking for a theory of capacity strengthening can be adopted from the available 
literature.  We briefly describe some of these theoretical underpinnings for capacity 
strengthening research.   
 
• Theory of optimal capacity and capacity threshold 
• Theory of capacity sequencing 
• Systems theory of capacity utilization 
• Networking/social learning theory of capacity development 
• Theory of capacity destruction and deprivation
<<<PAGE=39>>>
30 
Theory of Optimal Capacity and Capacity Threshold 
The theory of optimal capacity relates to the levels and dimensions of capacity 
development that is required for achieving a pre-specified level of development objectives.  
It also raises issues related to the levels at which capacity should be built to achieve the 
maximum effectiveness and to avoid the crowding out even within the locally produced 
capacity.  The capacity strengthening programs, particularly those funded by aid agencies, 
suffer from the curse of duplication.  Developing capacity optimally to avoid duplication 
efforts requires an understanding of various donor agencies and their cooperation to invest 
optimally in a specific set of national institutions.  This could result in the optimal level of 
capacity strengthening that maximizes its benefits towards development goals and reduces 
the cost of capacity strengthening investment at the national level. 
 
Relative to the theory of optimal capacity is the theory of capacity threshold.  
Given the recent recognition of non-linearities and the thresholds for development ( Xiabo 
et al. 2004).  The theory of capacity thresholds raises the question, “Is there a minimum 
capacity threshold necessary for development projects to be effective?”  If a capacity 
threshold exists how one does identify such a threshold that is necessary for realizing 
project outcomes?  Given that a critical mass of capacity may be required to make the 
necessary impact on the ground what approaches and strategies should be followed when 
the capacity below the thresholds levels may not produce positive results? 
Theory of Capacity Sequencing 
The theory of capacity sequencing relates to the appropriate entry point for formal 
capacity strengthening efforts in the process of development.  It recognizes that capacity 
strengthening should encompass a broader dimension to be fully effective that includes, 
understanding the relationships among the subsystems of capacity development and 
identifying various stages in which capacity should be built and appropriately sequenced 
for effective utilization in the development process.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
31 
Systems Theory of Capacity Strengthening 
In order to compare various political and administrative systems that exist in 
developing countries a systems theory perspective for capacity strengthening research is 
proposed.  A systems theory approach recognizes the interactions within and outside of 
the systems that enhance the development of capacity and its utilization.  It also 
recognizes the interactions of the stakeholders, and interactions of the system with the 
stakeholders within a particular process.  The nature of capacity impact in various 
systems and performance indicators could differ depending on the system under which 
the capacity utilization is studied.  Yet, it is clear that a system that is open and allows 
freedom of choice and expression of the researchers would function better compared to a 
closed system and does not allow freedom of expression. 
Theory of Networks and Social Learning 
Increased development of networks through which capacity strengthening can be 
done in developing countries allow opportunities for use of the theory of social learning 
in conducting capacity strengthening research (Eade, 1997).  The role of social learning 
in developing inherent human capacity between and within particular networks could be 
studied.  Using case studies, we could derive important lessons for determining the 
preconditions that would promote social learning through networks. 
Theory of Capacity Destruction/Deprivation 
The theory of capacity destruction/deprivation recognizes the influence of 
external factors that tend to systematically deprive capacity within the national 
agricultural systems.  Imposition of external ideology in project implementation erodes 
the local capacity of the national agricultural systems.  Policies and programs that reduce 
capacity destruction while promoting harmony between the external ideas and indigenous 
thought processes should be identified for stopping “crowding out” capacity though 
development processes.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
32 
The available literature on capacity strengthening research cuts across many 
social science disciplines.  Yet, the development of a unified theoretical framework 
remains at a nascent stage.  Capacity strengthening activities carried out in different parts 
of the world may have different impacts and outcomes due to differing levels of inherent 
capacity present within the country.  Thus there might be a pre-specified level of inherent 
capacity which ensures the maximum effectiveness of externally implemented capacity 
strengthening activity and avoids crowing out of locally produced capacity.  A proper 
sequencing of capacity strengthening efforts will ensure that the capacity built does not 
stagnate due to constraints in policy environment or does not destroy the progress 
achieved thus far by local efforts.  
 
The exact nature and content of a training activity could be borrowed from the 
theory of adult learning which is sensitive to the motivation and characteristics of the 
participants in the learning process.  The training process has to be interactive, reflective 
and dialogue oriented so that it leads to transformation in the abilities of the trained 
individuals to undertake additional responsibilities. 
6.  Potential Research Themes on Capacity Strengthening 
Based on the limited literature on capacity strengthening research and the 
emerging paradigms and combining them with the process of capacity strengthening for 
reaching development goals, it is possible to identify potential research themes.  There is 
a need for relating capacity strengthening as a development activity to the economics of 
development.   
The New Economics of Capacity Strengthening 
Capacity strengthening is a development activity that requires resources.  If 
considered as an economic activity, the costs involved in building human capacity and 
institutions and the benefits from such activities should be documented for analyzing the
<<<PAGE=42>>>
33 
economics of capacity strengthening (ECDPM 2005).  A research approach to the new 
economics of capacity development would require systematic understanding of the 
allocations of resources to capacity strengthening activities to various sectors that 
contribute to improved functioning of the public sector institutions and tracing the 
benefits of increased capacity of the global, national and local institutions in the process 
of better governance and better development outcomes (ECDPM 2003).  Analysis of 
costs of improving capacities of food and agriculture innovation systems (FAIS) in 
relation to the benefits from the development of new research innovation and their 
dissemination needs immediate attention (Archibuigi et al. 1999).  Furthermore, such an 
economic approach to understanding the impact of capacity strengthening would 
contribute to the decision-making on appropriate investments in capacity strengthening 
and institutional development in the future (Horton et al. 2003).   
Institutional Capacity Building for Agricultural Development 
Studying the approaches to institutional capacity building in agricultural 
development requires special attention.  During the past 50 years, agricultural institutions 
that contribute to research and development, extension, and building of farmers’ 
organizations have been strengthened (Eicher 2005).  Yet, there is limited information on 
the pros and cons of the various approaches used in strengthening agricultural 
institutions.  A major research area would be to identify cost and time effective 
approaches for strengthening capacity of these institutions (Harris et al. 1997; Pitcoff 
2004).  Issues related to long-term as well as short-term approaches to human capacity 
strengthening should be evaluated for their contribution to institutional and development 
outcomes (Lele 1989; Land 2000). 
Capacity Strengthening for Food System Efficiency 
Recently, increasing the efficiency of global food systems, food systems 
governance, and managing innovations within the food system have been considered
<<<PAGE=43>>>
34 
critical for reducing hunger and malnutrition (Gervais 2004).  Capacity strengthening at 
the national level for better governance of food systems and institutional innovation of 
food systems would require a supply chain approach.  Yet, research-based information 
for appropriate methods for strengthening state, market, and civil society organizations 
for better governance of the food system has been few and far-between.  Fostering 
scientific and institutional innovation and technology for the benefit of poor people in 
developing countries requires an industrial organization approach to national food 
systems (Connor et al. 1988).  A recently concluded meeting of the association of 
agricultural research institutions in Asia has identified the supply chain approach as one 
of the efficient ways of identifying capacity needs and strengthening capacity throughout 
the agricultural innovation system (Best et al. 2005).  Major research issues related to the 
food systems approach would require setting priorities along the supply chains for 
capacity strengthening and identifying appropriate levels of capacity at each stage in 
order to fill gaps and create new set of skills that would contribute to efficient functioning 
of national food systems.   
Capacity Strengthening for Organization and Management of the NARS 
The role of capacity strengthening in organization and management of national 
agricultural research systems requires special research attention (ISNAR 2005).  Using 
the insights from organizational theory, it is possible to look at the key requirements of 
capacity for efficient functioning of food and agriculture innovation systems (Edquist 
1997).  Capacity strengthening activities among these various agencies would facilitate 
them to come to a consensus regarding their common goals and objectives and formulate 
appropriate strategies to take collective action.  
Studying Technical Assistance/Cooperation for Capacity Strengthening 
The deployment of technical cooperation and technical assistance as an approach 
to capacity filling within development programs and projects has come under serious
<<<PAGE=44>>>
35 
criticisms (Kanbur 1995).  Technical assistance provided through externally funded 
development programs have not only failed to develop sustainable capacity but have 
eroded existing capacity due to the presence of external advisors and technical assistance 
personnel (Fukuyama 2004).  Yet, it is not clear what appropriate role technical 
assistance should play in developing new agriculture programs and policies, implement 
programs, and evaluating the programs, particularly when the institutional structures and 
capacity within the institutions are weak in developing countries.  There has also been a 
dependency syndrome created due to the continuous presence of technical assistance in 
several institutions including food and agriculture innovation systems (FAIS).  Several 
national agricultural research systems are partly funded through external funding.  Such 
funding comes with its own technical personnel who work parallel to national scientists 
often with detrimental capacity outcomes.  While Berg (1993) raised these issues in the 
early 1990s, challenges of managing technical assistance has received very little research 
attention.  It would be worthwhile to examine on a case by case basis how technical 
assistance contributes to long run sustainability of project benefits as well as to the 
creation of adequate capacity for future implementation of similar programs within 
national institutions. 
Does Foreign Aid Help Strengthen National Capacity?  
Foreign aid through bilateral and multilateral donor agencies has been under 
scrutiny for their role in strengthening and reforming institutions (Shirley 2004).  While 
there is some evidence that foreign aid does not structurally influence the institutional 
performance in developing countries it is not clear to what extent external resources 
channeled through development programs and projects influence strengthening of the 
capacity within the institutions (Easterly 2002).  The role donor resources play in 
enabling and sustaining the institutional capacity within the food and agriculture 
innovation systems requires further investigation (Wane 2004).
<<<PAGE=45>>>
36 
Effectiveness of foreign aid for strengthening national capacity has been an area 
donors have tried hard to grapple with.  The Paris declaration of 2005 marks the latest in 
donor approach to understanding the relationship between capacity strengthening and 
foreign aid.  It is now understood that for foreign aid to be effective in strengthening in-
country capacities, there is a need to develop local ownership for development projects. 
Leadership roles would be taken by the country with donors providing only tactical 
support.  This is considerably different from the previous approaches adopted by the 
international community at various international forums.  
 
In the Monterry conference in 2002 technical assistance and productive capacity 
building was linked to interactions between the government and the private sector in the 
form of public-private initiatives.  It was assumed that the capacity strengthening 
programs can be financed through foreign aid and would put countries at a higher 
learning curve post the capacity strengthening programs.  Hence stress was on sustained 
lending by international financial organizations like the IFC and IMF.  The high level 
forum on Harmonization in Rome in 2003 still has the remnants of the top-down donor 
mentality, but with the realization that development cannot be imposed on countries and 
they would have to desire to build their capacities before any such programs are thrust on 
them.  The forum highlights the importance of dialogue between the donors and partner 
country governments to come upon principles of good practice which are suitable in the 
contexts.  
 
The 2004 Marrakech Roundtable on strengthening country capacities to manage 
for results places greater emphasis on good governance for better public sector 
management, the delivery of services and for achievements of results on the ground.  This 
led to the introduction of results oriented approaches with changes in the incentives and 
systems at the country level as part of the long-term reform agenda (IDA 2004).
<<<PAGE=46>>>
37 
Capacity for Institutional Change and Innovation Systems  
Institutional Change and Innovation Systems in agriculture requires capacity at 
various levels starting from national institutions of agriculture to farmers organizations.  
Innovations occur at all stages of agriculture research and extension systems (Rivera et al. 
2000).  Yet, understanding the role of capacity strengthening both at the institutional and 
individual levels for effective institutional change and innovations could be an important 
element of this research program.  Organization and management of research and 
academic institutions would require improving managerial, organizational, public 
relations and leadership skills of the managers and researchers of food and agriculture 
innovation systems (FAIS). Capacity strengthening research could generate information 
for addressing the above issues in close collaboration with other research programs in the 
ISNAR division. Such research questions will be jointly raised with the institutional 
change and innovation systems program within the ISNAR division and will complement 
the research efforts of that program.  Some of the key research questions are identified 
here: 
• Understanding the capacity needs for and facilitating the innovation process in 
food and agriculture systems for reducing poverty.  
• Develop the capacity to assess the effectiveness of programs and policies that aim 
to reduce poverty and  
• Determine the capacity needs of institutions and individuals for analyzing the 
impacts of agricultural innovations on poverty and food security. 
Decentralization and Local Use of Capacity 
Decentralization of sectoral responsibilities as well as development of 
implementation plans and programs is increasingly an accepted way of achieving 
development goals.  However, decentralization, even with adequate resources allocated at 
the local levels, cannot effectively deliver unless adequate capacities are built at the 
decentralized levels.  Furthermore, effective use of the capacity at the decentralized level
<<<PAGE=47>>>
38 
remains a challenge for implementation and evaluation of development programs (Babu 
2003).  Countries that have decentralized their budget allocation process as well as their 
fiscal responsibilities continue to face the challenge of weak institutions at the local 
levels and poor capacity to implement programs and projects (Kaarhus 2004; Gervais 
2004).  Optimal level of capacity required at the local level and the mechanisms through 
which the existing capacity could be mobilized to effectively contribute to development 
is still not clear.  The challenge to effectively use existing capacity at the decentralized 
level pervades several sectors of the economy such as agriculture, rural development, 
health, education, and local administration. 
Information and Communication Technology for Capacity Strengthening 
Increased availability of information and communication technology to 
developing countries brings them to the forefront of information society (Desai et al. 
2002).  Effective use of information technology for development programs and policies 
requires a better understanding of the capacity strengthening requirements for 
implementing these technologies.  National institutions connected to global information 
and knowledge bases through communication technologies tend to operate with better 
efficiency.  Not only vast amount of information is available for decision-making, it is 
also available in a timely manner to these institutions (Korac-Kakabadse Nada 2000). 
 
The extent to which decentralized institutions are connected through 
communication technology, they are able to make better use of information.  The role of 
virtual libraries and knowledge sharing systems in strengthening the capacities at various 
levels of food and agriculture innovation systems need to be studied.  Furthermore, new 
innovations in capacity strengthening, such as distance education and the role of 
communication technology in improving the skills and operational capacity of the 
existing human resources has not been adequately analyzed (Peterson 1998).  Such
<<<PAGE=48>>>
39 
information would be of importance in deciding the level of investment in information 
and communication technologies in the food and agriculture innovation systems.  
 Governance and Capacity Development 
The quality of governance and the capacity to organize and manage public sector 
institutions are closely related. Yet, strengthening capacity for better governance in 
public sector institutions including national agricultural research systems has received 
increased attention only after the dismal performance of structural adjustment programs 
(Isimbabi 2005).  It is increasingly suggested that improved capacity for public 
administration is an essential input in producing better governance (Kernaghan 2004; 
Grindle 1997).  However, there is very little analysis relating capacity strengthening to 
governance and the extent to which capacity strengthening contributes to better 
governance outcomes. Further, identifying optimal levels of strengthening various 
spheres of capacity in the public sector organizations that contribute better governance 
requires analyzing various context-specific case studies (Levy 2002; Mafunisa 2004). 
How will one build capacity for better governance and how better governance in turn 
contributes to capacity development needs to be fully understood.   
Science Policy Process and Capacity Strengthening 
Successful development of food and agriculture innovation systems (FAIS) 
requires appropriate policies and programs on science and technology.  Developing 
capacity for science policy by understanding the policy processes involved in the 
development of science and technology policies is essential (InterAcademy Council 
2004). There is a great need for strengthening various capacities in the policy process that 
will effectively contribute to better science policy outcomes (Mashelkar 2005).  Research 
on the relationship between agricultural science policy development and strengthening 
capacity in the policy process will shed light on enabling better policy outcomes.
<<<PAGE=49>>>
40 
Addressing the capacity challenges of the emerging issues identified by the 
ISNAR research program on agricultural science and technology policy, the following 
key research policies would be beneficial.  
• Develop capacity for analyzing and implementing policies for pro-poor 
agricultural innovation 
• The various kinds of skill-development trainings that would enable better resource 
mobilization for sustainable financing and delivery of agricultural research and 
extension activities 
• Capacity for priority setting and impact evaluation (ex-post and ex-ante) of 
prospective food and agriculture innovations and technologies 
 
In the foregoing section various potential research themes have been identified 
based on the existing literature on capacity strengthening for development.  These 
research themes could be streamlined and defined in order to set priorities for 
undertaking specific research studies. Broad approaches to capacity strengthening 
research that could be used to address the issues raised above are identified in the next 
section. 
7. Approaches to Capacity Strengthening Research 
Methods and approaches to conduct research on capacity strengthening issues remain 
underdeveloped.  Yet, the literature is replete with papers where authors from various 
disciplines of social sciences attempt to study capacity strengthening and its role in 
international development from various context specific approaches.  These approaches and 
methods could be grouped into the following broad categories: 
 
• Qualitative approach – participatory rural appraisal, post focus group discussions, 
and interviews;
<<<PAGE=50>>>
41 
• Quantitative approach – cross country analysis based on empirical data collected 
during learning events;  
• Case study methods – documenting best practices and lessons; 
• Narratives approach – social learning and learning through field investigations; 
and 
• Action research for capacity strengthening. 
• Results Oriented Approach towards Capacity Development 
Qualitative Approach for Capacity Strengthening Research 
Several qualitative approaches have been borrowed from social sciences in order 
to generate research based information at various stages of the capacity development 
process.  Assessing the specific needs for capacity strengthening in various national 
institutions relied heavily on participatory approaches.  Such participatory assessments 
involve group discussions and the use of structured qualitative assessment using 
questionnaires for identifying capacity needs of organizations and individuals (Angeles & 
Gurstein 2000).  The qualitative approach also involves conducting strategic interviews 
with key people at various levels to understand where the capacity gap exists (Box 
1999).  Qualitative interviews are also useful to identify the thematic needs to be 
imparted through the learning programs (Phaik-Choo 1999).  Group discussions have 
been effectively used also for evaluation of the training programs to understand how 
training and learning activities have contributed to skills improvement and filling of gaps 
identified in the needs assessment activities (DFID 1995). 
Quantitative Approach for Capacity Strengthening Research 
While there is limited information on how various quantitative methods could be 
applied for understanding the role of capacity strengthening in the process of 
development, quantitative studies on the role of human capital in economic development 
provide opportunities for applying cross country analysis. Using the regression method it
<<<PAGE=51>>>
42 
is possible to study the specific contribution of capacities in various sectors to economic 
growth and development (ECON 2002).  While collecting data from agricultural 
innovation systems on specific indicators and measures of capacity could contribute to 
the study of effectiveness of this organization through capacity strengthening, 
development of such indicators of capacity strengthening and appropriate measures of 
success remain rudimentary.  It would be useful to expand the data collected as part of 
Agriculture Science and Technology Indicators (ASTI) project to collect indicators 
related to specific skills and capacities and the training activities undertaken by the 
institutions to strengthen their staff skills and to relate such indicators to the overall 
success of the agriculture innovation system (Narula, 2004).   
 
CSP has undertaken assessment of capacity needs in Ghana and Vietnam.  In 
2002, at the request of the World Bank-Vietnam, CSP assessed the policy analysis 
capacity for the Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Development and a consortium of 
donors.  As a follow-up to the assessment, a multi-donor proposal for long-term capacity 
strengthening in the Vietnam Ministry of Agriculture and Development was 
developed.Case Study Methods 
 
Case study methods have been successfully applied in political economy literature 
to understand the commonalities between the reform processes in various countries in a 
particular sector and how such common approaches result in varying outcomes 
depending on the process by which policy reforms were implemented (Hirschmann 
1993).  Evaluating capacity strengthening programs provide opportunity to employ case 
study approaches on a country by country basis in order to learn from the approaches to 
capacity strengthening, the design, delivery, and implementation and to document best 
practices in capacity strengthening (Odhiambo 2000).
<<<PAGE=52>>>
43 
Narratives Approach 
 Recently, in order to assess the impact of projects and programs, information 
based on anecdotal evidence have been assembled in the form of the narratives approach.  
The approach, derived from social discourse theory, involves interaction with various 
stakeholders at various levels of project implementation (Roe 1994).  The narrative 
approach will also provide opportunities for understanding the social network process for 
learning and capacity strengthening.   
Action Research 
The capacity strengthening outreach activities described in the next section call 
for conducting capacity strengthening research activities as part of IFPRI’s outreach. 
Reaching out to potential participants who will use IFPRI research and methods through 
specific capacity strengthening activities provides opportunities for action research.  Such 
activities allow us to learn from the participants of the program and interacting with them 
on a regular basis.  Implementation of research projects by IFPRI’s research divisions 
also provide avenues for conducting capacity strengthening research by becoming part of 
the research projects.  Several country level programs in the past have provided 
opportunities for such approaches.  Action research will pull in various methods and 
approaches for conducting capacity strengthening research as described above (Schmidt 
1991). 
 Results Oriented Approach to Capacity Development and Change 
The results oriented approach in capacity development and change (ROACH) 
works on the organization level and focuses on outputs as a relevant analytical vantage 
point. The approach views organizations as open systems and takes a “functional-
rational” and “political” perspective on how capacity is to be shaped and how it changes. 
Such perspective seeks to understand what functions the organization is scheduled to 
perform to form a basis of capacity development. Since ownership to achieve the goals
<<<PAGE=53>>>
44 
rests with the organization, capacity development and change is a domestic matter and is 
based on “possible” rather than “desirable” capacity (Boesen and Therkildsen, 2005).  
 
Capacity development from the ROACH approach identifies the “outsiders” and 
“insiders” in organizational capacity development and tries to determine if and how 
donors as outsiders can support and encourage capacity development in organizations 
(Boesen and Therkildsen, 2005). Leadership is a key role in organizational capacity 
development. Identifying with the top management in an organization, this factor could 
lead to successful outcomes. In cases of poor institutional situations, leadership would 
play an important role to effectively use the existing capacity for successful outcomes. 
Another important element in this approach is the role of incentives and rewards. This is 
linked to staff motivation in terms of tangible and intangible benefits. Hence apart from 
slaries and bonuses, opportunities for personal growth and satisfaction  also plays an 
important role.  
 
This approach thus combines traditional elements of capacity strengthening with 
newer ideas of “ownership”, “possible capacity” and how best can a donor enhance 
capacity within an organization without making the process outcomes reflecting donor 
goals and objectives. 
8. Analytics for Capacity Strengthening Research 
For a research program to be useful in contributing to improved effectiveness of 
national institutions, it should address practical challenges faced by policy makers in 
strengthening institutional and human capacity.  Some questions frequently raised among 
those involved in capacity strengthening decision-making include:  what kind of capacity 
should be strengthened and in which institutions such capacities will bring maximum 
benefit.  An associated question is how to develop such capacity in a time and cost 
effective manner.
<<<PAGE=54>>>
45 
Such broad questions apply to any sector or institution in a developing country.  
Yet, these questions cannot be fully answered unless specific research questions are 
identified based on country and context specific situations.  For example, if one considers 
the role of capacity in meeting the Millennium Development Goals, an ideal approach 
would be to trace the capacity strengthening challenges along the path from setting the 
goals at the global level to reaching development outcomes at the grassroots level.  
Decision-makers have to go through the process of goal setting at the global level to 
initiating national strategies at the country levels.  This process will result in specific 
programs and policies for implementation through identified sectors and institutions.   
 
In translating development goals set by international treaties and global 
agreements into national level strategies decision-makers could ask, “Does enough 
capacity exist to meet the development challenge?”  If there exists inadequate capacity in 
national institutions, then the additional capacity needs should be identified.  Once the 
national institutions are identified and programs and policies are assigned for 
implementing public action towards the development goal, it is important to ask at the 
institutional level, “At which level is capacity development effective to meet the 
development goals?”  At the implementation stage, it is important to evaluate the impact 
of the programs and policies for their intended outcomes.  At this stage, it is important to 
identify capacity gaps for ground level implementation of the programs and policies and 
identify environmental factors that contribute to a successful utilization of human 
capacity to reach development goals.   
 
The analytics involved to generate information for solving capacity strengthening 
problems will vary depending on the broad goals at the national level, the institutional 
context, and the state of development in which capacity is needed.  A specific set of 
analytical questions that emerge from the discussion on various research paradigms, 
capacity strengthening processes, and research themes could be categorized based on the 
users of research information, national systems of decision-making, relationships
<<<PAGE=55>>>
46 
between the institutions within the national systems, the individual, and the international 
aid agencies.  Such categorization is also complemented by the various stages of capacity 
strengthening process which involves assessment of capacity needs, analysis of how to 
strengthen capacities, best approaches for making the need and impact orientation and 
sustainability of capacity strengthening approaches.   
Assessing Capacity Strengthening Needs in National Systems   
In developing information for effective capacity strengthening of the national 
systems, the first set of research issues relate to assessing the capacity needs and 
identifying gaps in key capacity areas.  Capacity gaps exist either due to inadequate 
capacity development or due to the erosion of capacity over time in the existing 
institutions.  In either case, it is important to recognize the evolution of capacity gaps 
over time and the causal factors associated with such capacity gaps.  On the national level 
it is important to assess the principal barriers to capacity development which may relate 
to budget reallocations, poor organization and management of the national institutions, 
unproductive work environment, and poor incentives for translating skills into productive 
outcomes.  Factors that influence enhanced capacity utilization at the national levels 
should be identified and fostered.  Given a particular institution such as a national 
agriculture research institute, it is important to identify the key capacity challenges to 
meet development objectives and to recognize the levels at which capacities should be 
developed in the short and long run.   
Implementing Capacity Strengthening Programs 
Another broad set of research issues for which information is needed at the 
national level relates to how to implement capacity strengthening programs.  Given the 
ongoing economic and civil service reforms in many countries, it becomes essential to 
align the capacity strengthening process to the development goals and objectives.  A 
frequently raised challenge at the national level systems is how to develop a core mass of
<<<PAGE=56>>>
47 
research and policy capacity at national institutions that will be self-sustaining in 
answering the development challenges faced by the country.  Steering the existing policy 
analysis and research capacity to provide research-based information to the bureaucracy 
that makes decisions is important.   
 
At the national level there exists tension between the local capacities and the 
external technical assistants that work side-by-side.  A key issue to be addressed is the 
level of influence of capacity transfer from technical assistance component to the local 
counterparts during the period of project implementation.  Undertaking such institutional 
capacity transfer smoothly continues to present challenges for development projects.  
Furthermore, a cautious approach to capacity strengthening at the national level by 
avoiding excessive dependency on external assistance that tends to erode local capacity in 
the long run is important. 
 
At the national level it is also important to recognize the existence of regional and 
national networks for capacity development.  To the extent the human capital developed 
at the local level participates in the regional networks, they can bring back the 
experiences of the region to bear on the local decision-making systems.  Since many 
countries are dependent on external aid for investing in development programs and 
projects and that such aid comes with conditionalities of donors it is useful to recognize 
how such conditionalities can be positively directed to create local capacity (Babu 1997).  
Finally, identifying policies and approaches that will cost and time effectively increase 
the capacity for development should be a priority research area. 
Institutional Development Through Capacity Strengthening 
Building stable institutions and preventing erosion of human capacity particularly 
in the national agriculture research systems remains a major challenge.  Challenges in 
capacity development, maintenance, retention, utilization and monitoring of capacity
<<<PAGE=57>>>
48 
confront every institution in developing countries.  Cultural norms and social choices 
play an important role in capacity creation, maintenance, and retention in developing 
countries.  Information on appropriate incentives to retain and attract new capacity needs 
to be generated through the studying of stable agricultural innovation systems.  
Increasing the quality of academic institutions, research systems and universities is 
important to increase the quality of public sector capacity and its effective use in 
development. Yet, interactions between the internal norms and values and the external 
approaches to institutional reforms have not been adequately analyzed.    
 
Given the increasing role of public/private partnerships in institutional 
strengthening identifying specific contributions of private and public components of such 
partnerships to capacity strengthening is important.  Factors that influence creation of 
self-sustaining indigenous institutions and those that improve institutional quality in the 
long run should be studied.  Identifying appropriate indicators of institutional quality and 
measuring them to compare improvements in such measures will be useful for developing 
best practices for institutional development through capacity strengthening. 
Analytics for Developing a Solid Human Capacity Base 
Careful attention needs to be paid to develop a pool of trained manpower within 
national institutions to ensure successful outcomes in developing a strong agricultural 
research base in developing countries. Several research issues remain unaddressed 
regarding best approaches to strengthen the human capital base in institutions. Capacity 
erosion comes in the form of researchers moving out from national systems to other 
regional and international organizations within the country or to the private sector.  
Specific forms of economic and policy reforms can increase incentives for proper use of 
human skills for policy and institutional change.  The best approach to attract human 
capital to national institutions is by providing individual incentives through price 
competition.  Often distortive incentives prevent mobility and freedom of human capital
<<<PAGE=58>>>
49 
inhibiting the retention and productive employment of individual human capacities in the 
public sector.   
 
Very little analytical study exist in understanding socio, economic, and political 
factors that determine increased retention of existing capacity and better utilization of the 
skills created and appropriate ways of monitoring the capacity’s contribution to 
institutional goals needs to be devised. Effective measures of human capital should be 
developed by incorporating specialized research and analytical skills.   
 
The various issues involved in building sustaining capacities within national 
systems in developing countries are still in a trial and testing phase. Capacity 
strengthening for ensuring a well-functioning institution requires detailed attention 
towards the analytics and research issues discussed above. However, the approach and 
results may vary between countries not only because of differences in the state of the 
existing institutions (political, environmental, research, etc), but also on several inherent 
limitations and challenges to implementing capacity strengthening activities in countries.  
9. Limitations to Capacity Strengthening Research and Outreach Activities 
Capacity strengthening research may face challenges in its conceptualization and 
implementation phase.  With regards to the research agenda, availability and accessibility 
to comparable cross-sectional data and time series data will be a constraint.  The ability to 
locate and engage previous participants for answering surveys and interviewing will be a 
challenge.  With regards to outreach activities there are challenges in adapting to country 
customs.  There may also be difficulties in identifying key institutions to collaborate with 
and to develop as Centers of Excellence.  Other challenges include limited information 
and communication infrastructure in partner countries for disseminating information and 
courses through distance education and sustainable delivery of courses by partners.
<<<PAGE=59>>>
50 
Rise and fall of donor assitance could pose significant challenge to developing 
sustainable capacities in developing countries. The results from capacity strengthening 
projects have long gestation period before they exhibit positive outcomes. However, most 
donor institutions are keen to recover costs by showing short-term impact of their 
investment on capacity strengthening.  Measuring the impact of donor investment on 
capacity strengthening still remains at an elementary stage.  Donor-driven capacity 
development to influence better organization and management and its role in building 
leadership within national institutions should be studied.   
 
Since capacity strengthening as a research domain is still at a formative stage, 
possibilities to expand its horizon looks extremely positive. The current challenges and 
limitations would form the basis for developing new outlook and approaches for capacity 
strengthening. It is expected that benefits and impact from successful capacity 
development will far outweigh the challenges and limitations to it. 
10. Possible Impacts of Capacity Strengthening Research and Outreach 
The possible impacts of the outreach and research activities are many.  The 
potential impacts of the outreach activities are: 
• Thematic and emerging issues affecting agriculture, food and nutrition security, 
and natural resources will be better understood; 
• Capacity in conducting agriculture and food policy analysis will be improved; 
• Postgraduate education in agriculture, natural resources, and food will be of 
higher quality; 
• Policy and program recommendations will better represent the needs of the 
targeted audience; 
• Policymakers will better understand the policy options; 
• Communication between researchers and decisionmakers will be greater; 
• Researcher output will meet the needs of decisionmaker better;
<<<PAGE=60>>>
51 
• IFPRI’s research and datasets will be disseminated to and utilized by a larger 
audience; 
• A larger pool of partners for IFPRI to collaborate with in conducting research, 
policy communication, and capacity strengthening; and 
• Researchers will be able to communicate policy research results better and to the 
appropriate media. 
 
Some potential impacts of capacity strengthening research are: 
• Identifying capacity strengthening outreach opportunities from the assessment of 
capacity gaps in agriculture research and policy analysis at the national and 
regional levels; 
• Improved development of curricula; 
• Better implementation of  capacity strengthening activities; 
• Enhanced delivering of capacity strengthening activities; 
• More efficiently developed and higher quality learning materials; 
• Enhanced delivery of capacity strengthening and training activities; and 
• Better understanding the theoretical underpinnings that should support the 
development of capacity strengthening activities in agriculture, food, and natural 
resources. 
11. Concluding Remarks and Way Forward 
Capacity strengthening research can play an important role in enhancing the 
capacities of researchers, analysts, policymakers, other decision-makers, practitioners, 
students, and communities.  With improved knowledge and abilities these partners will be 
able to better meet the urgent policy challenges and research related to food, nutrition, 
agriculture, natural resources, and poverty.  Capacity strengthening thus far has been in 
the form of diverse activities often undertaken separately by the different divisions.
<<<PAGE=61>>>
52 
This document provides the rationale for the capacity strengthening research and 
outreach activities.  The document attempts to develop the broad paradigms of capacity 
strengthening research.  In-keeping with these broad paradigms, the research issues and 
methods are outlined.  
 
Through capacity strengthening activities in various developing countries in Asia 
and Africa, the CSP has developed collaborations with various regional and national level 
institutions for agricultural research and development.  Limitations faced while doing 
capacity strengthening research as well as the possible impacts of the research and 
outreach activities accompanying it comprise the next two sections.  
 
The strategy of capacity strengthening research is not free of obstacles.  Many of 
the political and economic changes occurring may prevent its strategy from having the 
positive impact of which they are capable.  One of these is the weak education 
infrastructure in some countries.  Other larger impediments are the decline in investments 
in agriculture and poor governance.  With these impediments, capacity strengthening 
efforts may have little impact in some countries.  Fortunately, through adaptation and 
innovation, the obstacles may be surmounted in some cases. Yet in regard to the major 
part of the developing world, IFPRI through using a diversified and synergistic strategy 
that also involves ongoing evaluation and periodic assessments of the organization’s 
strengths, the larger environment, and learning needs, can make a measurable impact on 
increasing capacity to reduce hunger and malnutrition.
<<<PAGE=62>>>
53 
References 
Archibugi, D., J. Howels, and J. Michie. 1999. Innovation Systems and Policy in a Global 
Economy. In Innovation Policy in a Global Economy, ed. D. Archibugi, J. Howels 
and J. Michie. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Babu, S. C. 2000. Impact of IFPRI's Policy Research on Resource Allocation and Food 
Security in Bangladesh. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research 
Institute. 
________. 1997. Multi-disciplinary Capacity Strengthening for Food Security and 
Nutrition Policy Analysis: Lessons from Malawi. Food and Nutrition Bulletin 17. 
Babu, S. 2003. Social Safety Nets for Poverty Reduction in South Asia – Global 
Experiences. Sri Lankan Journal of Agricultural Economics 5(1): 1-8. 
Babu, S., and D. Sengupta. 2004. Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Agricultural 
Development in Africa: Best Practices and Framework for Success. Washington, 
D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute for New Partnership for 
Africa's Development.  
Barro, R. J.  1997.  Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Survey.  
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Barro, R. J., and X. Salai-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw Hill. 
Barro, R. J., and J. Lee. 1993. Losers and Winners in Economic Growth.  NBER, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Boesen, N., and O. Therkildsen. 2005. A Results Oriented Approach to Capacity Change. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Denmark. April, 2005.  
Box, L. 1999. Social Incapacity? An Alternative Viewpoint. CD Bibliography: 
Techniques, Tools, and Approaches. <www.capacity.org>. Accessed June 9, 
2006. 
Brinkerhoff, D. 1992. Promoting the Sustainability of Development Institutions: A 
Framework for Strategy. World Development 20: 369-383.
<<<PAGE=63>>>
54 
________. 2005. Rebuilding Governance in Failed States and Post-Conflict Societies: 
Core Concepts and Cross-Cutting Themes. Public Administration and 
Development 25: 3-14. 
Capacity Development Network. 2005. <http://www.capacitywhoiswho.net/>. Accessed 
June 9, 2006. 
Capacity Development Network. 2004. From Concept to Practice - Exploring Productive 
Partnerships. 2004. International Symposium on Capacity Development. 4-6 
February, 2004. Tokyo, Japan. 
 
Chang, H. J. 2002. Kicking Away the Ladder. London: Anthem Press. 
Canadian International Development Association, Political and Social Policies Division, 
Policy Branch). 2001. Capacity Development Tool Kit. <http://www.acdi-
cida.gc.ca/cida_ind.nsf/ 
0/526fd794e5c4261385256c61006405e0?OpenDocument>. Accessed June 9, 
2006. 
Commission for Africa. 2005. Our Common Interest - Report of the Commission for 
Africa. London.  
Connor, J. M., and F. E. Geithman. 1988. Mergers in the Food Industries: Trends, 
Motives, and Policies. Agribusiness. 4(4): 331-346 
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research Science Council. 2005. 2005-
2015 CGIAR System Research Priorities. Washington, DC. 
Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development and The World Bank. 2003. Harmonizing Operational Policies, 
Procedures, and Practices: A Synthesis of Institutional Activities. High Level 
Forum, February 24-25, 2003. Rome 
Desai, M., S. Fukuda-Parr, C. Johansson, and F. Sagasti.  2002.  Measuring the 
Technology Achievement of Nations and the Capacity to Participate in the 
Network Age.  Journal of Human Development 3(1): 95-122.
<<<PAGE=64>>>
55 
Department for International Development (DFID). 1995. Enhancing Stakeholder 
Participation in Aid Activities: Technical Note. London, UK. 
Dia, M. 1993. A Governance Approach to Civil Service Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
World Bank Technical Paper No. 225. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. 
Eade, D. 1997. Networks and Networking. Capacity Building: An Approach to People 
Centered Development. An Oxfam Development Guide. Oxfam Publishing, UK.  
Easter, W. K., S. Bisaliah, and J. O. Dunbar. 1989. After Twenty-Five Years of 
Institution Building, The State Agricultural Universities in India Face New 
Challenges. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 71(5): 1200-1205. 
Easterly, W. R. 2001.  The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and 
Misadventures in the Tropics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
________. 2002. The Cartel of Good Intentions: Markets vs. Bureaucracy in Foreign 
Aid.  Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development. 
________. 2005. What did Structural Adjustment Adjust?  The Association of Policies 
and Growth with Repeated IMF and World Bank Adjustment Loans.  Journal of 
Development Economics 76: 1-22. 
ECON Centre for Economic Analysis. 2002. Assessing Environmental Management 
Capacity- Lessons Learnt. Input for the World Bank CEA Workshop in 
Washington DC, May 6-7, 2002. Norway. Oslo.  
Edquist, C. 1997. Systems of Innovation Approaches- Their Emergence and 
Characteristics. In Systems of Innovation: Technologies, Institutions and 
Organizations, ed. C. Edquist. London: Pinter S1-35. 
Eicher, C. K. 2004. Rebuilding Africa's Scientific Capacity in Food and Agriculture. 
Background Paper No. 4. InterAcademy Council, Study Panel on Science and 
Technology Strategies for Improving Agricultural Productivity and Food Security 
in Africa. Accessible at www.interacademycouncil.net
<<<PAGE=65>>>
56 
________. 2001. Africa's Unfinished Business: Building Sustainable Agricultural 
Research Systems. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Staff 
Paper No. 2001-10. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
Rome. 
________. 1999. Institutions and the African Farmer. Issues in Agriculture 14. 
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research. 
________. 1989. Sustainable Institutions for African Agricultural Development. Working 
Paper No.19. The Hague: International Service for National Agricultural 
Research. 
________. 1970. Growth and Development of the Nigerian Economy. East Lansing, MI: 
Michigan State University Press.  
Eldis Food Security and Nutrition Reporter. 2005. <http://www.eldis.org/ 
food/statistics.htm>. Accessed June 9, 2006. 
European Centre for Development Policy Management (ECDPM). 2005. Implementing 
Institutional and Capacity Development: Conceptual and Operational Issues. 
Maastricht, Netherlands. 
________. 2005. Study on Capacity, Change, and Performance.  Maastricht, 
Netherlands. 
________. 2003. Building Capacity: How Can It Be Done?  Maastricht, Netherlands. 
________. 2002.Capacity Building for Demand-led research: Issues and Priorities. 
Policy Management No. Brief 14. Maastricht, Netherlands. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2003. Role of 
Agriculture and Rural Development in the Eradication of Hunger and Poverty. 
Issue Paper for Economic and Social Council. Ministerial Roundtable. Rome.  
Fukuyama, F. 2005. State Building: The Mission Dimensions of Stateness. World Bank 
Seminar, Washington, D.C. 
________. 2004. State Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
<<<PAGE=66>>>
57 
Gervais, S. 2004. Local Capacity Building in Title II Food Security Projects. 
Washington, D.C.: United State Agency for International Development. Office of 
Food for Peace. 
Grindle, M. S. 2000. Audacious Reforms: Institutional Invention and Democracy in Latin 
America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
________. 1997.  Getting Good Government: Capacity Building in the Public Sector of 
Developing Countries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Institute for International 
Development. 
Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, P. Todd. 1997. Matching as an Econometric Evaluation 
Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme. Review of 
Economic Studies 64(4): 605-54 
________. 1998. Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Estimator. Review of Economic 
Studies 65: 261-294. 
Hirschmann, D. 1993. Institutional development in the Era of Economic Policy Reform: 
Concerns, Contradictions and Illustrations from Malawi. Public Administration 
and Development 13: 113-128. 
Horton, D., A. Alexaki, S. Bennet-Lartey, K. Brice, D. Campilan, F. Carden, J. de Souza 
Silva, L. Duong, Khadar I, A. Maestrey Boza, J. Kayes Muniruzzaman, J. Perez, 
M. Somarribba Chang, R. Vernooy, and J. Watts. 2003. Developing and 
Evaluating Capacity in Research and Development Organizations.  The Hague: 
International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR).  
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute) - International Service for National 
Agricultural Research Division. 2005. A Strategic Agenda for the ISNAR 
Division. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
Isimbabi, M. J. 2005. Leadership and Governance Capacity Building in African 
Countries. An occasional Paper. African Leadership and Progress 
Network.Washington, DC. 
Israel, A. 1987. Institutional Development: Incentives to Performance.  Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
<<<PAGE=67>>>
58 
Johnson, G. L., and B. Okigbo. 1989. Institution Building: Lessons from USAID's 
Nigerian Agricultural College Programs. American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics 71 (5): 1211-1218. 
Kaplan, A. 2000. Capacity Building: Shifting the Paradigms of Practice. Development in 
Practice 10: 517-526. 
Kanbur, R. 1995. A Helping Hand? The Problem of Technical Assistance in Africa: 
review Article. Journal of African Economics 4: 289-300. 
Kaufman, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi. 2003. Governance Matters III: Governance 
Indicators for 1996-2002 (Draft). <www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/pdf/ 
govmatters3.pdf> Updated June 30, 2003; accessed June 11, 2006. 
Kay, M., T. Franks, and S. Tota. 2005. Capacity Needs Assessment Methodology and 
Processes. Paper presented at the Workshop on Capacity Development in 
Agricultural Water Management, Moscow, 2004. Published by Food and 
Agriculture Organization, Rome. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/008/y5899e/y5899e03.htm#bm3 
Kernaghan, K. 2004. Symposium on Public-Private Partnerships Revisited: Implications 
for Future Governance. International Review of Administrative Sciences 70: 195-
198. 
Klitgaard, R. E.  1995.  Institutional Adjustment and Adjusting to Institutions.  
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 
Korac-Kakabadse, N., A. Kouzmin, and A. Korac-Kakabadse. 2000. Information 
Technology and Development: Creating "IT Harems," Fostering new Colonialism 
or Solving "Wicked" Policy Problems? Public Administration and Development 
20: 171-184. 
Land, T. 2000. Implementing Institutional and Capacity Development: Conceptual and 
Operational Issues.  ECDPM Discussion Paper No. 14. Published by ECDPM. 
Maastricht. 
Lele, U., and A. A. Goldsmith. 1989. The Development of National Agricultural 
Research Capacity. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
<<<PAGE=68>>>
59 
Levy, B. 2002.  Patterns of Governance in Africa. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 
Levy, D. and S. Kpundeh.  2004.  Building State Capacity in Africa: New Approaches, 
Emerging Lessons.  Washington, D.C.:  The World Bank. 
Liebenberg, F. and J. Kristen. 2005. Policy Research and Capacity Needs for 
Agricultural Research and Innovation in SADC. Consultant’s Synthesis Report. 
Addis Ababa. International Food Policy Research Institute. 
Mafunisa, M. J. 2004. The Role of Civil Society in Promoting Good Governance in the 
Republic of South Africa. International. Review of Administrative Sciences 70: 
489-496. 
Mashelkar, R.A. 2005. Nation Building through Science and Technology: A Developing 
World Perspective. 10th Zukerman Lecture, Royal Society. London. Innovation 
Strategy Today 1: 16-22. http://www.biodevelopments.org/innovation/ist1.pdf 
Mosher, A.T. 1966. Getting Agriculture Moving: Essentials for Development and 
Modernization. New York: Praeger for the Agriculture Development Council. 
Narula,Rajneesh, 2004. "Understanding Absorptive Capacities in an "Innovation 
Systems" Context: Consequences for Economic and Employment Growth," 
Research Memoranda 004, Maastricht : MERIT, Maastricht Economic Research 
Institute on Innovation and Technology. 
NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2004. Summary of NEPAD Action 
Plans. South Africa.  
Ngugi, D. 2005. ISNAR Division’s Stakeholders Needs Assessment for Eastern and 
Central Africa – Synthesis Report. Consultant’s Synthesis Report. Washington 
D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute. 
Odhiambo, K. T. 2000. Key Challenges for Monitoring and Evaluation Practice in 
Africa. Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity Development in Africa. Washington 
D.C.: The World Bank, Development Bank of Southern Africa. 
Organization for European Co operation and Development (OECD), 2006. The Challenge 
of Capacity Development: Working Towards Good Practice.DAC Network for 
Governance. OECD.
<<<PAGE=69>>>
60 
Peterson, S. B. 1998. Saints, Demons, Wizards and Systems: Why Information 
Technology Reforms Fail or Underperform in Public Bureaucracies in Africa. 
Public Administration and Development 18: 37-60. 
Phaik-Choo, P. 1999. Stakeholder Analysis on Sector Wide Approach. Phnom Penh: 
Cambodia, Ministry of Health. 
Pitcoff, W. 2004. Investing in People: Building the Capacity of Community  
Development, Training and Social Enterprise Practitioners. Human and 
Institutional Capacity Building: A Rockefeller Foundation Series 1 
Pritchett, L. 1996. Where Has All the Education Gone? Working Paper No. 1581. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 
Pritchett, L., and M. Woolcock. 2002. Solutions When the Solution is the Problem: 
Arraying the Disarray in Development.: Center for Global Development. 
Washington, DC. 
Qualman, A. 1997. A Note on Stakeholder Analysis. CD Bibliography: Techniques, 
Tools, and Approaches. < http://www.acdi-
cida.gc.ca/INET/IMAGES.NSF/vLUImages/CapacityDevelopment/$file/1997-
11TKAnalysis.pdf>. Accessed June 11, 2006. 
Rivera, W., W. Zijp and G. Alex. 2000. Contracting for extension: review of emerging 
practices. Agricultural Knowledge and Information Systems Good Practice Note. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.  
Roe, E.  1994.  Narrative Policy Analysis Theory and Practice.  Durham: Duke 
University Press. 
Rondinelli, D. A. 2003. Reinventing Government for the Twenty-first Century: State 
Capacity in Globalizing Society. Kumarian Press Inc.  
Schmidt, G. 1991. Linking Action Training to Bureaucratic Reorientation and 
Institutional Reform. Public Administration and Development 11: 39-55. 
Sen, A. K.  1999.  Development as Freedom. New York: Knopf. 
Shirley, M. M. 2004. Can Aid Reform Institutions. Presentation given at the Governance 
Seminar at International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
<<<PAGE=70>>>
61 
Swaminathan, M. S. 2003. Sustainable Food Security in Africa: Lessons from India’s 
Green Revolution. South African Journal of International Affairs 10(1): 11-26. 
The World Bank . 2000. Reforming Public Institutions and Strengthening Governance. 
Washington, D.C.  
________. 2002. Building Institutions for Markets. World Development Report 2002. 
Washington, D.C. 
________. 2004. Building Agricultural Policy and Institutional Capacity. In Agricultural 
Investment Sourcebook.  Washington D.C. 
________. 2005. Capacity Building in Africa: An Operations Evaluation Department 
(OED)  Evaluation of World Bank Support.  Washington D.C. 
________. 2005. World Bank Capacity Development Briefs. Washington, D.C. 
________. 2005. Towards a more Strategic Approach to Capacity Building in Africa. 
Washington, D.C. 
World Bank and IDA. 2004. Implementation of the Agenda on Managing for Results: 
Progress Report. Marrakech, Morocco. 
The World Bank Institute. 2001. Promoting Analytical Capacity in Poverty Analysis. 
Washington, DC. 
The World Bank, Operational Task Force on Capacity Development in Africa. 2005. 
Effective States and Engaged Societies. Washington, DC. 
Ul Haque, N., and J. Aziz. 1999. The Quality of Governance: 'Second Generation' Civil 
Service Reform in Africa. Journal of African Economies 8 (68-106). 
Ul Haque, N., and A. M. Khan. 1997. Institutional Development: Skill Transference 
Through a Reversal of "Human Capital Flight" or Technical Assistance. IMF 
Working Paper 97/89. Washington DC. 
Ul Haque, Nadeem and Ratna Sahay, 1996. Do Government Wage Cuts Close Budget 
Deficits? Costs of Corruption, IMF staff papers 43 (4). Washington, D. C. 
Ul Haque, N., P. J. Montiel, and S. Sheppard. 1998. Public Sector Efficiency and Fiscal 
Austerity.  International Monetary Fund Working Paper 98/56. Washington DC.
<<<PAGE=71>>>
62 
UN Millennium Project. 2005. Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the 
Millenium Development Goals. London: Earthscan. 
UNDP (United Nations Development Program), Management Development and 
Governance Division, Bureau of Development Policy). 1998. Capacity 
Assessment and Development, In a Systems and Strategic Management Context. 
Technical Advisory Paper 3. New York, USA. 
UNDP-GEF (United Nations Development Program-Global Environment Facility). 2003. 
Capacity Development Indicators. New York, USA. 
USAID, 2005. New Partnerships Initiative: Local Democratic Governance. USAID 
Publications, Washington DC. Accessed April, 2005. 
http://www.usaid.gov/pubs/npi/corerept/npi-dem.htm - 65.7KB 
van de  Walle, N. 2001. African Economies and the Politics of Permanent Crisis, 1979-
1999. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Varma, S., and M. Winslow. 2004. Healing Wounds: How the International Centers of 
the CGIAR Help Rebuild Agriculture in Countries Affected by Conflicts and 
Natural Disasters.  Washington, D.C.:Consultive Group on International 
Agricultural Research (CGIAR). 
Wane, W. 2004. The Quality of Foreign Aid: Country Selectivity or Donors Incentives. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.  
White, D. 2005. Reformers- Dream Team with a Mission. Financial Times. April 26, 
final edition.
<<<PAGE=72>>>
ISNAR DISCUSSION PAPERS 
 
9 Capacity Development as a Research Domain: Frameworks, Approaches, and Analytics, Suresh Chandra 
Babu and Debdatta Sengupta, September 2006 
8 Building an Agricultural Research for Development System in Africa, Adiel N. Mbabu and Cosmas Ochieng, 
September 2006 
7 On the Uneven Distribution of Innovative Capabilities and Why That Matters for Research, Extension and 
Development Policies, Javier M. Ekboir, Manrrubio Muñoz, Jorge Aguilar, Roberto Rendón Mendel, José G. 
García Muñiz, and J. Reyes Altamirano Cárdenas, September 2006 
6 The Private Sector in Agricultural R&D: Policies and Institutions to Foster its Growth in Developing 
Countries, Anwar Naseem, Steven Were Omamo, and David J. Spielman, August 2006 
5  From “Best Practice” to “Best Fit” : A Framework for Analyzing Pluralistic Agricultural Advisory Services 
Worldwide, Regina Birner, Kristen Davis, John Pender, Ephraim Nkonya, Pooniah Anandajayasekeram, 
Javier Ekboir, Adiel Mbabu, David Spielman, Daniela Horna, Samuel Benin, and Marc Cohen, July 2006 
4 Seeking a Common Path: Structuring Multistakeholder Dialogue on Agricultural Biotechnology in Africa, 
Klaus von Grebmer and Steven Were Omamo, July 2006 
3 Agricultural Science and Technology Policy for Growth and Poverty Reduction, Steven Were Omamo and 
Anwar Naseem, November 2005 
2 Innovation Systems Perspectives on Developing-Country Agriculture: A Critical Review, David J. Spielman, 
September 2005 
1 Public Private Partnerships for Innovation-led Growth in Agrichains: A Useful Tool for Development in 
Latin America? Frank Hartwich, Carolina Gonzalez, and Luis-Fernando Vieira, September 2005