<<<PAGE=1>>>
PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
1988. 41 
TRANSFER OF TRAINING: A REVIEW AND 
DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 
TIMOTHY T. BALDWIN 
Indiana University 
J. KEVIN FORD 
Michigan State University 
Transfer of training is of paramount concern for training researchers and 
practitioners. Despite research efforts, there is a growing concern over the 
“transfer problem.” The purpose of this paper is to provide a critique of 
the existing transfer research and to suggest directions for future research 
investigations. The conditions of transfer include both the generalization 
of learned material to the job and the maintenance of trained skills over 
a period of time on the job. The existing research examining the effects 
of training design, trainee, and work-environment factors on conditions 
of transfer is reviewed and critiqued. Research gaps identified from the 
review include the need to (1) test various operationalizations of training 
design and work-environment factors that have been posited as having an 
impact on transfer and (2) develop a framework for conducting research 
on the effects of trainee characteristics on transfer. Needed advancements 
in the conceptualization and operationalization of the criterion of transfer 
are also discussed. 
Positive transfer of training is defined as the degree to which trainees 
effectively apply the knowledge, skills, and attitudes gained in a training 
context to the job (Newstrom, 1984; Wexley & Latham, 1981). Transfer of 
training, therefore, is more than a function of original learning in a training 
program (Atkinson, 1972; Fleishman, 1953). For transfer to have occurred, 
learned behavior must be generalized to the job context and maintained over 
a period of time on the job. 
There is growing recognition of a “transfer problem” in organizational 
training today (Michalak, 1981). It is estimated that while American in- 
dustries annually spend up to $100 billion on training and development, 
not more than 10% of these expenditures actually result in transfer to the 
job (Georgenson, 1982). While researchers have similarly concluded that 
much of the training conducted in organizations fails to transfer to the work 
A previous draft of this manuscript was presented at the 47th annual meeting of the 
National Academy of Management, New Orleans, August, 1987. 
Authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically. 
The authors wish to thank Ray Noe and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful com- 
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Timothy T. Baldwin, 
ments. 
939 Woodbridge Drive, Bloomington, IN 47401. 
COPYRIGHT @ 1988 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY. INC. 
63
<<<PAGE=2>>>
64 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
setting (e.g., I. Goldstein, 1986; Mosel, 1957; Wexley & Latham, 1981), 
a comprehensive review and critique of the empirical research on transfer 
has not appeared. 
Several researchers have stated that the existing literature on transfer 
offers little of value to trainers concerned with maximizing positive transfer 
(Gagne, 1962; Wexley, 1984). On the other hand, Hinrichs (1976) has 
suggested that trainers often fail to apply the scientific knowledge that 
does exist. Rather than argue for one viewpoint or the other, it is our 
belief that it is more beneficial to investigate systematically what we do 
know about transfer of training and to consider how we can proceed to 
learn more. Rather than continue to bemoan what is a widely recognized 
concern, we must begin to specify the type of investigations needed to 
generate the knowledge base for improving our understanding of transfer 
issues. 
The purpose of this paper is to provide a critique of the existing transfer 
research and to suggest directions for future research investigations. First, 
we will provide an organizing framework outlining the factors we believe 
affect transfer of training. Second, we will review the existing research on 
factors affecting transfer. Third, we will present a critique of the research 
and highlight critical research gaps. Finally, we will specify the types of 
research needed to improve our understanding of the transfer process. 
A Framework for Examining Training Transfer 
Examination of transfer issues requires a clear understanding of what is 
meant by transfer as well as the identification of factors that affect transfer. 
Figure 1 presents a framework for understanding the transfer process. In 
Figure 1, the transfer process is described in terms of training-input factors, 
training outcomes, and conditions of transfer. The conditions of transfer 
include both the (1) generalization of material learned in training to the job 
context and (2) maintenance of the learned material over a period of time on 
the job. Training outcomes are defined as the amount of original learning 
that occurs during the training program and the retention of that material 
after the program is completed. Training-input factors include training 
design, trainee characteristics, and work-environment characteristics. The 
major training-design factors are the incorporation of learning principles 
(Bass & Vaughan, 1966), the sequencing of training material (Gagne, 1962; 
Tracy, 1984), and the job relevance of the training content (Campbell, 
1971; Ford & Wroten, 1984). Trainee characteristics consist of ability or 
skill, motivation, and personality factors. Work-environment characteristics 
include climatic factors such as supervisory or peer support as well as 
constraints and opportunities to perform learned behaviors on the job.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 65 
Training Inputs Training Outputs Conditions of Transfer 
Trainee 
Characteristics 
*Personality 
Motivation 
-1 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
I 
I 
I I 
Ability 4 
- - - - - - I 
El- 21 I 
* Principles of 
Sequencing 
Training 
Content 
I I 
I I 
I I 
support I 
3 
Environment - - - - - A 
Fl--- ______ 5 ___ - -I 
Figure 1: A Model of the Transfer Process 
As the model indicates, training outcomes and training-input factors are 
posited to have both direct and indirect effects on conditions of transfer. 
These effects are specified in terms of six linkages, which are critical 
for understanding the transfer process. Working backwards in the model, 
training outcomes of learning and retention are seen as having direct effects 
on conditions of transfer (Linkage 6). That is, for trained skills to transfer, 
training material must be learned and retained (Kirkpatrick, 1967). Trainee 
characteristics and work-environment characteristics are also hypothesized 
to have direct effects on transfer regardless of initial learning during the 
training program or retention of the training material (Linkages 4 and 5, 
respectively). For example, well-learned skills may not be maintained on 
the job due to lack of motivation or lack of supervisory support. Finally, 
training outcomes (learning and retention) are viewed as directly affected 
by the three training inputs of training design, trainee characteristics, and
<<<PAGE=4>>>
66 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
the work-environment characteristics (Linkages 1, 2, and 3 respectively). 
These three training inputs, therefore, have an indirect effect on transfer 
through their impact on training outcomes. 
The model in Figure 1 provides a framework for describing the transfer 
process. The literature examining transfer issues will now be reviewed 
and then be critiqued in relation to the impact of training-input factors on 
training outcomes and conditions of transfer. 
Literature Review 
For this review, empirical studies cited in the major works of the 
organizational-training literature (e.g., Bass & Vaughan, 1966; Campbell, 
1971; Campbell, Dunnette, Lawler & Weick, 1970; Decker & Nathan, 
1985; Ellis, 1965; I. Goldstein, 1980, 1986; McGehee & Thayer, 1961; 
Wexley, 1984; Wexley & Latham, 1981) were examined. Other studies 
were identified through an extensive literature search and cross-referencing 
of cited studies. Therefore, this review provides an examination of the 
transfer-issue research that has been referenced in the organizational-training 
literature. 
The review was based on the framework provided in Figure 1; that is, 
the research was reviewed in terms of the effects of training design, trainee 
characteristics, or work-environment factors on either learning and retention 
of trained material (training outcomes) or generalization and maintenance 
of training (conditions of transfer). A summary of the findings will be 
followed by a critique of the existing research. 
Training Design 
A large proportion of the empirical research on transfer has concen- 
trated on improving the design of training programs through the incorpora- 
tion of learning principles. Research has centered on four basic principles: 
(1) identical elements, (2) teaching of general principles, (3) stimulus vari- 
ability, and (4) various conditions of practice. 
Identical elements. The notion of identical elements was originally 
proposed by Thorndike and Woodworth (1901). They hypothesized that 
transfer is maximized to the degree that there are identical stimulus and 
response elements in the training and transfer settings. Empirical research 
supports the use of identical elements as a means of increasing the retention 
of both motor (Crafts, 1935; Gagne, Baker, & Foster, 1950) and verbal 
behaviors (Duncan & Underwood, 1953; Underwood, 195 1). 
General principles. Teaching through general principles maintains that 
transfer is facilitated when trainees are taught, not just applicable skills,
<<<PAGE=5>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 67 
but also the general rules and theoretical principles that underlie the train- 
ing content (McGehee & Thayer, 1961). For example, Judd (1908) and 
Hendnckson and Schroeder ( 194 1) demonstrated the usefulness of teach- 
ing through general principles by using rules of light infraction to improve 
proficiency in underwater shooting. Crannell (1956), in a series of three 
studies, showed the value of teaching general principles for problem solv- 
ing by improving subjects’ ability to learn card-sorting tricks. Goldbeck, 
Bernstein, Hillix, and Marx (1957) found that individuals instructed in the 
principles of analyzing prohlems were better able to locate problems with 
malfunctioning electronic equipment. 
Stimulus variability is the notion that positive 
transfer is maximized when a variety of relevant training stimuli are em- 
ployed (Ellis, 1965). Proponents state that several examples of a concept 
to be learned strengthen the trainee’s understanding so that he/ she is more 
likely to see the applicability of a concept in a new situation (Duncan, 
1958; Ellis, 1965). The principle of stimulus variability has received em- 
pirical support with respect to training outcomes. For example, Shore and 
Sechrest (1 96 1) found that using a moderate number of different exam- 
ples that were repeated a few times each was more effective in enhancing 
learning than using one example repeatedly. 
Conditions of practice. Conditions of practice include a number of spe- 
cific design issues, including massed or distributed training, whole or part 
training, feedback, and overlearning. Massed versus distributed training is 
the issue of whether or not to divide training into segments. Research evi- 
dence suggests that material learned under distributed practice is generally 
retained longer than material learned by massed practice (Briggs & Naylor, 
1962; Naylor & Briggs, 1963). There is also evidence that difficult and 
complex tasks result in higher performance when massed practice sessions 
are given first, followed by briefer sessions with more frequent rest intervals 
(Holding, 1965). 
Whole versus part training concerns the relative efficiency of practice 
with all the material as opposed to practice on one part at a time. Evidence 
suggests that the whole method is advantageous for enhancing training 
outcomes when (1) the intelligence of the learner is high, (2) practice is 
distributed rather than massed, and (3) the training material is high in task 
organization but low in task complexity (Naylor & Briggs, 1963). 
Feedback, or knowledge of results, refers to information provided to 
trainees about their performance. Evidence shows that feedback is a critical 
element in achieving learning and that timing and specificity are critical 
variables in determining its effects (e.g., Wexley & Thornton, 1972). Some 
authors have suggested that the optimal specificity of feedback may be 
dependent on the trainee and the stage of learning (Blum & Naylor, 1968), 
although empirical evidence is lacking. 
Stimulus variability.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
68 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Overlearning refers to the process of providing trainees with continued 
practice far beyond the point when the task has been performed successfully 
(McGehee & Thayer, 1961). Research indicates that the greater the amount 
of overlearning, the greater the subsequent retention of the trained material 
(Atwater, 1953; Gagne & Foster, 1949; Mandler, 1954). More recently, 
Hagman and Rose (1983) reported the results of several studies sponsored 
by the Army Research Institute that provide empirical support for the value 
of overlearning on retention in military training contexts. 
While researchers have also stressed the importance of design issues 
such as sequencing and the relevance of training content, (e.g., Gagne, 
1962), empirical research is lacking. One exception is the work of Decker 
(1980, 1982), who has explored the effects of different types of learning 
points on the reproduction and generalization of skills taught in behavior- 
modeling programs. 
Trainee Characteristics 
A wide variety of trainee characteristics thought to affect transfer have 
been suggested in the practitioner literature (e.g., Robinson, 1984; Trost, 
1982); however, empirical investigations of ability, personality, and moti- 
vational effects on training and transfer outcomes are quite limited. 
Existing research evidence shows that trainee success in early stages 
of training or on training samples predicts transfer on some training tasks 
(Downs, 1970; L. Gordon, 1955; M. Gordon & Cohen, 1973; McGehee, 
1948). And investigations of a variety of ability and aptitude tests also 
show moderate success for such measures as predictors of trainability (e.g., 
M. Gordon & Kleiman, 1976; Nee1 & Dunn, 1960; Robertson & Downs, 
1979; Ryman & Biersner, 1975; M. Smith & Downs, 1975; C. Taylor, 
1952; E. Taylor & Tajen, 1948; Tubiana & Ben-Shakhar, 1982). But 
Ghiselli’s (1966) review of the literature in the area characterized the typical 
predictive power of aptitude tests for the prediction of trainability as “far 
from impressive” (p. 125). 
With respect to personality variables, Noe and Schmitt (1986) found 
limited support for the effects of locus of control on pretraining motivation 
and learning. Baumgartel, Reynolds, and Pathan (1984) found that man- 
agers high in need for achievement and having an internal locus of control 
were more likely to apply new knowledge gained in training to work set- 
tings. On the other hand, Miles (1965), in a study of a sensitivity program, 
concluded that personality factors had no direct effect on transfer. 
Several studies have investigated the effects of motivational factors on 
transfer. Ryman and Biersner (1975) found a significant relation between 
trainee confidence in the successful completion of a Navy diving training
<<<PAGE=7>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 69 
program and subsequent class success and dropout rate. Tubiana and Ben- 
Shakhar (1 982) found a significant relation between motivation to succeed 
in training and a composite criterion of training performance, a probabil- 
ity assessment of promotion potential, and a sociometric measure of the 
trainee’s popularity with peers. Results from a study by Hicks and Klimoski 
(1987) show that a trainee’s perception that he/she had a choice to attend 
(or not attend) a managerial-skills training program influenced motivation 
to learn and subsequent learning in the program. Noe and Schmitt (1986) 
found that trainees with high job involvement were more motivated to learn 
and transfer skills ti the work setting. Baumgartel et al. (1984) showed 
that managers who believed in the value of training were more likely to 
apply skills learned in training. Finally, Eden and colleagues (Eden & 
Ravid, 1982; Eden & Shani, 1982) found that higher self-expectancies led 
to higher training performance in two studies of military personnel. 
Post-training interventions such as goal setting and feedback have been 
used to increase the motivation of the trainee to transfer skills learned in 
training. For example, Wexley and Nemeroff (1975) found that trainees 
assigned goals after a management development program were significantly 
better at applying their learning than were members of a control group. Re- 
ber and Wallin (1984) showed that both feedback and goal setting produced 
higher levels of skill transfer to the work setting than did either approach 
separately. 
Work-environment Characteristics 
While the practitioner literature on training (e.g., Eddy, Glad, & Wilkins, 
1967) stresses that positive transfer is highly contingent on factors in the 
trainee’s work environment, empirical evidence is sparse. Baumgartel and 
his associates (Baumgartel & Jeanpierre, 1972; Baumgartel et al., 1984; 
Baumgartel, Sullivan, & Dunn, 1978) have conducted a line of research 
indicating that managers in favorable organizational climates (with free- 
dom to set goals and a supportive environment) are more likely to apply 
new knowledge to work settings. And Hand, Richards, and Slocum (1973) 
concluded that positive changes in human-relations skills 18 months after 
training were due to organizational decisions such as salary and promo- 
tions that reinforced the attitudes learned in training. Huczynski and Lewis 
(1980) found that a management style that included pre-course discussion 
with one’s boss and subsequent boss sponsorship contributed most to the 
transfer of skills.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
70 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Critique of the Existing Literature 
Tables 1, 2, and 3 present outlines of the research on the effects of 
training design, trainee characteristics, and work-environment characteris- 
tics, respectively. The next section provides a critique of the research to 
identify what is known about transfer and to aid in the specification of 
the type of research needed to improve our understanding of the transfer 
process. 
Training-input Factors 
Table 1 presents the studies referenced by training researchers (e.g., 
I. Goldstein, 1986; Wexley & Latham, 1981) as the empirical basis for 
what is known with respect to training design and learning principles. An 
examination of the table reveals that the research on learning principles 
was typically completed before 1970. The sample used for most of the 
studies was composed of college students completing relatively straight- 
forward memory and psychomotor-skills tasks. For example, to examine 
the impact of identical elements, Underwood (1951) used a sample of 54 
college students, whose task was to pair adjectives. In a more recent study, 
Schendel and Hagman (1982) had 38 soldiers disassemble machine guns 
under various conditions of overlearning. 
The criterion measure of interest for all the studies was oriented toward 
training outcome. Typically, measures of retention were taken immediately 
after completion of the training task. Mandler and Heinemann (1956), for 
example, used the number of correct trials immediately after training to 
examine the effects of overlearning on retention. The research indicates 
that learning principles have an effect on learning and immediate retention 
of training material. Nevertheless, attempts to examine retention over time 
or the effects of retention on the generalization and maintenance of skills 
have been rare. 
To summarize, Table 1 shows that studies examining training-design 
factors have used college students working on simple memory and mo- 
tor tasks, with immediate learning or retention as the criterion of interest 
(Linkage 1 of the transfer model in Figure I). From an examination of 
these study characteristics, two basic limitations of the existing research 
become evident. 
First, the tasks used limit generalizability of the results to short-term, 
simple motor tasks and memory-skills training. The use of such tasks 
is problematic, given that organizational training is often conducted to 
enhance individual competence on long-term, complex skills such as in- 
terpersonal communication and managerial problem solving. The effect of
<<<PAGE=9>>>
TABLE 1 
Empirical Studies of Transfer of Training-Training Input Factors: Design of Training 
Task or training 
Author{s) Sample content Variables Designa Criteria 
Adams (1 955) 
Atwater (1953) 
Baldwin (1987) 
Briggs & Naylor 
( 1962) 
Briggs & Waters 
(1958) 
Callentine & Warren 
Cominsky (1982) 
(1955) 
Crafts (1935) 
Crannel (1956) reports 
results of three 
experiments 
127 Military 
trainees 
32 College 
students 
72 College 
students 
144 College 
Students 
160 RDTC 
college stu- 
dents 
120 College 
students 
34 Graduate 
students 
64 College 
students 
248 College 
students 
Distinguishing spa- 
tial arrangements of a 
stimulus pair 
Pairing words 
Behavior modeling of 
assertive skills 
Maintaining control 
of a compensatory 
tracking system 
Pilot training; simula- 
tor tracking task 
Concept attainment 
with geometric figures 
Teaching reflection of 
feeling 
Card sorting 
Card trick problems 
Stimulus variability 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (overlearning) 
Stimulus variability 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (whole vs. part) 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (whole vs. part) 
Stimulus variability 
General principles 
and stimulus vari- 
ability 
Identical elements 
General principles 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
Q-E 
E 
E 
Immediatet proficiency on an arrangement task 
Immediate proficiency in pairing words cor- 
rectly 
Immediate measure of learning; immediate re- 
production of skills; generalization of skills to 
a novel context four weeks later; unobstrusive 
iiieasure of skill use four weeks later 
Immediate mtasure of tracking proficiency 
Immediate measure of total number of errors in 
sorting cards to illustrate understanding 
Immediate measure of total number of errors in 
sorting cards to illustrate understanding 
Taped role plays, immediately after program 
completion 
Immediate ability on test card sorting task 
Immediate measure of number of problems 
completed in one hour (Experiments 1 & 2); 
&week measure of whether two problems could 
be completed in 10 minuws (Experiment 3) 
=E=Experimental: Q-E = Quasi-experimental. 
this context, the tern. immediate denotes B period directly after the training took place; that is, no significant time elapsed between training and 
measurement of trained skllls
<<<PAGE=10>>>
4 
TABLE 1 (continued) h) 
Author(s) Sample 
Task or training 
content Variables 
Decker (1980) 
Decker (1982) 
Digman (1959) 
Duncan (1958) 
Duncan & Underwood 
(IY53) 
Forgus & Schwartz 
(1957) 
Fryer & Edgerton 
( 1950) 
Gagne & Foster (1949) 
Goldbeck, Bernstein, 
Hillix, & Marx 
(1957) 
90 College 
students 
24 First-line 
supervisors 
41 College 
students 
600 College 
students 
186 College 
students 
39 Fcmalc 
college stu- 
dents 
334 Military 
trainees 
145 Enlisted 
navy men 
40 Male col- 
lege students 
8ehavioral modeling 
of assertive skills 
Coaching and han- 
dling employee corn 
plaints 
Hitting a target button 
with rotor 
Movement of a lever 
into one of 13 slots 
Moving a lever into 
slots in response to 
color-light stimuli 
Learning a ne6 alpha- 
bet 
Gunnery training 
Reaction to light by 
pressing control panel 
switch 
Troubleshooting prob- 
lems with electronic 
equipment 
Type of learning 
points 
Type of learning 
points 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (massed vs. 
spaced) 
Stimulus variability 
Identical elements 
General principles 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (massed vs. 
spaced) (instruction 
methods) 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (overlearning) 
General principles 
Design" 
E 
Q-E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
Criteria 
lmmediate reproduction of skills; immediate 
generalization of skills 
Immediate reproduction of skills; immediate 
generalization of skills 
Immediate task proficiency 
w m 
5 z 
Two proficiency tests given: (I) 24 hours after 
training, (2) 48 hours after training 
Retention of learning 24 hours and 14 months 
after acquisition r 
2 
5 
< 0 
z 
lmmcdiaie recall, simple transposition, and a 
measure of prohlem solving proficiency 
Immediate test of lcarning and retention of 
learning after 2 months i 4 
Immediate measures of (I) amount of time to 
complete trials, (2) no. of errors 
Immediate test of troubleshooting proficiency
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Hagman & Rose 
(1983) results of 
13 experiments 
Haselrud & Meyers 
( 1958) 
Hendrickson & 
Schroeder (1941) 
Hilgard, Irvine. & 
Whipple (1953) 
Hilgard, Edren, & 
kine (1954) 
Judd (1908) 
Macpherson, Dees, & 
Grindley ( 1948) 
Mandlcr (I 954) 
Mandler & Heine- 
mann (1 956) 
Military per- 
sonnel 
76 College 
students 
90 Eighth 
grade boys 
60 High- 
school stu- 
dents 
150 High- 
school stu- 
dents 
Unspecified 
number of 
fifth and sixth 
grade boys 
200 College 
students 
60 Collcge 
students 
60 College 
students 
Variety of military 
tasks tice 
Conditions of prac- 
Deciphering word General principles 
codes (taught coding 
rules) 
Shooting an air gun at 
submerged underwater 
targets (taught princi- 
ple of light infraction) 
Card trick problems Gcnernl principlcs 
General princip1e.s 
Card trick problems General principles 
Shooting darts at sub- 
merged underwater 
targets (taught princi- 
ple of light infraction) 
Line drawing, pushing Feedback 
a Icver, pressing a 
Morse kcy 
Operating hand Conditions of prac- 
switches in scqucnccs lice (uverlemingj 
on a switchboard hav- 
ing six switches ar- 
ranged in a hexagon; 
stimuli were letters of 
the alphabet 
Assembly of verbal 
units from nonsense tice (overlearning) 
svllables 
General principles 
Conditions of prac- 
Q-E/ E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
Both immediate proficiency and retention over 
time 
Immediate number of correct codings 
Immediate jleasure of accurdcy wn hitting un- 
derwater targets 
(1) Overnight measure of rctention; 
(2) proficiency on simple transposition task; 
(3) proticiency on threc problem-solving tasks 
Overnight retention, number and t)rpe of errors 
made 
Immediate accuracy on hitting underwater target 
with depth charge 
Immediate task proficiency 
Immediate errorless trials 
Immediate number of correct trials
<<<PAGE=12>>>
4 
TABLE 1 (continued) P 
Task or training 
Author(s) Sample content Variables Design" Criteria 
Morrisett & Hovland 
( 1959) 
Naylor & Briggs 
(1963) 
Reynolds & Rilodeau 
(1 9.52) 
Schendel & Hagman 
Shore & Scchresr 
Thorndike (1927) 
( I YX2) 
(1961) 
Thorndike & Wood- 
worth (1901) 
Trowbridge & Cason 
(1932) 
Underwood (195 I) 
Wexley & Thornton 
Woodrow (1 927) 
( 1972) 
63 High- 
school stu- 
dents 
1 I2 Female 
college stu- 
dents 
612 Baqic 
trainee aimell 
35 Reserve 
soldicrs 
64 College 
students 
24 Peoplc 
varying in age 
from 20 to 
42+ 
5 College stu- 
dents 
60 College 
students 
54 College 
students 
261 College 
students 
76 College 
students 
Discriminating pairs 
of geometric figures 
Markov prediction 
task 
(I) Rudder control, 
(2) complex coordina- 
tion, (3) rotary pursuit 
Disassembly/ assembly 
of M60 machine gun 
Concept attaintnent 
Estimating length of 
paper strips blind- 
folded 
Observing words for 
certain characteristics 
Drawing lines blind- 
folded 
Pairing adjectives 
Introductory psychol- 
ogy course 
Memorization tasks 
(taught rnemorv rules) 
Stimulus variability 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (whole vs. part) 
Conditions of prac- 
tice (massed vs. 
spaced) 
Conditons of prac- 
tice (overlearning) 
Stimulus variahiliry 
Feedback 
Identical elements 
Feedback 
Identical elements 
Feedback 
General Principles 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
E 
Immediate ability to discriminate between pairs 
Immediate number of correct predictions 
Immediate proficiency and retention afier 10 
weeks 
I-week Retention interval 9 
rn Immediate number of correct tests of concept r 
attainment 71 
Immediate accuracy of length estirnatcs 4 c1 X 
v, 
E Immediate speed and accuracy in word recogni- 0 
tion 4 
Immediate proficiency of line drawing 
Immediate number of correct responses 
Course exams 
Immediate memory scorcs
<<<PAGE=13>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 75 
these learning principles on training outcomes for more complex and in- 
terrelated tasks is unknown. While it is relatively straightforward to opera- 
tionalize principles such as overlearning in controlled experimental settings 
with motor or memory tasks, the appropriate operationalization of learning 
principles in more complex organizational-training programs is problem- 
atic. For example, there is no empirical data regarding how much and in 
what ways a trainer should incorporate learning principles such as stimu- 
lus variability into a behavior-modeling program to enhance the transfer of 
managerial skills. In addition, W. Schneider (1985) suggests that several 
training-design maxims (e.g., practice makes perfect) are fallacious when 
training for “high performance” skills. 
Second, the criterion measures of interest in these studies have been 
learning and short-term retention. While these measures are certainly ap- 
propriate, given the goals of the original research, any claims by training 
researchers regarding the implications of these “robust” findings for enhanc- 
ing transfer of training must be made with caution. Training outcomes of 
learning and retention constitute necessary but not sufficient conditions for 
generalization and maintenance of skills. Therefore, we need research that 
explicitly examines the direct effects of training-design factors on training 
outcomes (Linkage 1) and then examines the effects of training outcomes 
on conditions of transfer (Linkage 6). 
Trainee Characteristics 
Table 2 presents the studies that have examined the relation of trainee 
characteristics to transfer of training. There are fewer such studies, but 
they are more recent than those focusing on training-design characteristics. 
Examination of the table reveals a variety of different samples, training 
tasks, and designs used. The sample includes managers, college students, 
and line personnel. The training tasks range from general interpersonal 
skills such as human-relations training to specific skills programs such as 
time management. 
The criterion measure typically used in these studies was retention of the 
learned material (Linkage 2). Retention was commonly measured through 
written tests, which asked trainees to recall trained material immediately or 
shortly after completion of the training program (see, for example, Wexley 
& Baldwin, 1986). In some studies, information on generalization and 
maintenance of trained skills to the job (Linkage 5) was also gathered. 
The major source of information about behavioral change was the trainee 
him/ herself, with such information being gathered soon after completion of 
the training program. For example, upon completion of a network-analysis 
training program, Huczynski and Lewis (1980) asked trainees about their 
intentions to transfer skills learned. Four months later they asked them for
<<<PAGE=14>>>
TABLE 2 
Empirical Studies of Transfer of Trainin-Training Input Factors: Trainee Characteristics 
Criteria 
Author($) Sample content Variables (timing) Measures & Results 
Training L-cc Br 
Baumgartel & Jean- 240 Indian 
pierre (1972) managers 
Baumgartel, Reynolds, 260 American 
& Pathan (1984) managers 
Study 1 
Baumgartel, Reynolds, 246 Indian 
& Pathan (1 984) managers 
Study 2 
Mandgmem devel- 
opment program 
Human relations 
Management devel- 
opment program 
Demographic (educ., 
age, job-income 
level); motivation 
(value & relevance 
of training); per- 
sonality (composite 
scale) 
Demographic (rank- 
job level); Motiva- 
tion (value of train- 
ing); personality (lo- 
cus of control) 
Personality (locus 
of control, need to 
achieve) 
Self (irnme- 
diate)" 
Self (un- 
known) 
Sup e IT i s o r 
(unknown) 
Self (imme- 
diate) 
Self (un- 
known) 
Self (imme- 
diatci 
Efnri to apply4 I % of respondents indicated 
some intended effort to apply. Significantly re- 
lated to job income but no other significant rela- 
tionship with trainee characteristics. 
Perceived success in trunsferring4f those in- 
dicating effort to apply, 47% indicated high suc- 
cess, 38% medium, and 15% low or no success. 
No r's with trainee characteristics reported. 
Artempi to Use-2 1 % of bosses indicated some 
subordinate attempt to use. No r's with trainee 
characteristics reported. 
Efurr to apply-Significantly related to locus of 
control. Relation with other trainee characteris- 
tics measured was n.s,b 
Perceived success in trunsferringSignificanily 
related to belief in the value of training. Rela- 
tion with other trainee charasteristics measured 
was n.s. 
E8or-f to uppply-Significantly related to locus 
of control and need achievement. Others were 
ns.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Downs (1970) 
Eden & Ravid (1982) 
Eden & Shani (1982) 
Fleishman (1953) 
Gordon (1955) 
Gordon & Cohen 
( 1973) 
Gordon & Kleiman 
(1976) 
82 Sewing 
machinists 
60 Military 
personnel 
105 Military 
personnel 
122 Manulac- 
turing fore- 
men 
400 Military 
recruits 
58 Weld- 
ing program 
trainees 
101 Police 
trainees 
Sewing machine 
training 
Clerical skills 
Military combat 
command course 
Leadership training 
Radio code training 
Plate welding 
Fundamentals of 
police work 
Ability (training 
sample) 
Motivation (self 
& instructor ex- 
pectancy) 
Motivation (instruc- 
tor expectancy) 
Demographic (age, 
educ.. tenure. num- 
ber of subordinates) 
Ability (early train- 
ing time required) 
Ability (early train- 
ing performance) 
Ability (training 
sample. IQ) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Self (before 
training & 
varied from 
2-24 after 
training) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Final instructor raring-Signifcantly related 
(r = SO) to score on training sample. 
Learning examsSignificant main effect for 
self-expectancy. High expectancy conditions 
had greater exam s&re average than controls. 
27-30% of variance explained by seif- 
expectancy. 
Learning exams-Significant main effect for in- 
structor expectancy., High expectancy conditions 
had greater exam scorc avcrage than controls. 
Instructor expectancy explained 738 of variance 
in learning exam performance. 
Leader hehavior.7 (LBDQ)-AII relationships 
with trainec characteristics were n.s. 
Radio code tesf score-Significantly related to 
early training time required for three separate 
groups varying in previous radio code exposure. 
Time required fo complete training-Signifi- 
cantly related to early training performance on 
each of the first four tasks in training. 
Sum of graded e.~ercise~-Si~iticantly related 
to both work sample tests and IQ tests but the 
work sample tests yielded significantly higher 
r's in most cases. 
"Immediate denotes that no significant time elapsed between training and measurement of trained skills. 
6nn.s. denotes statistically nonsignificant.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
TABLE 2 (continued) 
Criteria 
Author(s) Sample content Variables (timing) Measures & Results Training Source & 
Hicks & Klimoski 
( 1987) 
Huczynski & Lewis 
( 1980) 
Komacki. Heinze- 
mann, & Lawson 
(IYXO) 
85 Managers 
48 Electronic 
managers 
55 Vehicle 
maintenance 
personnel 
Two-day perfor- 
mance review 
training 
Three-day network 
analysis training 
program 
One-hour safety 
training 
Motivation (degree Self (imme- 
of choice to select diate) 
training, realistic 
preview j 
Self (imme- 
diate) 
Self (imme- 
diate) 
Self (imnie- 
diaie) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Trained 
observers 
(immediate) 
Motivation (attend Self (4 
on own. value of months af- 
training. prior course ter training 
discussion) 
Motivation (reinforc- Trained 
ing feedback) observers 
(weekly 
up to 40 
weeks) 
Appropriateness of training-Main effects for 
degree of choice and type of prior info. 
Projt from training-Main effects for degree of 
choice and type of prior info. 
Safisfaction w/ training-Main effects for degree 
of choice. 
Lr.urning--Main effccrs for degrec of choice. 
,khiewment test--Main effects for degrec of 
choice. 
Role pkV-No significant effects. 
Attempt to nansfer-35% of respondents made 
some attempt to transfer. Those who attempted 
transfer were more likely to have (1 j attended 
the course on their own initiative, (2) believed 
the course would be beneficial, and (,3) had 
prior discussions of the course. 
Sufep hehuviors e.uhibi/e~-Significant increases 
in safcty performance occurred when training 
was combined with feedback (15% over training 
only and 268 over baseline).
<<<PAGE=17>>>
McGchce (1948) 21 Rug-mill 
trainees 
Miles (196s) 34 Elemen- 
tary school 
principals 
Nee1 ~4 Dunn (1960) 32 Supervi- 
sory trainees 
Noc & Schmitt (1986) 60 School 
cducators 
Preparation of rug- 
spools fectiveness in OJT 
Ability (initial ef- 
training) 
‘Two-week human Demographic (tenure, 
relations no. of subs); pcrson- 
alitp (ego strength, 
flexibility, need affil- 
iation) 
motivation (desire 
for change, feedback 
received, involve- 
ment, unfreezing) 
I 0-week supervi- Ability (IQ-Wonder- 
sory skills training lic); personality 
(“How Supervise”, 
aurhoritarianism) 
pectancies, motive 
to Icarn, exploratory 
behavior, job in- 
volvement); per- 
sonality (locus 
of 
control) 
Managerial skills Motivation (ex- 
Instructor 
(immediate 1 
Self (imrne 
diare) 
Peer (im- 
mediate) 
Self (8 
months af- 
ter training) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Trained 
Raters (im- 
mediate) 
Time required to attain acceptable average 
pmduc,ion-Siigniticantly related to time re- 
quired to complete, early training periods. Most 
significant incrcasc in prediction was from 1st 
to 2nd period. 
Pcrceil-crl cYwrjiejintrt r,.crinitig--Signilicantly 
relutcd tct feedback received. Relation with all 
olhcr personality and motivation variahles was 
fl.S. ” 
Pefceived change pom rrainin~-Sienificantly 
related to unfreezing, involvement, and feedback 
other variables wqs n.s. 
On-rhe-jnh change-Significantly related to un- 
freezing. Relation with other variables was n.s. 
received. Relation’with desire for change and W 
U F 
3 
Course e.runiinuriuns-Sigrlificantly related to 9 2 
= .69). and authoritarianism (r = .39). U 
7 
0 LParnin<q (in-bu.skct exc,t-circ,sl.--Kelation with 
all trainee characteristics n.s. Krcsidual value 
for job involvement = (.41). 
Wonderlic (F = .25), “How Supervise” scale (r 
8 
Self (var- 
ied 1-34 characieristics n.s. 
mos. after 
training) 
Supervisor 
(3 mos. af- tics n.s. 
ter training) 
Motimron ro transfer-Relation with all trainee 
Behnvior-Relation with all trainee characteris- 
-I 
iD
<<<PAGE=18>>>
TABLE 2 (continued) 
z 
Criteria 
Author(s) Samale content Variables (timing) Measures & Results 
Training Source & 
Reber & Wallin (1984) 105 Farm rna- 
chinery work- 
ers 
Ryman & Biersner 548 Military 
(1975) personnel 
Smith & Downs (1975) 236 Ship- 
building ap- 
prentices 
Taylor ( 1952) 120 Automu- 
tive mechanic 
trainees 
Taylor & Tajen (1948) 313 Clerical 
trainees 
Safety procedures 
Technical (div- 
ing & underwater) 
skills 
Variety of ship 
building skills 
Mechanic skills 
Clerical, record- 
keeping skills 
Motivation (reinforc- 
ing feedback and 
goals) 
Motivation (course 
expectations, con- 
fidence, leadership 
efficacy, concern); 
personality (confor- 
mity) 
Ability (trainability 
assessment) 
Ability (aptitude test 
battery) 
Ability (numeric 
score 
on test battery) 
Peers (3 
rnos. after 
training) 
Trained 
observers 
(weekly 
up to 40 
Weeks) 
File data 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(3-I2 months 
after train- 
ability as- 
sessment) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Behuvior (peer) Relation with all trainee charac- 
teristics n.s. 
Safely behaviors exhibited-Main effects for 
each of three intervenlions: (1) safety rule train- 
ing alone, (2) goal setting, (3) feedback and 
goal setting. Percentage of safety behaviors 
exhibited varied such that (control) 62.80%. 
(1) 70.85%, (2) 77.5496, (3) 95.39%. 
P rogrum graduation-Across 3 programs, suc- 
cessful graduation had a significant positive re- 
lationship with training motivation, leadership, 
and conformity and was negatively related to 
training concerns. 
Yerformance test-Trainability assessments were 
successful in predicting performance after a 3- 
month period in the skill for which they were 
designed. They were lcss succcssrul afler a 
12-month period and no single assessinent pre- 
dicted performance for all skills. 
Performunce rest-Aptitude test hatter): was ef- 
fective in identifying trainees who had the nec- 
essary knowledge and skills to skip the first four 
weeks to training and still do approximately as 
well as those who took the whole course. 
Performance test-Individuals’ performance test 
scores on IBM punch card equipment were pre- 
dicted with a one-hour pretraining test battery 
such that 70% of the selected trainees did better 
than the average unselected trainee.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Tubiana & Shakhar 459 Israeli Basic military 
(1982) military training 
WexIey & Baldwin 256 College Time management 
(1986) students 
Wexley & Nemeroff 27 Health care Two-day supervi- 
(1975) managers sory skills program 
Demographic (ed- 
ucation); ability 
(language test, 2 IQ 
tests); motivation 
(motive to serve in 
combat); personality 
(activeness, socia- 
bility, responsibility, 
independence, & 
promptness) 
Motivation (goal 
setting, relapse pre- 
vention) 
Motivation (goal 
setting) 
Superior 
officer (im- 
mediate) 
Instructor 
(immediate) 
Self (8 
weeks af- 
ter training) 
Observer (8 
weeks af- 
ter training) 
Behuvior- 
No signifi- 
cant effects 
observed. 
Self (60 
days after 
training) 
Subordinate 
(60 days af- 
ter training) 
Performance potential4fficer rating of po- 
tential had a significant positive relationship 
to education (r -.21), language test scores (r 
= .24), intelligence (r = .32) and composite of 
personality & motivation (r = .33). 
b 
Learning-Main effect for assigned goal setting. 
i 
a 
Behovior-Main effects for assigned & partici- 
pative goal setting. u 
Behavior4oal setting treatments were signif- 
icantly more effective than a control group in 
improving the leader behavior of managers. 
Behavior-Assigned goal-setting group was 
most effective in increasing subordinate work 
satisfaction.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
82 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
their perceptions of their success in transfemng skills from the training 
program. Few studies used behavioral ratings (Noe & Schmitt, 1986) or 
observed and recorded actual behaviors (e.g., Komacki, Heinzemann, & 
Lawson, 1980; Reber & Wallin, 1984) to evaluate the extent of transfer. 
The research on trainee characteristics has two critical problems, which 
reduce its usefulness for understanding the factors affecting the transfer 
process. The first problem is the lack of theoretical frameworks to guide 
research. A number of individual-difference factors have been examined, 
including job involvement (Noe & Schmitt, 1986), need for achievement 
(Baumgartel & Jeanpierre, 1972; Baumgartel et al., 1984), belief in the 
value of training (Baumgartel et al. 1984; Ryman & Biersner, 1975), 
and intelligence level (Tubiana & Ben-Shakhar, 1982). Some motivational 
strategies have also been examined for their impact on transfer; they include 
goal setting (Reber & Wallin, 1984; Wexley & Baldwin, 1986; Wexley & 
Nemeroff, 1975), feedback (Komaki et al., 1980; Reber & Wallin, 1984), 
choice in attending training (Hicks & Klimoski, 1987; Huczynski & Lewis, 
1980), realistic information about the training program (Hicks & Klimoski, 
1987), and relapse prevention (Wexley & Baldwin, 1986). Despite these 
efforts, the lack of a systematic approach to this area has resulted in mini- 
mal improvements in our understanding of the transfer process. Systematic 
research is needed in which models would be developed, tested, and re- 
vised on the basis of empirical research. Noe (1986) has provided an 
initial attempt to identify key personality and motivational factors that af- 
fect transfer and to hypothesize expected linkages and relationships among 
these factors and transfer. More efforts at model development are needed. 
A second critical issue is the lack of adequate criterion measures of 
transfer in the studies examining the effects of trainee characteristics. Self- 
report measures of transfer are not adequate for developing a data base 
regarding the relation of trainee characteristics to transfer or for determin- 
ing which interventions have the greatest effect on transfer. For example, 
Wexley and Baldwin’s (1986) conclusion that a post-training goal-setting 
intervention was more effective than a relapse-prevention intervention must 
be tempered by the fact that the conclusion was based solely on self- 
reported generalization of skills and not on actual behavioral changes. 
Environmental Characteristics 
Table 3 presents information about the seven studies that have examined 
the relation of environmental characteristics to transfer of training. We 
located no studies in which an intervention was made to change the work 
environment and the effects of those changes on the extent of transfer 
was examined. Instead, studies used large-scale surveys to examine the 
relationships of correlates such as work climate (Baumgartel et al., 1984),
<<<PAGE=21>>>
TABLE 3 
Empirical Studies of Transfer of TraininR-Envir~nmental Factors 
Criterh 
Training Source & 
Authorjs) Sample content Variables (timing) Measures Bi Results 
Baumgartel & Jean- 
pierre (1 972) 
Baurngartel, Reynolds, 
& Pathan (1984) 
(Study I) 
Baumgartel, Reynolds, 
& Pathan (1984) 
(Study 2) 
Fieishman (1953) 
240 Indian 
managers 
260 American 
managers 
246 Indian 
managers 
122 Manufac- 
turing foremen 
Management 
development 
program 
Human rela.. 
tions 
Management 
development 
program 
Leadership 
training 
Perceptions of trans- 
fer climate 
Perceptions of trans- 
fer clirnatc 
Perceptions of trans- 
fer climate 
Perceptions of lead- 
ership climate 
Self (imme- 
diate)" 
Self (imme- 
diate) 
Self (imme- 
diate) 
Self (varied 
(2-24 mos. 
after training) 
Effirf 10 npplp-FavorabIe organization climate 
perceptions were significantly and positively re- 
lated to effort to apply. 
E#&rr to apply-Favorable organization climate 
perceptions wtre significantly and positively re- 
ated to effoort to apply: the most favorable urga- 
niratiun climate was charactcrizcd by high ap- 
prcciation for perfummxe and innovation, en- 
couragement of risk taking and freedom to sct 
own performance goals. 
Effrf to uppljLFavorable organization climatc 
perceptions were significantly and ositivcly re- 
ared to cffort to apply. The most t%orable orga- 
nization climate was characterized by high appre- 
ciation for performance and innovation, a climate 
of freedom. a rational reward system, and open- 
ness in relationships among managers. 
Leader behavior (LBDQJ-Leader behavior was 
significantly affected by the leadership climate in 
the trainee's work environment. Trainees who re- 
turned to supervisors high in consideration exhi- 
bitcd more consideration. No such change occurred 
for those returning to supervisors lower in consider- 
ation. 
"Immediate denotes that no significant time elapsed beiwecn wining and measurement of trained skills. M w
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Table 3 (continued) 
00 
P 
Training Source & 
Author(s) Sample content Variables (timing) Measures & Results 
Hand, Richards & 21 Middle Human ?!a- Perceptions of trans- Self (3 & 18 3-hfonfh ewluution-No significant changes in 
Siocum (1973) managers tions training fer climate mos. after attitudes or behaviors of trainees were observed. 
training) l8-hf0nth ei;uluafzon-Significant positive changes 
in attitudes were observed in the ex erimental 
group; negative changes existed in tie control 
group. Three climate perceptions (whether the 
organization favors participation by subordinates, 
innovative behavior, and independence of thought). 
a 
P v: 
m 
% 3 
moderated the findings. 
Huczynski & Lewis 48 Electronic Three-day net- Supervisor support Self (4 mos. Atrempt to rrrmsfer-Transfer attempts were more 
(1980) managers work analysis & perceptions of after training) li!cly when the trainmv had pre-training discus- r 
a gram new idea. The management sryle and attitudes of v1 
.c c1 z 
training pro- transfer climate sions with boss and where the boss “sponsored” the 
the trainee’s boss were found to be the most 
important factor in attempt to transfer. 
34 Elementary Two-week hu- Perceptions of trans- Self (8 mos. Perceived on-rhe-job cha~Ke-Organizational 
school princi- man relations fer climate after training) factors (security, autonomy, power, & problem- 
pals program solving adequacy) mediated the perceived change P 8 
Miles (1965) 
4 associated with laboratory training.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 85 
leadership climate (Fleishman, 1953) and supervisory support (Huczynski 
& Lewis, 1980) to transfer criteria. 
Most of the training programs studied were interpersonal-skills (human- 
relations) programs. Given that behavioral changes in interpersonal rela- 
tions are difficult to operationalize, it is not surprising that the transfer 
criterion measure frequently used was a self-reported measure of effort to 
transfer (e.g., Baumgartel & Jeanpierre, 1972, Baumgartel et al., 1984). 
Many of the measures were gathered immediately or soon after the train- 
ing program was completed. A few studies, such as Hand et al., (1973), 
collected’setf- and supervisor reports of behavior change at more than one 
point in time after completion of the training program. 
There are two major problems with the research examining work- 
environment characteristics and transfer. The first issue is the static nature 
of the research in relation to the dynamic nature of the transfer process. 
The “strong” support for the importance of environmental characteristics to 
transfer is based solely on correlational studies in which causality can not 
be inferred. What is needed is the identification of key work-environment 
variables and the operationalization of these variables. For example, while 
research suggests that supervisory support is an important component af- 
fecting transfer, there is little attempt to understand the supervisory be- 
haviors that lead to perceptions of support by trainees. Only by clearly 
operationalizing work characteristics such as support can interventions be 
developed and their effects on generalization and maintenance of training 
be examined. 
A second issue is the criterion problem. The studies on environmental 
characteristics have typically used self-reports of behavioral change as the 
major measure of transfer. In fact, Baumgartel and his associates have often 
used an “intention to transfer” measure, which is actually a “motivation to 
transfer” measure rather than a measure of the extent of generalization 
and maintenance of trained skills. Only one study, Hand et al. (1973), 
examined maintenance of trained behaviors across time as they measured 
self-reports and supervisory reports of behavior 3 months and 18 months 
after completion of the training program. The results indicated no change 
in behavior at 3 months but changes in behavior after 18 months. Given 
only two data points in time and the fact that process measures were not 
taken, it is impossible to determine why these results were found. Research 
is needed in which measures are taken at multiple intervals to examine the 
interactive effects of work characteristics and time on skill utilization and 
skill decrements after completion of a training program.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
86 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Overall Critique of the Research 
While the limited number and the fragmented nature of the studies 
examining transfer are disturbing by themselves, a critical review of the 
existing research reveals that the samples, tasks, designs, and criteria used 
limit even further our ability to understand the transfer process. This review 
and critique of the research brings to mind a quote by Campbell (1971) 
that “we know a few things but not very much” (p. 593). Yet the review 
and critique has also led to the identification of specific problems with 
research conddcted in this area. The next section provides a more specific 
and detailed discussion of needed future directions for research into the 
transfer process. 
Future Research Directions 
The critique of the transfer literature indicates that there are a number 
of research gaps that need to be addressed. The following section sug- 
gests needed future research directions regarding training design, trainee 
characteristics, work environment, and criterion issues relevant to transfer. 
Training Design 
Of the transfer research completed, it is clear that the experimental 
work on improving the training process is the most developed and rigor- 
ously researched. The results of research on the effects of the learning 
principles of identical elements, general principles, conditions of practice, 
and stimulus variability on retention has been quite robust. Nevertheless, 
we are still confronted with the problem of generalizing from these results 
to actual organizational-training settings. 
In this section, several salient operational questions associated with 
the learning principles will be identified and illustrated with the use of 
a common organizational-training example. For this purpose, the case of 
training a new sales representative to sell computer equipment will be 
used. The salient operational questions will lead to a discussion of needed 
research questions. For illustrative purposes, operational issues relevant to 
principles of identical elements and stimulus variability will be highlighted. 
Identical elements. The principle of identical elements predicts that 
transfer will be maximized to the degree that there are identical stimulus 
and response elements in the training and transfer settings. The critical 
operational problem is: “What, specifically, in the training program must 
be made identical to the actual work environment to facilitate learning, 
retention, and transfer?” One aspect of similarity is the degree to which
<<<PAGE=25>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 87 
the actual conditions of the training program (surroundings, tasks, equip- 
ment) match the work environment (physical fidelity). A second aspect of 
similarity is the degree to which trainees attach similar meanings in the 
training and organizational context (psychological fidelity). While there is 
some evidence that physical fidelity is less important than psychological 
fidelity (Berkowitz & Donnerstein, 1982), the concepts and their relative 
importance for different training content and skills have been neglected in 
the industrial-training literature. 
To use the example of the new sales representative, one training tac- 
tic might be to replicate the relevant physical characteristics of the sales 
context exactly, including products, types of clients, office surroundings, 
and common distractions. Or, the training could focus on creating accurate 
reproduction of behavioral and cognitive processes that are necessary for 
performing the sales job. One could create training stimuli that necessitate 
the same responses and decision-making processes that the trainee should 
use in real sales situations. Research is needed to explore the type and 
level of fidelity needed to maximize transfer, given time and resource con- 
straints. Unfortunately, the industrial-training literature does not provide 
specifications for what constitutes optimal levels of physical and psycholog- 
ical fidelity in various types of industrial-training programs. It is necessary 
to understand the type of learning involved and the instructional events 
being considered before it is possible to choose the most effective learning 
procedures, or operationalization of principles. 
Stimulus variability. Maximizing stimulus variability is based on the 
notion that transfer is maximized when a variety of relevant training stimuli 
are employed (e.g., Ellis, 1965). Kazdin (1975) has noted that transfer is 
enhanced by developing a variety of situations or by using differentially 
reinforced stimuli to avoid the problem of training becoming attached to a 
narrow range of stimuli and responses. In this way, variability can serve to 
strengthen understanding of the applicability of the training to new situa- 
tions (Duncan, 1958) and to foster innovation and generalization of skills 
(Bandura, 1977). 
Operationalization of stimulus variability in organizational-training pro- 
grams is problematic. Consider the example of developing models for a 
behavior-modeling program on building interpersonal skills for a new sales 
representative. Modeling is intended to provide the majority of the cog- 
nitive aspects of the training, including attention to a modeling display, 
mental coding, and mental rehearsal (Decker & Nathan, 1985; A. Gold- 
stein & Sorcher, 1974). Yet, in behavior-modeling training, models are 
typically very simple and often redundant, and trainees are conditioned 
to think that the specific behaviors modeled and reinforced are universally 
applicable in handling problem situations on the job (Parry & Reich, 1984).
<<<PAGE=26>>>
88 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Three options for increasing stimulus variability in the modeling com- 
ponent of behavior-modeling training are character, situational, and model- 
competence variability. With character variability, a variety of different 
model characteristics (age, sex, organizational level) can be displayed. A 
second direction is to vary the situations modeled. For example, if one 
modeling tape entitled “assertive communication” portrays a salesperson 
assertively requesting a customer to reconsider a product, a second model 
could be shown that portrays a salesperson assertively requesting that the 
order department fill hidher order as soon as possible. A third way to 
increase variability is to vary the competence of the models. Models might 
be varied in terms of the extent to which they correctly demonstrate the key 
behaviors (high to low competence). Current behavior-modeling programs 
typically use effective models that are repeatedly shown. Yet, concept 
formation and problem-solving research suggest that negative models, in 
addition to positive models, can improve the process of retention and gen- 
eralizability of skills (e.g., Bourne, 1970; Bourne & Guy, 1968; Craik & 
Lockhart, 1972). 
Consequently, in the sales example, variability can be increased via 
different models, situations, and/ or levels of model effectiveness. Also, 
while the focus in this section has been on the model displays, it should 
be noted that behavior modeling is a multi-stage process that should also 
include instructor input, role playing, and feedback. Thus, stimulus vari- 
ability might also be introduced by the instructor (e.g., by providing varied 
examples or experiences) or by participants themselves in the role-playing 
scenarios. Unfortunately, at the present time, decisions regarding the focus 
and extent of stimulus variability in organizational-training programs such 
as behavior modeling must be based on intuition and conjecture rather than 
empirical support. 
Baldwin (1987) has begun applied work examining the impact of stim- 
ulus variability within a behavior-modeling program. Variability has been 
operationalized in terms of the inclusion of different situations and differ- 
ent levels of effectiveness (effective or ineffective modeling) for assertive 
behaviors displayed by a videotaped model. Results suggest that increases 
in the variability of model competence enhance trainee generalization of 
learned skills. Similarly, in a counseling setting, Cominsky (1982) used 
different therapists (character variability) for the same patient rather than 
continuous work with one therapist and found that the increased stimulus 
variability led to enhanced treatment gains. 
It is evident that there is much to be learned about the operational- 
ization of training-design principles. Extending beyond the domain of 
organizational-training literature, recent research in the areas of informa- 
tion processing and instructional theory holds promise for furthering our 
understanding of training-design issues.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 89 
Cormier (1984) contends that an information-processing perspective 
has implications for training design. He points out that the principle of 
identical elements can be reconceptualized by using what we know about 
encoding and retrieval processes. More specifically, a training stimulus is 
conceptualized as a collection of attributes or elements (E. Smith, Shoben, 
& Rips, 1974; Underwood, 1969) that vary in terms of redintegrative capac- 
ity (Flexser & Tulving, 1978). Redintegration refers to the capacity of one 
part of a stimulus complex to re-evoke or cue the entire complex (Cormier, 
1984). The redintegrative value of the available retrieval information is the 
critical determinant of its effectiveness. Applying this notion to transfer 
of training suggests that transfer should be the highest when the stimulus 
attributes with the highest redintegrative capacity are present in the task. 
In this view, it is not fidelity (either physical or psychological) per se that 
contributes to high positive transfer, but rather, the presence of retrieval 
information that has a high redintegrative capacity. Even low-fidelity train- 
ing stimuli can be effective in producing transfer by providing the trainee 
with the essential cuing relationships between the stimulus attributes of the 
task environment and the appropriate responses. 
While the task of identifying which attributes in training environments 
have high or low redintegrative value remains, the value of this conceptual- 
ization and framework for training is relatively straightforward. The fidelity 
of a training stimulus to the actual stimuli can be based on those attributes 
with high redintegrative value for correct responses. Those attributes with 
lower redintegrative value can be modified or eliminated without substan- 
tial loss of transfer (Cormier, 1984). These suggestions have considerable 
practical implications since high fidelity is often very difficult and expen- 
sive to create. 
Research on information processing also suggests new avenues for bet- 
ter understanding the design principle of stimulus variability. An informa- 
tion-processing perspective suggests that when individuals are exposed to a 
variety of related or similar material across different presentations, they can 
more easily integrate new material with that already in memory into a com- 
mon representation. From this perspective, stimulus variability is thought 
to aid transfer by providing a means by which an individual distinguishes 
relevant from irrelevant attributes (abstraction) and by enhancing the prob- 
ability that additional relevant attributes are encoded into the functional 
representation of the to-be-remembered item. Therefore, research on the 
extent to which variability induces the formation of higher-order concepts 
or facilitates the abstraction of critical dimensions of task performance and 
stimulus recognition is needed. 
The work of instructional theorists such as Gagne and Briggs (1979) 
is also relevant for transfer researchers interested in training-design issues. 
Gagne and Briggs developed a set of learning categories that permits them
<<<PAGE=28>>>
90 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
to analyze tasks and code behavior into one of several learning outcomes 
(e.g. intellectual skills, motor skills, cognitive strategies). Further, they 
have begun to examine each of the outcomes and determine the conditions 
of learning and instructional events that best support that learning outcome. 
While Gagne and Briggs (1979) focus on learning outcomes, a logical 
extension of the model would be the inclusion of the transfer outcomes of 
generalization and maintenance discussed earlier. 
To further illustrate this point, consider that much of the conduct be- 
ing modeled in training programs designed to teach motor skills is exactly 
prescribed. Therefore, it is desirable for trainees to adopt the modeled be- 
haviors in essentially the same fonn as they are portrayed (Bandura, 1977). 
For example, there is little leeway permitted in the proper way to safely 
operate a power tool or perform a surgical operation. Consequently, the 
objective is to have trainees mimic behavior as closely as possible. In the 
case of interpersonal or supervisory skills, however, the objective is more 
to inculcate generalizable rules or concepts (specifying a class of behaviors 
to be used, given certain stimuli) and not simply to enable the trainee to 
reproduce only those behaviors specifically modeled. In fact, in the train- 
ing of interpersonal and supervisory skills, the title “behavior” modeling 
is perhaps a misnomer. The training objective is to have observers extract 
the common attributes exemplified in modeled responses and formulate the 
rules for generating behavior with similar structural characteristics. Stated 
simply, the ultimate goal in complex skill-modeling training is to teach the 
trainee one or more principles (not strictly a list of behaviors) that will al- 
low him/ her to learn, generalize, and apply behaviors different from those 
modeled. It is clear that investigation directed at building a contingency 
model of transfer-oriented instructional design would provide information 
important for developing training environments more conducive to positive 
transfer. 
Trainee Characteristics 
A limited amount of research has examined ability, motivational, and 
personality characteristics for their effects on transfer. We need research 
that more clearly identifies the important trainee characteristics and applies 
them in organizational settings. An interactive approach to research is also 
needed to begin testing for optimal matches between trainee characteristics 
and training-program design and content. 
The research on ability and personality characteristics has failed to 
identify those factors that are most critical in a training context. In addition, 
the focus of this research has been on distinguishing between individuals 
who are successful and those who are unsuccessful in transferring skills
<<<PAGE=29>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 91 
rather than on placing individuals into programs that optimally match their 
characteristics. 
Empirical evidence suggests that need for achievement (Baumgartel & 
Jeanpierre, 1972; Baumgartel et al., 1984), locus of control (Noe & Schmitt, 
1986), and general intelligence (Nee1 & Dunn, 1960; Robertson & Downs, 
1979) can be factors in learning and transferring skills. While further 
identification of key individual-difference variables is needed, there is a 
critical need for the development of a research perspective that attempts to 
understand the relationships of trainee characteristics and training-program 
design to transfer. The major application of the existing research on stable 
indivdual differences is that transfer can be facilitated by carefully selecting 
individuals who have certain personality and/ or ability characteristics for 
the training program. 
Given that in many organizations selection of trainees is not a viable 
option (everyone must be trained), researchers must begin a program of 
research on placement, rather than selection, of individuals into the type of 
program that is optimal (in terms of transfer), given certain trainee char- 
acteristics. The existing research does not speak to the issue of placement 
because the instructional methodology (e.g., lecture, case study, discus- 
sion) of specific types of training programs (e.g., assertiveness, human 
relations, time management) have been held constant in the studies com- 
pleted. Studies are needed in which personality/ ability factors are measured 
and individuals placed into training programs under different conditions of 
instructional methodology to determine which “types” of individuals best 
match which types of programs for effective transfer of skills to the job. 
Cronbach and Snow (1977) have labelled this concern for providing 
each trainee with the appropriate model of instruction the “aptitude-treat- 
ment interaction.” When an aptitude-treatment interaction is found, trainees 
should be assigned differentially to alternative training methods to maxi- 
mize the probability of transfer. Similarly, we posit that a “personality- 
treatment interaction” would call for assigning trainees with external locus 
of control, for example, to a different method of instruction than trainees 
with an internal locus of control. As noted by I. Goldstein (1986), the 
examination of how individual differences moderate the effectiveness of 
different training methods requires refinement of individual-difference mea- 
sures and the development of a typology of instructional methodology of 
the sort proposed by Gagne and Briggs (1979) discussed earlier. 
Research examining motivational issues of transfer lacks a coherent 
framework for understanding factors affecting the transfer process. We 
propose that the expectancy model (Lawler, 1973; Vroom, 1964) provides 
just such a useful heuristic for integrating research on transfer motivation 
and for leading to new directions for transfer research.
<<<PAGE=30>>>
92 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
The expectancy model provides a useful heuristic for understanding 
transfer because of its interactive perspective on motivation. Perceptions- 
and therefore motivation-are affected by both individual and work-environ- 
ment factors, which must be interpreted by an individual and translated 
into choices among various behavioral options. This perspective has not 
been adequately acknowledged in the transfer literature: few studies have 
attempted to examine multiple influences on motivation to learn or motiva- 
tion to transfer skills. From the expectancy framework (Lawler, 1973), it 
can be seen that there are numerous factors (locus of control, self esteem, 
past experience, communications from others) that need to be examined 
for their relevance to the transfer process. For example, social interaction 
regarding the usefulness of a training program may affect an individual’s 
expectancies regarding the relationship between doing well in the program 
and attaining valued outcomes. 
Second, the expectancy framework stresses the importance of a dy- 
namic perspective on motivation. Individuals are seen as active informa- 
tion processors who adapt their attitudes, behaviors, and beliefs to their 
social context and to their own past experiences. Organizational proce- 
dures and reward systems, as well as information obtained from interactions 
with peers and superiors in the work environment, affect an individual’s 
construction of the reality within the work setting, including perceptions 
of expectancies (Daft & Weick, 1984). This implies that new experiences, 
once integrated into a person’s construction of reality, can result in changes 
in these expectancies. Unfortunately, most studies examining motivational 
factors and transfer have examined motivation from a static perspective, 
gathering information at one period of time. Similarly, all the research on 
motivational effects on transfer has focused on the effects within a single 
training program. Given that expectancies can change over time, important 
issues that have not been researched are the cumulative effects of past train- 
ing experiences on an individual’s expectancies and subsequent motivation 
to transfer currently trained skills to the job. 
Environmental Characteristics 
Progress in the resexch on environmental characteristics requires the 
operationalization of key variables such as climate and supervisory support 
at a level of specificity that allows for the development of interventions for 
changing environmental characteristics and testing their effects on transfer 
of training. I. Goldstein (1985) has discussed environmental characteristics 
as either facilitating or inhibiting the transfer of training, and more research 
is needed to identify and operationalize variables that significantly facilitate 
or inhibit transfer. Also needed is research that examines the effects of 
environmental characteristics from a levels-of-analysis perspective. Such a
<<<PAGE=31>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 93 
perspective would lead to the examination of the effects of differences in 
climate or support across workgroups, and even across organizations. 
Supervisory support. Supervisory support for training has been cited 
as a key work-environment variable affecting the transfer process (e.g., see 
Fleishman, 1953; House, 1968). Employees look towards their supervisor 
for important information regarding how to work successfully within the 
social environment of the organization. As Huczynski & Lewis (1980), 
state, employees who perceive that a training program is important to the 
supervisor will be more motivated to attend, learn, and transfer trained 
skills to the job. While support is critical, development of a concept of 
*hat is meant by support has lagged far behind anecdotal evidence of the 
importance of support. In addition, those trained skills and behaviors most 
affected by supervisory support have not been examined. 
Supervisory support is clearly a multidimensional construct, which 
could include encouragement to attend, goal-setting activities, reinforce- 
ment activities, and modeling of behaviors (Baumgartel et al., 1984; Eddy, 
Glad, & Wilkins, 1967; Huczynski & Lewis, 1980; Maddox, 1987). A 
supervisor can demonstrate encouragement to attend through both verbal 
and nonverbal cues. For example, a supervisor may demonstrate a lack of 
knowledge about the content of the training program or show his/ her reluc- 
tance to allow subordinates to attend by rescheduling training when minor 
crises arise in the department. In relation to goal setting, supervisors can 
discuss the content and benefits of the program and set goals prior to (fo- 
cus on improving these skills) and subsequent to (action plans for applying 
skills) attendance in the program (Wexley & Baldwin, 1986). Remforce- 
ment refers to the provision of rewards for using behaviors developed in 
the training program. Supervisors can first insure that trainees have the 
opportunity to use the new skills in which they are trained. Then, the su- 
pervisor can provide praise, better assignments, and other extrinsic rewards 
for trainees who utilize their new skills. Reinforcement processes can also 
work in reverse; for example, a supervisor who ignores the use of a new 
skill or actively attacks the use of new skills can cause the trained behaviors 
to “extinguish.” Finally, modeling has been shown to be a powerful force 
in affecting behavioral change (Sims & Manz, 1982). Employees tend to 
imitate supervisors who have power over them in order to gain rewards. 
Therefore, the extent to which the supervisor behaves in ways congruent 
with the training objectives will have a major impact on transfer of trained 
skills by subordinates. 
Empirical work is needed so that the supervisory-support factors that 
have the greatest impact on transfer can be identified. With this infor- 
mation, interventions can be developed to change managerial behaviors to 
increase supervisory support prior to subordinate attendance in a specific 
training program.
<<<PAGE=32>>>
94 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Levels-of-analysis issues. The existing research on influences of the 
work environment on transfer has been correlational in nature. Perceptions 
of supervisory support by individual trainees are correlated with self- or 
other reports of transfer of trained skills to the job. Such measures, which 
are often collected soon after completion of the training program, are clearly 
inadequate for developing a base of knowledge about the transfer process. 
In addition to serious criterion problems, this type of study is problematic 
as it focuses solely on the individual level of analysis. 
The literature describing research into climate (B. Schneider, 1983) in- 
dicates that there are often reliable differences in level of support and other 
climate factors across workgroups within an organization as well as across 
different organizations. Organizations and departments within organiza- 
tions can be differentiated in terms of goal orientation, time orientation, 
formality of structure, and interpersonal orientation (Lawrence & Lorsch, 
1969). For example, an organization’s philosophy about its people (inter- 
personal orientation) can have important implications for the transferring of 
skills from a human-relations training program. This perspective calls for 
research at the organizational level of analysis in which the same training 
program is offered across multiple organizations. Similarly, from a group 
level of analysis, a research and development department with a long time 
perspective may be more supportive of interpersonal-skills training pro- 
grams that do not have immediate, objective payoffs while production de- 
partments under time pressures would be less supportive of such programs. 
Consequently, an organization-wide training program for improving in- 
terpersonal skills will most likely lead to different amounts of transfer 
across departments, depending on the support or congruence of the training 
program with the climate or philosophy of the various departments within 
the organization. An examination of the transfer literature reveals no ex- 
isting attempts to empirically examine the effects of work environmental 
characteristics on transfer from a levels-of-analysis perspective. 
Criterion Issues 
The conditions of transfer include generalization of skills or behaviors 
learned in the training pogram and the maintenance of those skills and 
behaviors over a specified period of time. The review of the transfer litera- 
ture reveals that research has concentrated on the training-input factors that 
might affect transfer rather than focusing on the appropriate measurement 
of the conditions of transfer. This neglect of criterion issues is surprising, 
given the long-standing concern of applied psychologists over the “criterion 
problem” (Cascio, 1982; Wallace, 1965). The usefulness of the empirical 
research on transfer is severely limited by the use of criterion measures
<<<PAGE=33>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 95 
that are deficient and contaminated. Advancement in criterion measure- 
ment requires a greater appreciation of the issues relevant to measuring 
generalization and maintenance of skills and behaviors. 
Generalization. To examine the successful generalization of trained 
skills or behaviors, a clear identification of the knowledge, skills, and be- 
haviors expected to be transferred to the job is needed. Then a systematic 
collection of the appropriate information is needed to make effective train- 
ing decisions related to the value of various training programs (I. Goldstein, 
1986) and to systematically reassess training needs for possible redesign 
of the training program (Ford & Wroten, 1984). 
To develop ippropriate measures of generalization requires a linkage 
of needs-assessment information, the specification of training objectives, 
and the determination of criteria to use to determine how much of the 
knowledge, skills, and behaviors learned in training are transferred to the 
actual job. In addition, the relevance of the skills learned for effective 
job performance must be determined. While these suggested linkages are 
certainly not new, few attempts have been made in the transfer literature 
to list the criteria of success that one should expect on the basis of training 
objectives and training evaluation criteria. Such an approach is critical to 
the development of an empirical base regarding transfer. 
Once the knowledge, skills, and behaviors that should be exhibited on 
the job are specified, the next step is to determine baselines that describe 
how often we can expect trainees to exhibit those knowledges, skills, and 
behaviors on the job. A task analysis is needed to detail the importance and 
frequency of the tasks performed on the job. The tasks that are affected 
by the trained behaviors and skills can then be identified. Other analysis 
techniques, such as the collection of critical incidents, can help provide a 
taxonomy of situations that call for the use of the trained skills or behaviors. 
The combination of task importance and frequency and a taxonomy of 
situations can provide a baseline for determining how often one should 
expect trained behaviors to be exhibited on the job. This would force the 
explicit recognition that an important component in developing transfer 
measures of generalization is the identification of how often and in what 
situations a trainee could reasonably be expected to demonstrate the trained 
behaviors or skills. 
Maintenance. While generalization refers to the extent to which trained 
skills and behaviors are exhibited in the transfer setting, maintenance con- 
cerns the length of time that trained skills and behaviors continue to be 
used on the job. Decreases in the use of trained skills on the job could be 
a result of skill decrements over time. Or, the decrease in use could be 
a result of decreased motivation to use the skills due to constraints in the 
work environment or a lack of rewards for using the skills. Regardless,
<<<PAGE=34>>>
96 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
this perspective requires a highly dynamic approach to the study of transfer 
that is lacking in the literature. 
Such a dynamic perspective has been taken in research examining the 
amount of learning that occurs in training or educational settings over time. 
Researchers in the learning field have represented the dynamic process of 
learning in the form of “learning curves” (e.g., see Bass & Vaughan, 1966). 
Learning curves represent how well a certain skill is learned and the speed 
with which an individual acquires that skill. The kind of task being trained, 
the design of the training program, and the characteristics of the trainee 
have been found to have major impacts on how quickly an individual attains 
the level of performance that meets established standards (Blum & Naylor, 
1968). 
Similarly, we posit that a useful way to think about maintenance of 
trained knowledge, skills, and behaviors is through the use of “maintenance 
curves,” which represent the changes that occur in the level of knowledge, 
skills, or behaviors exhibited in the transfer setting as a function of time 
elapsed from completion of the training program. The development of 
a maintenance curve requires the consideration of three issues. First, a 
baseline of the level of knowledge, skill, or behavior that a trainee exhibits 
prior to and at the end of the training program must be established. The 
amount of differentiation between pre- and post-training levels indicates the 
decrement that must occur to return to the pre-training baseline. Second, an 
adequate time interval that allows for the determination of overall trends 
or variations in skill or behavior levels must be established. Third, at 
multiple time intervals, measurements must be taken to examine changes 
in the shape and slope of the maintenance curve over time. 
The five types of maintenance curve presented in Figure 2 illustrate 
the points made above. Type A demonstrates a curve in which there is 
a slow tapering off of a trained skill over time towards the pre-training 
baseline. This indicates the successful transfer of skills that is maintained 
over time but is in need of a “booster” session at some point to return to 
post-training baseline conditions. Type B indicates a failure in transfer as 
the post-training level drops immediately upon returning to the work site. 
In this case the person has demonstrated an ability to use the skill appropri- 
ately (based on performance in the training) but immediately reverts back 
to old ways of doing things on the job, for whatever reason. The third 
example, Type C, demonstrates an attempt by the trainee to use the skills 
trained on the job for a period of time, which is followed by a sharp decline 
in the use of a skill towards the pre-training baseline. This decline could 
occur due to the lack of success in using a trained skill on the job, perceived 
lack of support for using the skill, or some combination. Type D highlights 
the situation in which a trainee’s learning and retention of trained material 
was minimal. In this case, there is little chance for the skills to generalize
<<<PAGE=35>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 
Pre 
Training - 
Level 
97 
Pre 
Training - 
Level 
Post I 
Training -- 
Level 
Training 
Level 
Training 
Level 
Pre 
Training - 
Level 
Time Time 
Training 
Level 
Training 
Level 
Time 
Figure 2: Types of Transfer Maintenance Curves
<<<PAGE=36>>>
98 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
and be exhibited on the job. Finally, Type E demonstrates a situation in 
which the skill level actually increases over time once back on the job. 
For example, a supervisor may learn some behavioral modeling skills in 
giving performance feedback. Positive reactions by subordinates to the 
skills exhibited by the trainee once back on the job may result in more 
opportunities to exhibit those behaviors and an increase in the level of 
performance of those behaviors over time. 
It is highly probable that the shape or “type” of maintenance curve 
found is affected by the type of skills trained (e.g., behavioral, psychomo- 
tor, cognitive), the proficiency level or amount of material retained by 
trainees at the completion of training, and supportiveness in the work envi- 
ronment for applying the new skill. For example, it might be predicted that 
psychomotor skills (other factors being constant) will be maintained over 
a longer period of time than will behavioral skills. In addition, mainte- 
nance curves can be examined at the individual level or the group level of 
analysis. For example, similarity of individual maintenance curves within 
a department would suggest a work-environment effect. Given reliable 
measures, a large variance in maintenance curves across individuals within 
a department would suggest individual-characteristics effects. Similarly, 
maintenance curves for different departments undergoing the same training 
program could be examined to identify differences in patterns. Then fac- 
tors in the work environment that have systematic effects on the patterns 
found through the maintenance curves could be identified. 
Conclusion 
This paper has provided a review and critique of the transfer research 
reported in the organizational-training literature. Future research to increase 
our understanding of the factors affecting transfer has been outlined, and 
it has been stated that we must take into account a variety of factors and 
linkages that, to date, have not been adequately examined. One important 
step in doing this would be to take a more eclectic orientation toward 
transfer by focusing on a number of other literatures neglected by industrial- 
training researchers. 
For example, with respect to the issue of conducive transfer environ- 
ments, the literatures in the areas of counseling (Spevak, 1981), and psy- 
chotherapy (A. Goldstein & Kanfer, 1979) are potentially rich sources of 
ideas for testing and application to organizational settings. To illustrate, 
researchers in those areas have investigated the value of “buddy systems” 
for facilitating transfer (Barrett, 1978; Karol & Richards, 1978). A buddy 
system refers to two trainees being paired to reinforce each other in or- 
der to maintain learning, provide advice, and be alert for signs of relapse 
in themselves and the buddy. In a study of habitual smoking reduction,
<<<PAGE=37>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 99 
Karol and Richards (1978) found that the buddy system condition exhibited 
substantially less relapse to smoking than did a control condition. 
Another strategy investigated in a counseling context has been that of 
“booster sessions” (Ashby & Wilson, 1977; Kingsley & Wilson, 1977). A 
booster session is an extension of training and usually involves periodic 
face-to-face contact of either a planned or unplanned nature between trainee 
and trainer. An obesity study by Kingsley and Wilson (1977) found that 
the inclusion of booster sessions at 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-week intervals induced 
a significantly greater percentage of maintained weight loss than did the 
absence of boosters. . 
Marx (198i) has begun a program of research adapting a transfer strat- 
egy termed “relapse prevention,” which was originally designed and suc- 
cessfully implemented in the treatment of addictive behaviors (Marlatt & 
J. Gordon, 1980; Perri, Shapiro, Ludwig, Twentyman, & McAdoo, 1984) 
to industrial settings. As Marx has noted, this approach seems particularly 
applicable as a post-training transfer strategy for industrial training. The 
relapse prevention model consists of both cognitive and behavioral compo- 
nents designed to facilitate the long-term maintenance of learned behaviors 
by teaching individuals to understand and cope with the problem of relapse. 
In the area of educational psychology, Wlodkowski (1985) recently 
presented a comprehensive list of strategies for enhancing adult motivation 
to learn. While the author’s focus was primarily on learning (not trans- 
fer) outcomes, and empirical evidence presented was quite limited, such 
work could serve as a departure point for empirical investigations aimed at 
investigating transfer in organizational contexts. 
Aside from exploring other literatures, it is also readily apparent that 
we need to begin research that takes a more interactive perspective. Most 
of the existing research has focused exclusively on one input factor (de- 
sign, trainee, work environment) rather than attempting to develop and test 
a framework that incorporates the more complex interactions among these 
training inputs. Consequently, we have a quite limited knowledge base 
about which input factors have the greatest impact on transfer under vari- 
ous conditions (such as type of organization and type of training program). 
A recent paper by I. Goldstein and Musicante (1985) is one of the first 
attempts to bring together several of the different factors usually examined 
independently (principles of learning, environment characteristics) and ap- 
ply them together to an organizationally relevant (rater training) context. 
In addition, training research cannot continue to ignore the job rele- 
vance of the training content as a critical factor affecting what is learned, 
retained, and transferred to the work setting. Transfer research has implic- 
itly assumed the job relevance of the training content without attempting to 
specify what the desired skills or behaviors are or what the training content 
should be to insure skill acquisition. When training content is not valid,
<<<PAGE=38>>>
100 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
trainees may actually be successful in learning and transfemng knowledge 
and skills that are inappropriate for effective job performance. Ford and 
Wroten (1984) and I. Goldstein (1986) have developed techniques for ex- 
amining the content validity of training programs. Information from these 
analyses can then be used to refine training content and to increase the job 
relevance of the training program. In future studies on transfer, researchers 
should provide evidence of the job relevance of the training material before 
examining the effects of other input factors on generalization and mainte- 
nance of trained skills. 
Perhaps most importantly for the present, there is a critical need to 
conduct research on transfer with more relevent criterion measures of gen- 
eralization and maintenance. Conclusions from the existing research are 
problematic, given the relatively short-term, single-source, perceptual data 
base that has been created. It is hoped that the model presented, the review 
conducted, and the suggestions given in this paper will help spur further 
efforts at examining transfer from a broader and more dynamic perspective. 
REFERENCES 
Adam JA. (1955). Multiple vs. single problem training in human problem solving. Journal 
of E.vperimental Psychology, 48, 15-18, 
Ashby WA, Wilson GT. (1977). Behavior therapy for obesity: Booster sessions and long-term 
maintenance of weight loss. Behavior Research and Theory, 15, 45 1463. 
Atkinson RC. (1972). Ingredients for a theory of instruction. American Psychologist, 27, 
921-93 1, 
Atwater SK. (1953). Proactive inhibition and associative facilitation as affected by degree of 
prior learning. Journal of E.rperimenta1 Psychology, 46, 40&404. 
Baldwin TT. (1987, August). The effect of negative models on learning and transfer from 
behavior modeling: A rest of stimulus variabilily. Presented at the 47th annual meeting 
of the Academy of Management, New Orleans, LA. 
Bandura A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Barrett CJ. (1978). Effectiveness of widow’s groups in facilitating change. Journal of Con- 
sulting and Clinical psycho log.^, 46, 2@3 1. 
Bass BM. Vaughan JA. (1966). Training in industry: The management of learning. Belmont. 
CA: Wadswonh. 
Baumgartel ti., Jeanpierre F. (1972). Applying new knowledge in the back-home setting: A 
study of Indian managers’ adoptive efforts. Journal of Applied Behaviorul Science, 
8(6), 674-694. 
Baumgartel H, Reynolds M, Pathan R. (1984). How personality and organizational-climate 
variables moderate the effectiveness of management development programmes: A 
review and some recent research findings. Management and Labour Studies, 9, 1-16. 
Baumgartel H, Sullivan GJ, Dunn LE. (1978). How organizational climate and personality 
affect the pay-off from advanced management training sessions. Kansas Business 
Review, 5, 1-10. 
Berkowitz L, Donnerstein E. (1982). External validity is more than skin deep: Some answers 
to criticisms of laboratory experiments. American Psychologist, 37, 245-257. 
Blum ML, Naylor JC. (1968). Industrial psychology: Its theoretical and social foundations. 
New York: Harper Row.
<<<PAGE=39>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 101 
Bourne LE. (1970). Knowing and using concepts. Psychological Review, 77, 546556. 
Bourne LE, Guy DE. (1968). Learning conceptual rules: The role of positive and negative 
instances. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77, 488494. 
Briggs GE, Naylor JC. (1962). The relative efficiency of several training methods as a function 
of transfer task complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 505-5 12. 
Briggs GE, Waters LK. (1958). Training and transfer as a function of component interaction. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56, 492-500. 
Callentine MF, Warren JM. (1955). Learning sets in human concept formation. Psychological 
Reports, 1, 363-367. 
Campbell JP. (197 I). Personnel training and development. Annual Review of Psychology, 22, 
565-602. 
Campbell JP, Ducnette MD, Lawler EE, Weick KE. (1970). Managerial behavior, perfor- 
mance and eflectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Cascio WF. (1982). Costing human resources: The financial impact of behavior in organi- 
zations. Boston: Kent Publishing. 
Cominsky IJ. (1982). Transfer of training in counselor education programs: A study of the use 
of stimulus variability and the provision of general principles to enhance the transfer 
of the skill of reflection of feeling. Dissertation Abstracts International, 43( I-A), 76. 
Cormier S. (1984). nansfer of training: An interpretive revicw. (Technical Report No. 608). 
Alexandria, VA: Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences. 
Crafts LW. (1935). Transfer as related to number of common elements. Journal of General 
Craik FIM, Lockhan RS. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. 
Crannell CW. (1956). Transfer in problem solution as related to the type of training. The 
Cronbach LJ, Snow RE. (1977). Aptitudes and instructional methods. New York: Irvington. 
Daft RL, Weick KE. (1984). Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems. 
Decker PJ. (1980). Effects of symbolic coding and rehearsal in behavior modeling training. 
Decker PJ. (1982). The enhancement of behavior modeling training of supervisory skills by 
Decker PJ, Nathan BR. (1985). Behavior modeling training. New York: Praeger Publishers. 
Digman JM. (1959). Growth of a motor skill as a function of distribution of practice. Journal 
Downs S. (1970). Predicting training potential. Personnel Management, 2, 2628. 
Duncan CP. (1958). Transfer after training with single versus multiple tasks. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 55, 63-72. 
Duncan CP, Underwood BJ. (1953). Transfer in motor learning as a function of degree of 
first task learning and inter-task similarity. Journal of Experimenial Psychology, 46, 
445452. 
Eddy WB, Glad DD, Wilkins DD. (1967). Organizational effects on training. Training and 
Development Journal, 22(2), 3643. 
Eden D, Ravid G. (1982). Pygmalion versus self-expectancy: Effects of instructor and self- 
expectancy on trainee performance. Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor- 
mance, 30, 351-364. 
Eden D, Shani AB. (1982). Pygmalion goes to boot camp: Expectancy leadership and trainee 
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 194-199. 
Ellis HC. (1965). The transfer of learning. New York: Macmillan. 
Fleishman E. ( 1953). Leadership climate, human relations training, and supervisory behavior. 
Psyrhology, IS, 147-158. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684. 
Journal of General Psychology, 54, 3-14. 
Academy of Management Review, 9, 284295. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 65, 627-634. 
the inclusion of retention processes. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 32, 323-332. 
of Experimental Psychology, 57, 3 10-3 16. 
PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 6, 205-222.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
1 02 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Flexser AJ, Tulving E. (1978). Retrieval independence in recognition and recall. Psycholog- 
Ford JK, Wroten SP. (1984). Introducing new methods for conducting training evaluation to 
Forgus RH, Schwartz RJ. (1957). Efficient retention and transfer as affected by learning 
Fryer DH, Edgerton HA. (1950). Research concerning off-the-job training. PERSONNEL PSY- 
Gagne RM. (1962). Miltary training and principles of learning. American Psychologist, 17, 
83-9 1. 
Gagne RM, Baker K, Foster H. (1950). On the relation between similarity and transfer 
of training in the learning of discriminative motor tasks. Psychological Review, 57, 
Gagne RM, Briggs LJ. (1979). Principles of instructional design. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
Winston. 
Gagne RM, Foster H. (1949). Transfer to a motor skill from practice on a pictured represen- 
tation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 39, 342-54. 
Ghiselli EE. (1966). The validity of occupafional aptitude tests. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons. 
Georgenson DL. (1982). The problem of transfer calls for partnership. Training and Devel- 
opment Journal, 36( lo), 75-78. 
Goldbeck RA, Bernstein BB, Hillix WA, Marx MH. (1957). Application of the half split 
technique to problem solving tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53, 330- 
338. 
Goldstein AP, Kanfer FH. (1979). Maximizing treatment gains: Transfer enhancement in 
psychotherapy. New York: Academic Press. 
Goldstein AP, Sorcher M. (1974). Changing supervisory behavior. New York: Pergamon 
Press. 
Goldstein IL. (1980). Training in work organizations. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 
229-212. 
Goldstein IL. (1985, August). Organization analysis and evaluation models. Presented at the 
1985 meeting of the American Psychological Association, Los Angeles, CA. 
Goldstein IL. (1986). Training in Organizations: Needs assessment, development and evalu- 
ation. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Goldstein IL, Musicante GA. (1985). The applicability of a training transfer model to issues 
concerning rater training. In Locke E (Ed.), Generalizing from laboratory to field 
settings (pp. 83-98). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. 
Gordon LV. (1955). Time in training a5 a criterion of success in radio code. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 39, 3 1 1-3 13. 
Gordon ME, Cohen SL. (1 973). Training behavior as a predictor of trainability. PERSONNEL 
PSYCHOLOGY, 26, 261-272. 
Gordon ME, Kleiman LS. (1976). The prediction of trainability using a work sample test and 
an aptitude test: A direct comparison. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 29, 243-253. 
Hagman JD, Rose AM. (1983). Retention of military tasks: A review. Human Factors, 25(2), 
Hand HH, Richards MD, Slocum JM. (1973). Organization climate and the effectiveness of 
a human relations program. Academy of Management Journal, 16, 185-195. 
Haselrud GM, Meyers S. (1958). The transfer value of given and individually derived prin- 
ciples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 49, 293-298. 
Hendrickson G, Schroeder W. (1941). Transfer of training in learning to hit a submerged 
target. Journal of Educational Psychology, 32, 20621 3. 
ical Review, 85, 153-171. 
program redesign. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 37, 65 1466. 
method. Journal of Psychologj, 43, 135-139. 
CHOLOGY, 3, 262-284. 
67-79. 
199-2 13.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 103 
Hicks WD, Klimoski RJ. (1987). Entry into training programs and its effects on training 
outcomes: A field experiment. Academy of Management Journal, 30, 542-552. 
Hilgard'ER, Edren RD, Irvine RP. (1954). Errors in transfer following learning with under- 
standing: Further studies with Katona's card-trick experiments. Journal of Experi- 
mental Psychology, 47, 457-464. 
Hilgard ER, Irvine RP, Whipple JE. (1953). Rote memorization, understanding and transfer: 
An extension of Katona's card-trick experiments. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
46, 288-292. 
Hinrichs JR. (1976). Personnel Training. In, Dunnette MD (Ed.), Handbook of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology (pp. 861-88). Chicago: Rand McNally. 
Holding DH. (1965). Principles of training. London: Pergamon Press. 
house RJ. (1968i. Leadelship training: Some dysfunctional consequences. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 12.~556-57 1. 
Huczynski AA, Lewis JW. (1980). An empirical study into the learning transfer process in 
management training. Journal of Management Sfudies, 17, 227-240. 
Judd CH. (1908). The relation of special training and general intelligence. Educational 
Review, 36, 4248. 
Karol RL, Richards CS. (1978, November). Making treatment effects last: An investigation 
of maintenance strategies for smoking reduction. Presented at the meeting of the 
Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy, Chicago, IL. 
Kazdin AE. (1975). Behavior modification in applied settings. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press. 
Kingsley RG, Wilson GT. (1977). Behavior therapy for obesity: A comparative investigation 
of long-term efficacy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 288-298. 
Kirkpatrick DL. (1967). Evaluation of training. In Craig RL, Bittel LR (Eds.), Training and 
development handbook (pp. 87-1 12). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Komacki J, Heinzemann AT, Lawson L. (1980). Effects of training and feedback: Component 
analysis of a behavioral safety program. Journal of Applied Psychology, 65, 261-70. 
Lawler EE 111. (1973). Motivation in work organizations. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Lawrence PR, Lorsch JW. (1 969). Organization and environment: Managing differentiation 
and integration. Homewood, IL: Irwin. 
MacPherson SJ, Dees V, Grindley GC. (1948). The effect of knowledge of results on per- 
formance: 11. Some characteristics of very simple skills. Quarterly Journal of Exper- 
imental Psychology, I, 68-78. 
Maddox M. (1987). Environmental and supervisory infEuence.7 on the transfer of training. 
Unpublished manuscript, Michigan State University, E. Lansing, MI. 
Mandler G. (1954). Transfer of training as a function of response overlearning. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 47, 41 1417. 
Mandler G, Heinemann SH. (1956). Effects of overlearning of a verbal response on transfer 
of training. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52, 3946. 
Marlatt GA, Gordon JR. (1980). Determinants of relapse: Implications for the maintenance 
of behavior change. In Davidson PO, Davidson SM (Eds.), Behavioral medicine: 
Changing health lifestyles (pp. 410-452). New York: Brunner/ Mazel. 
Marx RD. (1982). Relapse prevention for managerial training: A model for maintenance of 
behavioral change. Academy of Management Review, 7,433441. 
McGehee W. (1948). Cutting training waste. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, I, 331-340. 
McGehee W, Thayer PW. (1961). Training in Business and Industry. New York: Wiley. 
Michalak DF. (1981). The neglected half of training. Training and Development Journal, 
Miles MB. (1965). Changes during and following laboratory training: A clinical-experimental 
Morrisett L, Hovland CI. (1959). A comparison of three varieties of training in human problem 
35(5), 22-28. 
study. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 1, 215-242. 
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 52-55.
<<<PAGE=42>>>
104 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 
Mosel JN. (1957). Why training programs fail to cany over. Personnel, 4, 5M4. 
Naylor JC, Briggs GE. (1963). The effect of task complexity and task organization on 
the relative efficiency of part and whole training methods. Journal of Experimental 
Nee1 RG, Dunn RE. (1960). Predicting success in supervisory training programs by the use 
of psychological tests. Journal of Applied Psychology, 44, 358-360. 
Newstrom JW. (1 984, August). A role-faker/ time dijjerentiafed integration of transfer strafe- 
gies. Presented at the 1984 meeting of the American Psychological Association, 
Toronto, Ontario. 
Noe R. (1986). Trainees’ attributes and attitudes: Neglected influences on training effective- 
ness. Academy of Management Review, II, 736-749. 
Noe RA, Schmitt N. (1986). The influence of trainee attitudes on training effectiveness: Test 
of a model. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 39, 497-523. 
Parry SB, Reich LR. (1984). An uneasy look at behavior modeling. Training and Developrnenr 
Journal, 30(3), 57-62. 
Perri MG, Shapiro RM, Ludwig Wk’, Twentyman CT, McAdoo WG. (1984). Maintenance 
strategies for the treatment of obesity: An evaluation of relapse prevention training 
and post treatment contact by mail and telephone. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 52, 404-41 3. 
Reber RA, Wallin JA. (1984). The effects of training, goal setting, and knowledge of results 
on safe behavior: A component analysis. Academy of Management Journal, 27, 544- 
560. 
Reynolds B, Bilodeau IM. (1952). Acquisition and retention of three psychomotor tests as 
a function of distribution of practice during acquisition. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 44, 19-26. 
Robertson I, Downs S. (1979). Learning and the prediction of performance: Development of 
trainability testing in the United Kingdom. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 42-50. 
Robinson JC. (1984). You should have sent my boss. Training, 21(2), 4547. 
Ryman DH, Biersner RJ. (1975). Attitudes predictive of diving training success. PERSONNEL 
Schendel JD, Hagman JD. (1982). On sustaining procedural skills over a prolonged retention 
interval. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 605-610. 
Schneider B. (1983). Interactional psychology and organizational behavior. In Cummings LL, 
Staw BM (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior (Vol. 5, pp. 1-31). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 
Schneider W. ( 1985). Training high performance skills: Fallacies and guidelines. Human 
Factors, 27(3), 285-300. 
Sims HP, Manz CC. (1982, January). Modeling influences on employee behavior. Personnel 
Journal, pp. 45-5 I. 
Shore E, Sechrest L. (1961). Concept attainment as a function of positive instances presented. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 52, 303-307 
Smith EE, Shoben EJ, Rips LJ. (1974). Structure and process in semantic memory: A feature 
model for semantic decisions. Psychological Review, 81, 214-241. 
Smith MC, Downs S. (1 975). Trainability assessments for apprentice selection in shipbuilding. 
Journal of Occupational Psychology, 48, 39-43. 
Spevak PA. (1981). Maintenance of therapy gains: Strategies, problems and promise. JSAS 
Cafalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 11, 35. (MS. No. 2255). 
Taylor CW. (1952). Pretesting saves training costs. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 5,213-239. 
Taylor EK, Tajen C. ( 1948). Selection for training: Tabulating equipment operators. PERSON- 
Thorndike EL. (1927). The law of effect. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 212-222. 
Psychology, 65, 217-224. 
PSYCHOLOGY, 28, 181-188. 
NEL PSYCHOLQSY, 1, 341-348.
<<<PAGE=43>>>
BALDWIN AND FORD 105 
Thorndike EL, Woodworth RS. (1901). The influence of improvement in one mental function 
upon the efficiency of other functions. Psychological Review. 8, 247-261. 
Tracy WR. (1984). Designing training and development systems. New York: Amacom. 
Trost A. (1982). They may love it but will they use it? Training and Development Journal. 
Trowbridge MH, Cason H. (1932). An experimental study of Thomdike’s theory of learning. 
Journal of General Psychology, 7, 245-260. 
Tubiana JH, Ben-Shakhar G. (1982). An objective group questionnaire as a substitute for a 
personal interview in the prediction of success in military training in Israel. PERSONNEL 
PSYCHOLOGY, 35, 349-357. 
Underwood BJ. (1951). Associative transfer in verbal learning as a function of response 
similatity and degree of first-line learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42, 
44-53. 
36( 1 ), 78-8 1. 
Underwood BJ. (1969). Attributes of memory. Psychological Review, 76, 559-573. 
Vroom VH. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley. 
Wallace SR. (1965). Criteria for what? American Psychologist, 20. 41 1-417. 
Wexley KN. (1984). Personnel training. Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 5 19-55 I. 
Wexley KN, Baldwin TT. (1986). Post-training strategies for facilitating positive transfer: 
An empirical exploration. Academy of Management Journal, 29, 503-520. 
Wexley KN, Latham GP. (1981). Developing and Training Human Resources in Organiza- 
tions. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman. 
Wexley KN, Nemeroff W. (1975). Effectiveness of positive reinforcement and goal setting as 
methods of management development. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 239-246. 
Wexley KN, Thomton CL. (1972). Effect of verbal feedback of test results upon learning. 
Journal of Educational Research, 66, 119-121. 
Wlodkowski RJ. (1985). Enhancing adulr motivation to learn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Woodrow H. (1927). The effect of type of training upon transference. Journal ofEducationa1 
Psychology, 18, 159-172.