<<<PAGE=1>>>
IMPROVING 
PUBLIC SECTOR 
PERFORMANCE
THROUGH INNOVATION AND 
INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY FROM THE GLOBAL REPORT
Fusing Tradition with 
Modernity: Imihigo 
Performance Contracts 
in Rwanda
<<<PAGE=2>>>
PART I – GLOBAL TRENDS IN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
A
E
nsuring follow-through on policy promises is always a difficult 
task, particularly in the wake of a national crisis. Following the 
Rwandan genocide, the country’s government had to find a 
way to move on from the devastation, implement policies that would 
stimulate development and improve service delivery, and then make 
sure it delivered on those policies. To hold public officials accountable, 
the government chose to adapt the idea of performance contracts to 
a traditional practice of setting and achieving goals called Imihigo . 
First implemented with district mayors, Imihigo  were later expanded 
across government ministries and agencies. The increased focus on 
performance of public officials helped Rwanda achieve impressive 
rates of economic growth, rapidly improve infrastructure, and increase 
health and education outcomes for its citizens. More recently, however, 
critics noted that focusing on district Imihigo  targets – which were 
largely derived from central government priorities and financed by the 
national budget – had potentially limited the opportunity for citizen 
participation and for local governments to implement their own 
policies and solutions.
Overview
RWANDA
1CIA World Factbook, 2World Bank (2016), 
3World Bank (2016), 4World Bank (2016)
POPULATION (July 2017 est.)1
11.901 million
GDP PER CAPITA (current US$)2
702.80
INCOME GROUP3
Low income
GOVERNMENT EFFECTIVENESS4
58.2%
Fusing Tradition with 
Modernity: Imihigo 
Performance Contracts 
in Rwanda
CASE STUDY 1
2
IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE THROUGH INNOVATION AND INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY 1
<<<PAGE=3>>>
PART I – GLOBAL TRENDS IN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
A
Introduction7
A
t the start of the new millennium, Rwandans 
had begun to put their country back together 
after the horrors of the 1994 genocide. 
Following the atrocities, the government focused on 
providing urgently needed services to the distressed 
population, while long-term development strategies 
took a backseat. By 2000, however, President Paul 
Kagame was ready to set the country on a course 
for rapid development. In 2000, he launched Vision 
2020, a national plan to reduce poverty, improve 
governance, and promote economic development. 
Vision 2020 aimed to transform Rwanda into a 
middle-income country by the year 2020 with a per 
capita income of US$1,240, reduce the poverty rate 
to 20%, and increase average life expectancy to 66 
years (from 49 years in 2000) (Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Planning 2000). 
 
Five years into the plan, however, progress had been 
painfully slow. More than half of the population still 
lived in poverty, and the rate had only decreased by 
2.2%, from 58.9% in 2000 to 56.7% in 2005. An 
evaluation of the country’s 2003 to 2005 poverty 
reduction strategy found that a weak monitoring 
and evaluation system, poor prioritization, and 
a lack of accountability were major factors in the 
disappointing progress (African Development Bank 
2012). To get its Vision 2020 plan back on track, the 
Rwandan government had to drastically improve its 
performance. 
 
In 2006, Kagame launched an ambitious program to 
push mayors across the country to set development 
targets for their districts, and deliver on them. The 
program was based on a pre-colonial tradition called 
Imihigo, where individuals or communities would 
publicly promise to complete certain tasks, sometimes 
set by the king or another leader. If the individual or 
group achieved their goal, the community celebrated 
their success; if they failed to follow through, they 
faced public humiliation (Ndahiro 2015). 
 
Under the modern Imihigo  program, mayors would 
devise action plans based on the national development 
agenda in consultation with the local community, and 
then make public commitments to implement them. 
The agreements were codified in contracts with the 
national government. 
 
Enacting the agreements, however, required more than 
just a written promise. To ensure compliance with the 
Imihigo – and push the country’s development agenda 
forward – the government had to set up a structured 
system to check mayors’ progress and incentivize 
them to achieve their goals. After pioneering the 
system with district mayors, Kagame planned to 
spread the program through all levels of government, 
from high-level central government officials down to 
local leaders at the village level. 
 
The Imihigo program had several ambitious aims, 
including to: 
• Speed up implementation of the local and 
national development agenda 
• Ensure stakeholder ownership of the 
development agenda 
• Promote accountability and transparency 
• Promote results-oriented performance 
• Encourage competitiveness 
• Ensure stakeholders’ participation and 
engagement in policy formulation and 
evaluation 
• Instill a culture of regular performance 
evaluation (Government of Rwanda 2010) 
 
Imihigo was designed as a Rwandan approach to 
performance management, as described in a policy 
note published by the minister of local government in 
2006: “The Imihigo approach shares many characteristics 
with results-based management tools. First, each Imihigo 
identifies a set of clear priorities. Second, each Imihigo 
presents a set of specific targets backed by measurable 
performance indicators. Third, each Imihigo undergoes 
a well-defined process of performance monitoring and 
evaluation. Fourth, each Imihigo constitutes an efficient 
accountability mechanism and an incentive for local 
government leaders and their population to implement the 
decentralization policies and to meet local and national 
development targets.”
 
Many other countries used performance contracts to 
incentivize follow-through on development promises, 
but in Rwanda, Imihigo  was a more traditional way 
to achieve the same goals and thus much more 
understandable for the local population. Alexis 
Dukundane, the former head of the Directorate for 
3
IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE THROUGH INNOVATION AND INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY 1
<<<PAGE=4>>>
PART I – GLOBAL TRENDS IN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
A
The Response
T
he national government’s ultimate goal was to 
have everyone in the public sector working to 
achieve specific goals, but it decided to focus 
first on rolling out Imihigo  for mayors at the district 
level. Improving the performance of the mayors of 
Rwanda’s 30 districts was crucial for the country to 
achieve its goals. At the time, Rwanda was undergoing 
a decentralization process, and local governments had 
far more responsibility for service delivery than they 
had had previously. 
Choosing targets
At the same time that it launched the Imihigo  
program, the Rwandan government developed its 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy (EDPRS). The EDPRS was a medium-term 
plan to put the country on track toward its Vision 
2020 goals. The government incorporated the Imihigo 
process into the EDPRS as a mechanism to ensure 
follow-through by local governments (Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Planning 2007). 
 
Development targets at the district level were 
partly influenced by the central government’s 
agenda (defined in the EDPRS and Vision 2020), 
and partly influenced by discussions and demands 
from local communities. Every year, each district 
mayor and other senior district officials met with 
representatives from central government ministries 
during meetings known as the Forum of Central 
and Local Government. The ministry representatives 
informed the mayor of the government’s priorities in 
their respective areas and gave an indication of the 
expected budget that would be available for the local 
government to achieve those priorities. 
 
The mayor’s team would also speak with members of 
community councils within the districts to take into 
account local demands and priorities, as well as with 
NGOs and civil society groups. By meeting with 
Community Development at the Ministry of Local 
Government said: “People wouldn’t understand if 
you talk about performance contracts, but if you say 
Imihigo, they understand.”
8
those groups, the mayors could ensure coordination 
between the district government’s work and the 
projects being implemented by other organizations. 
 
Based on those national and local level conversations, 
the district governments developed 5-year plans for 
the 2007 to 2012 period. Each district government 
also developed one-year action plans each year to 
put them on a path toward their 5-year goals. The 
action plans included all tasks the council planned 
to complete that year, from administrative tasks such 
as writing reports and preparing budgets, to large 
infrastructure projects such as building roads and 
bridges. Mayors’ Imihigo  targets formed part of the 
action plans. 
Each Imihigo was linked with a specific indicator of 
success. For example, an Imihigo might be to increase 
electricity coverage to 100%, and the indicator could 
be the percentage of households with an electricity 
connection. 
 
After settling on well-defined goals and measurement 
metrics, the local mayors signed the Imihigo  in a 
ceremony with the President. The ceremony was 
broadcast on television and reported in newspapers, 
and the Imihigo documents were made available to the 
general public. 
 
Monitoring progress 
Local governments were required to keep 
documentation of all activities and expenses related 
to their Imihigo so that the central government could 
track progress. Halfway through the year, mayors 
submitted reports to the government explaining their 
progress in detail. 
 
At the end of the fiscal year, the national government 
put together two evaluation teams, each made 
up of representatives from the Ministry of Local 
Government, the Prime Minister’s Office, the 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 
the Rwandan Association of Local Government 
Authorities, the implementation secretariat, and civil 
society organizations. The teams included high-level 
people from those groups, sometimes even the director 
of the organization. The two teams traveled around 
the country, and between them visited each of the 
country’s 30 districts to conduct two-day evaluations. 
 
4
IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE THROUGH INNOVATION AND INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY 1
<<<PAGE=5>>>
PART I – GLOBAL TRENDS IN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
A
During the evaluation process, the teams would go 
through all of the district government’s progress 
reports and audit supporting documentation. 
The team would then ask the mayor to explain 
any discrepancies in the reports or any delays in 
implementation. Finally, the team would choose a 
selection of the Imihigo  targets and check them in 
person. For example, if an Imihigo was to build a new 
school with 50 classrooms, the evaluation team would 
visit the school, count the classrooms, and check it 
met other specifications defined in the Imihigo  target. 
From 2014 to 2018, the Institute for Policy Analysis 
and Research, a Rwandan research institution, 
conducted the Imihigo evaluations. The Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Planning reported that from 
2018 onwards the evaluations would be conducted 
by the National Institute for Statistics, a government 
agency.
Holding districts accountable
 
The evaluation team scored each Imihigo  target 
on a 1 to 10 scale. The score was based not only on 
whether the Imihigo  was achieved, but also on the 
completeness and accuracy of the mayor’s progress 
reports. An Imihigo  that was fully implemented with 
complete and accurate supporting documentation 
would score a 10. An activity that had barely begun 
would score a 1. 
Finally, districts were given an overall score based 
on a weighted average of their scores for each Imihigo  
activity. Each activity was classified as an “economic” 
activity, a “social welfare” activity, or a “governance” 
activity. Economic activities made up 60% of the 
scoring, social welfare activities 30%, and governance 
activities 10%. After the team completed the scoring 
and evaluation process, the final scores and reports 
were presented in person to the mayors at another 
ceremony with the President. At the same ceremony, 
the mayors committed to new Imihigo  targets for the 
next year. 
 
The scores and reports were made available to the 
public online, along with a list ranking each district 
from first to last based on their overall score. Using 
those rankings, the public could see how their 
local government had performed compared to 
neighboring districts and other districts across the 
country. Fred Mufulukye, the director general of 
territorial administration, said the system fostered 
competition. “Now districts – both citizens and 
mayors – want to compete and want to be best,” 
he said. “This competition drives development.”
9 
 
Expanding the Imihigo  program
After the success of the Imihigo program at the district 
level, Rwanda expanded the system to cover more of 
the public sector. Administratively, each district in 
Rwanda is divided into sectors, each sector divided 
into cells, and each cell divided into villages. Public 
officials at each level (sector, cell, and village) were 
included in the Imihigo  program and made public 
commitments each year. Monitoring and evaluation 
was carried out at the local level. For example, 
public officials at the cell level were responsible for 
monitoring village leaders’ Imihigo within the cell’s 
geographic area (Ndahiro 2015). 
 
The program was also expanded within the central 
government, and beginning in financial year (FY) 
2009 all government ministries and agencies began 
requiring staff to sign Imihigo  contracts. 
Reflections
S
ince the Imihigo  system was introduced, 
Rwanda has scored highly on a range of 
development indicators. While a number 
of factors have contributed to the country’s 
improvements, the Imihigo  program likely helped 
keep officials at all levels focused on achieving 
development targets. The country’s GDP increased 
from US$3.2 billion in 2006 to US$8.4 billion in 
2016 and life expectancy increased from 57 years to 
67 years over the same period. In addition, the poverty 
rate decreased from 56.7% in 2005 to 39.1% in 2013.
10  
Achievements of individual Imihigo targets in districts 
across the country no doubt contributed to those 
impressive national achievements. In FY 2014/2015, 
there were more than 2000 Imihigo  targets spread 
across the 30 districts. Of those, about 75% were 
achieved. Based on a report by the Institute for Policy 
Analysis and Research, the key results of Imihigo  
during FY 2014/2015 were increased electricity 
5
IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE THROUGH INNOVATION AND INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY 1
<<<PAGE=6>>>
PART I – GLOBAL TRENDS IN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE
A
coverage, improved access to clean water, increased 
access to credit for women and youth, improved 
agricultural production, and a large increase in the 
number of roads and healthcare facilities (Institute 
of Policy Analysis and Research, Rwanda 2015). 
It is also possible, however, that official reports 
on Imihigo overstate the initiative’s success. Susan 
Thomson, the author of Rwanda: From Genocide 
to Precarious Peace, noted “stressed and under-
resourced local officials regularly skimp to meet their 
Imihigo commitments” (Thomson 2018). In addition 
to cutting corners, strong pressure to perform may 
have resulted in officials inflating achievements.
 
Imihigo  created a strong culture of performance 
across the whole country. Scrutiny from the highest 
levels of government put pressure on public officials 
at every level within the central and local government 
to perform. The increased focus on performance 
fit well with the World Bank’s new Program-for-
Results financing instrument. World Bank-funded 
projects in Agriculture and Urban Development 
were linked with district and sub-district level 
Imihigo, ensuring a focus on results from the public 
officials involved in implementation. 
Reflecting on the program’s original aims, however, 
there was at least some concern that Imihigo  did 
not necessarily ensure stakeholder participation. 
Benjamin Chemouni, a fellow at the London 
School of Economics, noted that “theoretically [the 
Imihigo-setting process] should be informed by the 
aggregation of the population’s wishes… [but] this 
process barely takes place in reality” (Chemouni 
2014). The central government wielded strong 
influence over the selection and implementation of 
district Imihigo , and local governments had little 
flexibility to implement policies that reflected local 
realities or the community’s wishes. As a result, 
the Imihigo  system fulfilled the goal of creating 
top-down pressure for public officials to perform, 
but did not necessarily make public officials more 
accountable to Rwandan citizens (Hasselskog and 
Schierenbeck 2015). 
Rwanda’s introduction of Imihigo  contracts to improve government officials’ performance across 
government reflects three  of the five key dimensions for successful public sector innovation.
Political Leadership  drove the Imihigo  program from the outset, and it was the sustained support 
from the president that enabled the program to expand across the whole of government. The political 
leadership recognized the gap between the country’s development vision and the outcomes on 
the ground, and initiated an outreach to mayors to bring them into a new partnership to deliver 
on district-level development plans. Scrutiny from the president and other high-level officials put 
pressure on government workers at every level to perform.
Incentives were a key element of the Imihigo  contracts and critical to the reform’s success. Mayors 
around the country had to report progress to the central government, and evaluations were 
conducted by a special team each year. All districts were scored on their performance, and top 
performers received special recognition from the president in a dedicated awards ceremony. Public 
recognition of achievement also helped create positive competition among mayors to do even better.
Transparency  was an important component of the Imihigo  program. Contracts were signed in a 
public ceremony, and scores were disseminated through various media channels. Citizens could 
watch the broadcast of the Imihigo ceremony on television and look up results online to see how 
their local government was performing compared to other districts around the country.
Success Drivers
6
IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE THROUGH INNOVATION AND INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION
CASE STUDY 1