<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235263261
The role of individual and training design factors on training
transfer
Article  in   Journal of European Industrial Training · August 2010
DOI: 10.1108/03090591011070770
CITATIONS
139
READS
6,307
2 authors:
Muhammad Awais Bhatti
King Faisal University
56 PUBLICATIONS   2,290 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Sharan Kaur Garib Singh
University of Malaya
29 PUBLICATIONS   1,192 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Sharan Kaur Garib Singh on 25 March 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
The role of individual and training
design factors on training transfer
Muhammad Awais Bhatti and Sharan Kaur
Faculty of Business and Accountancy, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this study is to highlight the role of individual and training design factors
on training transfer.
Design/methodology/approach – A review of the literature is conducted, and this review
highlights a dual role of perceived content validity in the form of increasing self-efﬁcacy and the role of
trainees’ reaction. The study suggests that transfer design factors improve performance self-efﬁcacy
and reaction measures work as a bridge between content validity and transfer motivation. In addition,
the role of transfer design in training transfer theory is explained.
Findings – A combination of variables is proposed, suggesting further investigation to build a
strong training transfer theory. The study highlights the dual role of perceived content validity as a
factor to develop positive trainee reaction and increase trainee performance self-efﬁcacy. Furthermore,
the study proposes that transfer design and perceived content validity increase trainee performance
self-efﬁcacy, which leads to maximizing training transfer through transfer motivation. The study also
explains that perceived content validity inﬂuences transfer motivation through trainee reaction, and
proposes a framework coupled with future research directions.
Research limitations/implications– The suggested framework provides a theoretical basis for
researchers to build a strong training transfer theory. This conceptual paper elaborates the role of
perceived content validity, transfer design, reaction, performance self-efﬁcacy and transfer motivation
to substantiate training transfer theory. Future researchers should test the proposed framework
empirically and highlight other factors that could increase the efﬁcacy and motivation levels of
trainees in order to maximize training transfer.
Practical implications– Transfer design factors in this paper provide practical implications for
training transfer in general and training professionals in particular. Thus, training transfer is
maximized through positive trainee reaction, which is an important facet of training. Another factor,
i.e. perceived content validity, not only develops positive reaction but also increases the efﬁcacy level
of trainees. Therefore, in order to increase the performance self-efﬁcacy and motivation level of
trainees, training professionals should focus on the content and transfer design factors to maximize
training transfer.
Originality/value – This conceptual paper contributes to the existing training transfer literature by
suggesting a combination of variables that provides a theoretical basis for building a strong training
transfer theory.
Keywords Training, Self development, Individual behaviour
Paper typeConceptual paper
Training is one of the most important and reliable human resource techniques to
enhance organizational and employee productivity (Bhatti and Kaur, 2009). To
accomplish organizational tasks and improve employee performance, training
programs should be designed in such a way that they create a win-win situation for
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0309-0590.htm
JEIT
34,7
656
Received 28 September 2009
Revised 20 November 2009
Accepted 8 April 2010
Journal of European Industrial
Training
Vol. 34 No. 7, 2010
pp. 656-672
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0309-0590
DOI 10.1108/03090591011070770
<<<PAGE=3>>>
both organizations and employees. Organizations and employees can achieve their
goals if learning skills are transferred effectively to the workplace. Acton (2003) argued
that training and development of employees is essential for organizational operation
and advancement. From the employee’s perspective, these same factors are both crucial
and critical for skills development and for career advancement. Kauffeld and
Lehmann-Willenbrock (2010) argued that organizations invest considerable sums of
money in human resource development and it is imperative for organizations facing
global competition continuously to improve employees’ knowledge, skills, abilities and
attitudes. Thus, researchers and training professionals have focused on the factors
affecting the transfer of training to the workplace, such as content validity,
self-efﬁcacy, transfer design, the employee’s reaction towards training, and training
transfer motivation.
Different researchers have identiﬁed varying factors that directly or indirectly
affect the transfer of training. These factors are categorized as individual, situational,
environmental or contextual and intervention design factors. This paper proposes a
combination of variables coupled with the development of propositions based on the
literature. However, the proposed model will need to be tested in future research (see
Figure 1). Thus the purpose of this paper is to provide a clear insight about the factors
that affect the transfer of training.
The central issue of training and development is to engage employees in effective
learning. To maximize the utility of training, it is important that training deliverers
actively promote such engagement (Robotham, 2004). The engagement of employees
with training activities can be increased by motivating them and making them realize
how training can help them improve the ir performance and organizational
productivity. In addition, Nikandrou et al. (2009) argued that planning of the
training program is very important for its total success, and therefore for training
transfer at work. They further suggested that the goals and the extent of training, the
training methods and means, as well as the training place and equipment, are
important factors related to training program planning. All these help employees
transfer training to the workplace.
Figure 1.
Proposed conceptual
framework for transfer of
training
Individual and
training design
657
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Among the training effectiveness criteria, the most vital impact is the transfer of
training, which leads to improvements in employee and organizational performance. In
this regard, Baldwin and Ford’s (1988) work in examining the effects of training
design, trainee and work environment factors on the condition of transfer is a way
forward in advancing the learning transfer system. Colquitt et al. (2000) identiﬁed a
number of situational and contextual factors that affect training outcomes, including
organizational climate, organizational commitment and career planning. Besides
situational and contextual factors, individual factors that affect training outcome have
also been examined, such as general mental ability, self-efﬁcacy, personality (Colquitt
et al., 2000) and goal orientation (Smith et al., 2008). In addition, Holton (1996) also
developed the Learning Transfer System Inventory (LTSI) model, which is another
important contribution in the transfer of training literature.
Holton’s (1996) LTSI model considered 16 factors likely to inﬂuence the transfer
of training in the workplace. In this regard, the literature shows that researchers
have been giving consideration towards the most important aspect of training
outcomes, i.e. the transfer of training. Although other outcomes also play an
important role in the training effectiveness criteria such as trainee reaction and level
of learning, the transfer of training enables organizations to achieve their ultimate
objectives. In addition, other researchers (Gist et al., 1991; Tracey et al., 2001;
Liebermann and Hoffmann, 2008; Tai, 2006) also found many factors havong an
effect on different training outcomes.
All those factors that affect transfer cannot be said to take place without some form
of evidence. As such, many researchers have gathered evidence by proposing different
evaluation models to measure the outcomes of training. Among them, Kirkpatrick’s
model is widely accepted (Al-Eisa et al., 2009). Kirkpatrick (1976) came up with the
training evaluation model and divided it into four levels:
(1) reaction;
(2) learning;
(3) transfer; and
(4) results.
Alliger et al.(1997) extended Kirkpatrick’s work and divided the reaction outcomes into
two categories:
(1) utility reaction; and
(2) affective reaction.
Kirkpatrick’s measures are useful for evaluating training outcomes (Colquitt et al.,
2000; Kraiger et al., 1993; Quinones and Ehrenstein, 1997), as it is simple, easy to
understand and comprehensive.
Another extension of Kirkpatrick’s model was Phillip and Phillips’s (2001) addition
of return on investment (ROI) as the ﬁfth level, deﬁned as “the conversion of beneﬁts to
monetary value which can then be compared to the fully loaded costs of the training (p.
242). However, Phillips and Phillips (2001) noted that it is not always appropriate to
evaluate at the fourth (results) and ﬁfth (ROI) levels as ROI is often characterized as a
difﬁcult and expensive process. Therefore, the ﬁrst three levels of the Kirkpatrick
model are important for the organization in order to see the results of their efforts.
JEIT
34,7
658
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Kirkpatrick’s model of evaluation, which examines the after-training stage, and the
evaluation of training effectiveness after the event by Chiaburu and Marinova (2005),
comprise four distinct stages:
(1) Post-training declarative knowledge.
(2) Training transfer.
(3) Training generalization.
(4) Training maintenance.
The vast literature on the transfer of learning still lacks a ﬁrm theory behind it. Brown
and McCracken (2009) argued that little of the program content actually gets
transferred to the workplace. With the identiﬁcation of many factors, researchers are
still unable to develop strong training transfer theory and the organizations reported
low rate of training transfer. Ford (2009) argued that trainees transfer only 20 percent
of their learned skills to their workplace. In addition, Bhatti and Kaur (2009) stated that
it remains a challenge to establish a theory on the transfer of training even with the
identiﬁcation of many inﬂuencing factors. In addition, Kauffeld and
Lehmann-Willenbrock (2010) advocated that transfer is insufﬁciently considered in
both practice and academic research. Nevertheless, organizations would reap huge
beneﬁts if employees were able to transfer training to the workplace (Thompson et al.,
2010). On the basis of previous studies, those factors that are closely related to the
transfer of training are identiﬁed. A combination of those variables is built and
propositions are developed based on the past literature, but the model will need to be
tested in future research (see Figure 1). Hence, the purpose of this paper is to provide a
clear insight about the factors that affect the transfer of training. This conceptual paper
prompts researchers to look again at the important ingredients of training programs.
The factors that make up this combination are explained individually in the following
sections.
Transfer design
In the past, researchers found many training design factors (such as identical elements,
general principles, stimulus variability and conditions of practices) that inﬂuence the
transfer of training in the workplace. Thorndike and Woodworth (1901) highlighted the
concept of identical elements and argued that the transfer can be maximized if training
has more identical elements. With regards to general principles, McGhee and Thayer
(1961) argued that transfer is facilitated when trainees are taught not just applicable
skills, but also the general rules and theoretical principles that underline the training
content. With reference to stimulus variability, Ellis (1965) argued that transfer is
maximized when a variety of relevant training stimuli are employed. The concept of
conditions of practice include a number of speciﬁc design issues, including massed or
distributed training, whole or part training, feedback and over learning (Baldwin and
Ford, 1988). Recently, Nikandrou et al. (2009) suggested that training design and the
speciﬁc method used, which are trainee-centered, play an important role in training
transfer, but studies have seldom examined the impact of training design and method
on training transfer. Lim and Johnson (2002) suggest that training design, content and
instructional strategies must be related to the objective of transfer, whether near or far
transfer, for learning transfer to be realized.
Individual and
training design
659
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Holton developed the Learning Transfer System Inventory (LTSI) in which he
introduced the transfer design factor (Holton, 1996). Transfer design develops
understanding about the training program and shows a practical way in which
training can be best used on the job. Transfer design can also be deﬁned as the degree
to which training has been designed and delivered to give trainees the ability to
transfer learning to the job, and to which the training instruction matches the job
requirements (Holton et al., 2000, p. 345). Trainees are more likely to transfer training
content to the work context when they perceive that the training program was
designed and delivered in such a way as to maximize the trainee’s ability to transfer
the training to the job (Holton, 1996, 2007). Holton et al.(2000) argued that part of the
transfer design is the degree to which the training instruction matches the job
requirements. When trainees have previous knowledge and practice of how to apply
the newly learned knowledge and skills to the job, and when training instructions are
congruent with job requirements, an increased likelihood of transfer should exist
(Velada et al., 2007). In the same study, Velada et al.(2007) found that transfer design
positively relates to transfer of training. They suggested that in order for organizations
to ensure that training is effective, it should be designed to match employees’ ability to
learn the training material and to utilize the knowledge and skills accrued by
employees during training outside of the learning environment. According to May and
Kahnweiler (2000) trainers should provide opportunities to practice, in order to show
the trainee the practical relevance of the training contents and to ensure transfer.
Furthermore, Kirwan and Birchall (2006) tested the Holton model and found a
signiﬁcant correlation between transfer design and performance self-efﬁcacy.
The transfer design factor requires trainers to include some practical example
regarding the training transfer process. It may not be sufﬁcient for the learner to learn
the skills; there is a need to learn how to transfer the learned skill to the workplace.
Moreover, when the learner understands how he/she can use the learned skills in the
workplace, the conﬁdence level of the learner may increase (Bhatti and Kaur, 2009). The
transfer design factor not only shows the learner how to transfer the learned skills to the
workplace, but it also helps to increase indirectly the performance self-efﬁcacy level of
the learner. Hence, the role of the transfer design factor is two-fold. The transfer design
factor is either a source of increase in the self-efﬁcacy of the learner, or it directly
inﬂuences the transfer motivation factor. The clarity of the transfer design factor can
enhance the productivity of the training program, thus making it a focus for the trainer.
It is recommended that researchers test empirically the effects of transfer design factor
on performance self-efﬁcacy and highlight other factors in training design that can
improve the trainee efﬁcacy level. Therefore, testing this relationship empirically will
uncover new insight and will highlight the importance of training design factors in the
training transfer theory. Thus, the following proposition is suggested:
P1. Transfer design has a positive relationship with performance self-efﬁcacy.
Another factor that affects training transfer is the content validity perceived by the
learner, which is described in the following section.
Perceived content validity
Perceived content validity refers to the extent to which trainees judge the training
content to reﬂect the job requirement accurately (Devos et al., 2007). The concept of
JEIT
34,7
660
<<<PAGE=7>>>
perceived content reveals that when trainees perceive the contents of the training are
similar with the actual job, they maximize the transfer. Nikandrou et al.(2009) argued
that content of the training inﬂuence the training transfer. Laker (1990) found two
types of transfer:
(1) far transfer; and
(2) near transfer.
Far transfer indicates that the learned knowledge is applied in dissimilar working
situations, whereas near transfer refers to working situations which are similar to the
training program. According to Clark and Voogel (1985), near transfer is more likely to
occur when trainers emphasize the practical relevance of the training content. In other
words, if contents of the training are similar to the actual job, or the training activities
are relevant to the actual job activities, the level of transfer can be at a maximum. Lim
and Johnson (2002) suggest that training design, content and instructional strategies
must be related to the objective of the transfer, whether near or far transfer, for
learning transfer to be realized. Nikandrou et al.(2009) viewed near and far transfer as
direct and indirect transfer, and explained that in direct transfer the trained employee
is able to apply the knowledge and skills acquired to their work, while indirect transfer
means that the trained employee may apply in the workplace the skills or attitude that
were developed in training. Baumgartel et al.(1984) found that managers who believe
in the training utility are more likely to apply the skills learned in the training. Axtell
et al. (1997) also found that trainees who perceived training as relevant had higher
levels of immediate skills transfer. In addition, if trainees perceive that the new
knowledge and skills will improve relevant aspects of their work performance, they
will maximize transfer (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Clark et al., 1993). In addition,
Kauffeld and Lehmann-Willenbrock (2010) found that training transfer can be
improved by trying out training content in real work situations. Furthermore, Kirwan
and Birchall (2006) tested the Holton model and proposed that transfer design and
perceived content validity separately and collectively inﬂuenced participants’
performance self-efﬁcacy.
However, the focus on the reaction measure in relation to content validity was not so
clear in past studies. Reaction to content validity refers to the trainee’s perception of the
job’s relatedness to the training program (Holton, 1996). Some researchers focused on
the reaction of trainees to the organization and the training content (Baldwin et al.,
1991; Noe and Schmitt, 1986; Russell et al., 1985) while others focused on trainees’
satisfaction with the usefulness of the training at work (Latham and Saari, 1979;
Wexley and Baldwin, 1986). Liebermann and Hoffmann (2008) argued that if the
perceived practical relevance of the training were to match or exceed the trainee’s
expectations, he/she would be satisﬁed. Hence, when practical relevance matches or
exceeds the trainee’s expectations, he/she will react more positively. If the training is
less relevant, the trainee will be less satisﬁed or may show a negative reaction.
Clement (1982) found that trainees’ reaction to the relevance of the training material
increased learning. The study found that reaction through content validity predicted a
signiﬁcant correlation with transfer motivation. Garavaglia (1993) proposed that the
two most likely reasons that learning does not transfer to the job are that the work
environment is not supportive of the learned behavior, and that trainees think that the
training was irrelevant.
Individual and
training design
661
<<<PAGE=8>>>
In our proposed framework, we highlight the multidimensional role of the perceived
content validity factor. The ﬁrst dimension exposes the role of perceived content
validity as a factor to increase the learner performance self-efﬁcacy level, which would
ultimately affect transfer motivation. It would be helpful to develop a positive reaction
in the learner, which would lead to inﬂuencing the learner’s transfer motivation. Bhatti
and Kaur (2009) argued that when learners perceive that the content of the training is
similar to actual job tasks, they believe more strongly in their capabilities to perform
given tasks. In addition, the learner’s perception that “training contents are similar
with the actual job tasks” also leads to a positive reaction. In summary, a suggested
proposition is as follows:
P2. There is a positive relationship between perceived content validity and
performance self-efﬁcacy, or, perfo rmance self-efﬁcacy mediates the
relationship between perceived content validity and affective reaction.
This could be a future research direction to test the role of perceived content validity in
training transfer theory as a factor to improve performance self-efﬁcacy and to develop
a positive reaction. The reaction of the learner and the content validity of the training
are pertinent to the transfer process when it affects the performance self-efﬁcacy of the
learner, which is described at length in the following section.
Performance self-efﬁcacy
The concept of self-efﬁcacy is based on social learning theory. According to this theory,
people learn by observing other people (models) who they believe to be credible and
knowledgeable (Bandura, 1986). The theory relates to a belief in one’s capabilities to
organize and perform the courses of action needed to achieve given goals (Bandura,
1997). In the past, researchers found that self-efﬁcacy increases the motivation to learn
and is positively associated with training motivation (Colquitt et al., 2000; Tracey et al.,
2001). The deﬁnition of performance self-efﬁcacy given by Holton (1996) describes it as
“an individual’s general belief that he/she is able to change his/her performance when
he/she wants to”. Moreover, research found that performance self-efﬁcacy is strongly
related to both the outcome of training, (Gist et al., 1991; Quinones, 1995) and transfer
of training (Ford et al.1998; Velada et al., 2007).
Al-Eisa et al. (2009) argued that a trainee who has high conﬁdence in his or her
capability to learn the content of training is more likely to have high conﬁdence in his
or her capability to apply newly gained knowledge and skills on the job after the
completion of training. Researchers have focused on the relationship between
self-efﬁcacy and other variables like transfer motivation and training transfer. They
conﬁrmed that self-efﬁcacy can increase the level of training transfer (Chiaburu and
Marinova, 2005; Gaudine and Saks, 2004; Ford et al., 1998; Kirwan and Birchall, 2006;
Latham and Frayne, 1989; Stevens and Gist, 1997; Saks, 1995; Mathieu et al., 1992;
Tannenbaum et al., 1991; Velada et al., 2007), but there has been less focus on the
concept of performance self-efﬁcacy improvement. Hence, there is a need to highlight
which factors can improve the performance self-efﬁcacy of the learner. Moreover,
Bhatti and Kaur (2009) suggested that if trainers focus on transfer design, which can
improve learners’ self-efﬁcacy, they might be able to increase the level of transfer. In
this paper, it is proposed that transfer design and perceived content validity increase
the learner’s performance self-efﬁcacy. This paper’s framework also proposes a
JEIT
34,7
662
<<<PAGE=9>>>
mediating role of performance self-efﬁcacy between transfer design, perceived content
validity and transfer motivation. Therefore, it is suggested that future researchers
should test this relationship and highlight other factors that can improve the efﬁcacy
level of trainees to develop a strong training transfer theory. As a result, the
recommended propositions are as follows:
P3. Performance self-efﬁcacy mediates the relationship between perceived
content validity and transfer motivation.
P4. Performance self-efﬁcacy mediates the relationship between transfer design
and transfer motivation.
As well as performance self-efﬁcacy, reaction also plays an important role in the
transfer of training, as is elaborated below.
Reaction
Upon completion of the training program, evaluation design and reaction are the focus;
they represent the ﬁrst stage in the evaluation process. Reaction is one of the important
factors in the evaluation stage. The American Society for Training and Development
(ASTD) found that 77 percent of organizations collected learner reaction information and
38 percent measured learning, while only 14 percent evaluated behavior change and a
mere 7 percent measured results from training (Van Buren, 2001). It seems that many
organizations persist in believing that learner reactions are valid and reliable indicators
to assess the effectiveness of training, and are also able to demonstrate its impact on
organizations (Ruonaet al., 2002). A positive reaction on the part of the trainee enhances
learning. In other words, if the trainee reacts positively, the learning level of the trainee is
higher and transfer of training will be maximized. In contrast, a negative reaction leads
to low interest in training activities, a low learning level, and a lower transfer rate.
However, Wang and Wang (2006) consider reaction a short-term evaluation of the
training outcomes; the other three levels of evaluation belong to the long-term evaluation
of training outcomes. They argued that a more realistic way of evaluating reaction is to
obtain the learner’s feedback on the interest in, attention to and motivation towards the
learning object (Wang and Wang, 2006). In addition, if the training satisﬁes the learning
needs of the trainee and the reaction is positive, the other evaluation levels like learning,
transfer and results should show a more productive output. In the long term, transfer can
lead to improved organizational and individual performance.
In this proposed framework, it is suggested that reaction (utility or affective) may
affect other training outcomes through motivation, whereby a person is motivated to
show a speciﬁc behavior when the person expects this behavior to help him/her achieve
his/her goals, as proposed by Vroom (1964). Noe (1986) expanded this notion towards
transfer motivation and found that the fulﬁllment of training needs for personal
development inﬂuences the transfer motivation. Tannenbaumet al.(1991) also explained
that the fulﬁllment of expectations promotes the trainee’s motivation. They also found
that trainees who have more positive reaction to training have more post training
motivation. Additionally, Liebermann and Hoffmann (2008) found a signiﬁcant
correlation between affective reaction and transfer motivation. These ﬁndings are
consistent with the study of Ruonaet al.(2002), in which they found that utility reactions
added minimal power as a predictor of motivation to transfer and argued instead that
perceptions of the utility of training provide nominal value in predicting transfer.
Individual and
training design
663
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Although reaction measures or measures of trainee satisfaction remain one of the
most over-used methods of evaluation in the ﬁeld of human resource development
(Ruona et al., 2002), research has shown no correlation between reaction measures with
the other training outcomes (Alliger and Janak, 1989; Dixon, 1990; Noe, 1986; Warr and
Bunce, 1995). Hence, the focus on the reaction measure was not so clear in past studies.
Some researchers were have focused on the reaction of trainees to the organization and
the content of the training program (Russell et al., 1985; Noe and Schmitt, 1986;
Baldwin et al., 1991) whereas others have focused on trainees’ satisfaction with the
usefulness of the training at work (Latham and Saari, 1979; Wexley and Baldwin,
1986). However, after the work of Alliger et al. (1997) on the reaction measure,
researchers found different results. Alliger et al. (1997) distinguished the reaction
measure into two categories:
(1) affective reaction (general satisfaction with the training); and
(2) utility reaction (utility of the training content for the work situation).
In other words, if the trainee perceives that the content of the training is similar to the
actual job, the reaction of the trainee (utility reaction) would be positive. Alliger et al.
(1997) found that utility reaction was more strongly related to transfer than was
affective reaction. Using Alliger et al.’ classiﬁcation of reactions, a few researchers
found signiﬁcant but weak correlations between reaction (utility and affective) and
other training outcomes (Warr et al., 1999; Morgan and Casper, 2000). Ruona et al.
(2002) also conﬁrmed that there was no signiﬁcant relationship between reaction and
behavior change. In addition, they also proposed that if reaction measures are to be
used at all, utility reactions might be of greater value in evaluating outcomes than
traditional affective reactions.
Therefore, it is recommended that future research tests empirically the mediating
role of the affective reaction between perceived content validity and transfer
motivation. It would be interesting to establish, the kind of relationship, if any, that can
explain the importance of affective reaction in the training transfer process. Hence, the
suggested proposition as a result of the above explanation is as follows: affective
reaction mediates the perceived content validity and transfer motivation relationship.
The ﬁnal factor in the training transfer process of this proposed framework is
explained in the following section.
Transfer motivation
Transfer motivation is a key element in the training transfer process. It may be difﬁcult
to transfer learning effectively without motivation. Bates et al.(2007) deﬁned transfer
motivation as the direction, intensity and persistence of effort towards utilizing in a
work setting the skills and knowledge learned. In other words, motivation to transfer is
the trainee’s desire to use on the job the knowledge and skills that have been learned in
training programs (Axtell et al., 1997; Noe, 1986). Furthermore, recent research
(Nikandrou et al., 2009) suggested that in order to transfer the skills learned, trainees
must have transfer motivation. In a training context, motivation can inﬂuence the
willingness of employees to transfer what they learn in the program onto the job
(Baldwin and Ford, 1988). Furthermore, Axtell et al.(1997) found that trainee transfer
motivation was positively associated with short- and long-term transfer after
employees returned to their work sites. However, there are many factors affecting
JEIT
34,7
664
<<<PAGE=11>>>
trainees’ motivation to transfer, such as learner readiness, supervisor and peer support,
training design, and perceived content validity. Holton (1996) proposed that transfer
motivation is the most crucial precondition for the trainee to apply training content to
the workplace. However, most of the evaluation studies have not included transfer
motivation (Colquitt et al., 2000), except Kirwan and Birchall (2006) and Liebermann
and Hoffmann (2008), who found that a signiﬁcant relationship exists between transfer
motivation and transfer. In addition, Bhatti and Kaur (2009) proposed that transfer
motivation is an important factor in the training transfer process that leads to
maximizing training. While inserting a new group of variables affecting transfer
motivation, there is a need to further investigate the effects of transfer motivation on
training transfer. This paper proposes that researchers could consider the mediating
role of the transfer motivation between performance self-efﬁcacy and transfer in other
training transfer models. To further explain and highlight the importance of the
transfer motivation factor, future empirical tests could be conducted to establish the
relationship between transfer motivation and other proposed factors. Furthermore,
highlighting other factors that inﬂuence trainee transfer motivation would be helpful to
build a basis for a training transfer theory. After identifying the elements or factors of
training design and supporting this identiﬁcation with past studies, as well as
establishing some gaps in the preceding paragraphs, a discussion and the future
direction of transfer of training will be described in the next section. The outcome of
this discussion leads to the following proposition:
P5. Transfer motivation mediates the relationship between performance
self-efﬁcacy and transfer.
In the proposed model (see Figure 1), this paper suggests that transfer design
inﬂuences performance self-efﬁcacy. In other words, when the trainer explains how to
transfer the learned skills practically, this will increase the efﬁcacy level of the trainee.
On the other hand, when the trainee perceives the content of the training to be similar
to the actual job, the efﬁcacy level of the trainee will be higher. Kirwan and Birchall
(2006) suggest that transfer design and perceived content validity work together and
separately inﬂuence trainee efﬁcacy level. In addition, perceived content validity
inﬂuences trainee reaction (Liebermann and Hoffmann, 2008). When the trainee
perceives that the content of the training is similar to the actual job, they react more
positively. Furthermore, when trainees have a high level of performance self-efﬁcacy,
they are more motivated to transfer the skills learned and inﬂuence training transfer
(Liebermann and Hoffmann, 2008; Nikandrou et al., 2009). The role of content validity
and transfer design has never been highlighted in this way in past research. Here we
have taken into account affective reaction and explained that when trainee perceives
the content of the training to be similar to the actual job, they enjoy the training
activities and react positively. As proposed in this model, researchers could test
empirically the dual role of content validity as a factor to inﬂuence trainee efﬁcacy level
and develop a positive reaction. In addition, empirical results will highlight the effects
of content validity and transfer design on performance self-efﬁcacy. However, when
content validity and transfer design increase the trainee efﬁcacy level, the transfer
motivation of trainee will be increased. The higher level of trainee self-efﬁcacy leads to
a higher level of transfer motivation (Velada et al., 2007; Kirwan and Birchall, 2006;
Chiaburu and Marinova, 2005; Gaudine and Saks, 2004). Finally, when the trainee is
Individual and
training design
665
<<<PAGE=12>>>
motivated to transfer the leaned skills, training transfer will be higher (Kirwan and
Birchall, 2006; Liebermann and Hoffmann, 2008; Bhatti and Kaur, 2009; Nikandrou
et al., 2009). Therefore, the proposed model needs to bed tested empirically to develop a
strong training transfer theory.
Discussion and future research direction
The proposed model of this paper is centered on factors that inﬂuence the transfer of
training. The purpose of this paper is to highlight the effects of individual and training
design factors on the transfer of training. This paper suggests a proposed framework
for the effective transfer of training to the workplace, which – more importantly – will
improve employee and organizational performance. Transfer of training is a critical
issue and researchers have focused on the different factors affecting it to provide
substantial feedback to trainers and managers.
Among the different factors affecting the transfer of training, researchers should not
ignore the importance of training design factors such as transfer design. Transfer
design shows learners in a practical way how they can apply the skills learned to the
workplace. In previous studies, a few researchers have included transfer design factors
in their training transfer models, while most have underestimated the importance of
these factors. In addition, Nikandrou et al. (2009) suggested that training design and
the speciﬁc method used, which was trainee-centered, play an important role in
training transfer, but studies have seldom examined the impact of training design and
method on training transfer. Lim and Johnson (2002) suggest that training design,
content and instructional strategies must be related to the objective of the transfer,
whether it is near or far transfer, for learning transfer to be realized. However, the role
of the transfer design factor is twofold – either as a source of increasing the
self-efﬁcacy of the learner or directly inﬂuencing the transfer motivation factor. Kirwan
and Birchall (2006) suggested that transfer design inﬂuences trainee performance
self-efﬁcacy. On the other hand, Holton et al. (2000) found that transfer design
inﬂuences transfer motivation. Therefore, there is a need to understand, transfer design
work as either a factor improving trainee self-efﬁcacy or a factor inﬂuencing the
trainee’s level of transfer motivation. This paper proposes that transfer design is a
source of increasing the performance self-efﬁcacy levels of learners, but at the same
time we suggest that researchers should test both relationships to empirically conﬁrm
that transfer design either works as a source of increasing learners’ self-efﬁcacy levels
or directly inﬂuences the transfer motivation. The main reason behind this empirical
suggestion is to conﬁrm the exact position of the transfer design factor in the training
transfer model. If the training design factor relates more strongly with performance
self-efﬁcacy (Kirwan and Birchall, 2006) then future researchers and trainers should
analyze thoroughly the different dimensions of training design that can improve the
efﬁcacy level of trainees. In addition, if a higher correlation exists between transfer
design and transfer motivation (Holton et al., 2002; Velada et al., 2007), then attention
should be given to highlight the elements in training design that can increase the
motivational level of the trainee. When learners see how they can transfer training to
the workplace their conﬁdence level will increase and they will believe in their
capabilities to perform given tasks. Therefore, in this study, we suggest that transfer
design is an important factor for the training transfer process, and not only explains
how to transfer the skills learned, but also increases the efﬁcacy level of the learner.
JEIT
34,7
666
<<<PAGE=13>>>
In this paper, a multidimensional role of perceived content validity is proposed.
When the learner perceives that the content of the training is similar to actual job tasks,
the efﬁcacy level of the learner increases (Kirwan and Birchall, 2006). When learners
perceive that the content of the training is similar to actual job tasks, they tend to react
in a positive way (Liebermann and Hoffmann, 2008). Thus, perceived content validity
affects the learner’s performance self-efﬁcacy, develops a positive reaction in the
learner, and affects transfer motivation. Therefore, researchers should include
perceived content validity in training transfer models and test the role of perceived
content validity in training transfer process.
A survey by ASTD found that majority of organizations were concerned with
learners’ reaction to training, while only a small percentage of organizations measured
the results of training (Van Buren, 2001). It seems that many organizations persist in
believing that learner reactions are valid and reliable indicators to assess the
effectiveness of training, and are able to demonstrate the impact of training on
organizations (Ruona et al., 2002). Furthermore, the ASTD ﬁndings suggest that the
transfer of skills learned in training is not a priority for organizations, as very few
organizations actually measure this. Although it is important for organizations to
assess the impact training has on employees and organizational performance, many
internal and external factors act to inﬂuence these organizational indicators. Hence, it
is a challenge to determine whether training alone has contributed signiﬁcantly to
organizational gains. Therefore, the proposed framework in this paper aims to
establish the link of probable variables that help to determine the transfer of training.
According to Kirkpatrick’s (1994) evaluation model, reaction measures lead to
changes in behavior and bring about the desired results. In contrast, Liebermann and
Hoffmann (2008) found that affective reaction only explained 25 percent of the variance
in transfer. Furthermore, Ruona et al.(2002) found that participant utility reactions are
more closely associated with ability and motivational constructs than with
environmental constructs. Therefore, we conclude that the reaction measure affects
transfer motivation to inﬂuence training transfer. This paper suggests a mediating role
of affective reaction between perceived content validity and transfer motivation. In the
past, researchers have ignored the reaction of the learner towards training activities.
Although reaction does not exert signiﬁcant correlation on other training outcomes like
learning, if researchers focus on those factors that can build positive reactions, like
perceived content validity, instrumentality and job assignment, these factors can play
an important role in establishing a training transfer theory. Therefore, in this paper, we
recommend that researchers test empirically the effect of perceived content validity on
reaction and highlight the mediating role of reaction between perceived content
validity and transfer motivation.
In prevuious studies, researchers have explained the factors that can affect the
efﬁcacy level of the learner. Kirwan and Birchall (2006) argued that transfer design and
perceived content validity work together and inﬂuence performance self-efﬁcacy in
this way. Therefore, researchers should test this relationship empirically and highlight
other factors that increase the level of trainee efﬁcacy level. This paper highlights the
importance of transfer design and perceived content validity and proposes the
mediating role of performance self-efﬁcacy between transfer design, perceived content
validity and transfer motivation.
Individual and
training design
667
<<<PAGE=14>>>
In future, researchers should test empirically the proposed model to conﬁrm the
relationship between the variables. In addition, research should highlight those factors
that can develop a positive reaction and increase the performance self-efﬁcacy of
trainees. These factors could be instrumental (intrinsic and extrinsic rewards).
Furthermore, researchers should highlight the role of learner readiness and training
retention in the training transfer process to develop a strong training transfer theory.
This research will help human resource development professionals to understand the
role of content validity, transfer design, reaction, performance self-efﬁcacy and transfer
motivation in the training transfer process. HRD professionals should develop training
content that is similar to the actual job and explain practically to trainees how to transfer
the skills learned to the workplace. In addition, HRD professionals should develop
positive trainee reactions by making them realize that the content of the training is
similar to the actual job, and that training will improve their job performance. By
developing training content that is similar to the actual job and explaining how to
transfer the skills learned, HRD professionals will be able to increase trainees’
self-efﬁcacy and develop positive reactions, which will maximize training transfer.
References
Acton, T. (2003), “Training the knowledge worker”, Journal of European Industrial Training,
Vol. 27 Nos 2-4, pp. 137-46.
Al-Eisa, A.S., Furayyan, M.A. and Alhemoud, A.H. (2009), “An empirical examination of the
effects of self-efﬁcacy, supervisor support and motivation to learn on transfer intention”,
Management Decision, Vol. 47 No. 8, pp. 1221-44.
Alliger, G.M. and Janak, E.A. (1989), “Kirkpatrick’s levels of training criteria: 30 years later”,
Personnel Psychology, Vol. 42, pp. 331-40.
Alliger, G.M., Tannenbaum, S.I., Bennett, W. Jr, Traver, H. and Shotland, A. (1997),
“A meta-analysis of the relations among training criteria”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 50,
pp. 341-58.
Axtell, C.M., Maitlis, S. and Yearta, S.K. (1997), “Predicting immediate and longer-term transfer
of training”, Personnel Review, Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 201-13.
Baldwin, T.T. and Ford, J. (1988), “Transfer of training: a review and directions for future
research”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 63-105.
Baldwin, T.T., Magjuka, R.J. and Loher, B.T. (1991), “The perils of participation: effects of choice
of training on training motivation and learning”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 44, pp. 51-65.
Bandura, A. (1986), Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Bandura, A. (1997), Self-efﬁcacy: The Exercise of Control, Freeman and Co., New York, NY.
Bates, R., Kauffeld, S. and Holton, E.F. III (2007), “Examining the factor structure and predictive
ability of the German version of the learning transfer system inventory”, Journal of
European Industrial Training, Vol. 31, pp. 195-211.
Baumgartel, H., Reynolds, M. and Pathan, R. (1984), “How personality and organizational/climate
variables moderate the effectiveness of management development programmes: a review
and some recent research ﬁndings”, Management and Labor Studies, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 1-16.
Bhatti, M.A. and Kaur, S. (2009), “Factors effecting transfer of training: a fresh review”,
paper presented at the 12th International Business Information Management Conference
(IBIMA), Kuala Lumpur.
JEIT
34,7
668
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Brown, T.C. and McCracken, M. (2009), “Building a bridge of understanding: how barriers to
training participation become barriers to training transfer”,Journal of European Industrial
Training, Vol. 33 No. 6, pp. 492-512.
Chiaburu, D.S. and Marinova, S.V. (2005), “What predicts skill transfer? An exploratory study of
goal orientation, training self-efﬁcacy and organizational supports”, International Journal
of Training and Development, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 110-23.
Clark, R.E. and Voogel, A. (1985), “Transfer of training principles for instructional design”,
Educational Technology Research and Development, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 113-23.
Clark, S.C., Dobbins, G.H. and Ladd, R.T. (1993), “Exploratory ﬁeld study of training motivation:
inﬂuence of involvement, credibility, and transfer climate”, Group and Organization
Management, Vol. 18, pp. 292-307.
Clement, R.W. (1982), “Testing the hierarchy theory of training evaluation: an expanded role for
trainee reaction”, Public Personnel Management Journal, Vol. 11, pp. 176-84.
Colquitt, J., LePine, J. and Noe, R. (2000), “Towards an integration theory of training motivation:
a meta-analytic path analysis of 20 years of research”, Journal of Applied Psychology,
Vol. 85 No. 5, pp. 678-707.
Devos, C., Dumay, X., Bonami, M., Bates, R. and Holton, E. III (2007), “The learning transfer
system inventory (LTSI) translated into French: internal structure and predictive validity”,
International Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 181-99.
Dixon, N.M. (1990), “The relationship between trainee responses on participation reaction forms
and post-test scores”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 129-37.
Ellis, H.C. (1965), The Transfer of Learning, The Macmillan Press, New York, NY.
Ford, J.K., Smith, E.M., Weissbein, D.A., Gully, S.M. and Sales, E. (1998), “Relationship of goal
orientation, metacognitive activity and practice strategies with learning outcome and
transfer”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 83, pp. 218-33.
Ford, L. (2009), “Improving training transfer”,Industrial and Commercial Training, Vol. 41 No. 2,
pp. 92-6.
Garavaglia, P.L. (1993), “How to ensure transfer of training”, Training & Development, Vol. 47
No. 1, pp. 63-8.
Gaudine, A.P. and Saks, A.M. (2004), “A longitudinal quasi-experiment on the effects of
post-training transfer intervention”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 15
No. 1, pp. 57-76.
Gist, M.E., Stevens, C.K. and Bavetta, A.G. (1991), “Effects of self-efﬁcacy and post-training
intervention on the acquisition and maintenance of complex interpersonal skills”,
Personnel Psychology, Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 837-61.
Holton, E.F. III (1996), “The ﬂawed four-level evaluation model”, Human Resource Development
Quarterly, Vol. 7 No. 1.
Holton, E.F. III, Bates, R.A. and Ruona, W.E. (2000), “Development of a Generalized Learning
Transfer System Inventory”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 11 No. 4,
pp. 333-60.
Kauffeld, S. and Lehmann-Willenbrock, N. (2010), “Sales training: effects of spaced practice and
training transfer”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 23-37.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. (1976), “Evaluation of training”, in Craig, R.L. (Ed.),Training and Development
Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, pp. 18-27.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. (1994), Evaluating Training Programs: The Four Levels, Berrett-Koehler,
San Francisco, CA.
Individual and
training design
669
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Kirwan, C. and Birchall, D. (2006), “Transfer of learning from management development
programmes: testing the Holton model”, International Journal of Training and
Development, Vol. 10 No. 4, pp. 252-68.
Kraiger, K., Ford, J.K. and Sales, E. (1993), “Application of cognitive, skills-based, and affective
theories of learning outcomes to new methods of training evaluation”, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Vol. 78 No. 2, pp. 311-28.
Laker, D.R. (1990), “Dual dimensionality of training transfer”, Human Resource Development
Quarterly, Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 209-23.
Latham, G.P. and Frayne, C. (1989), “Self-management training for increasing job attendance:
a follow-up and a replication”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 74, pp. 411-16.
Latham, G.P. and Saari, L.M. (1979), “The application of social learning theory to training supervisors
through behavioral modeling”,Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 64 No. 3, pp. 239-46.
Liebermann, S. and Hoffmann, S. (2008), “The impact of practical relevance on training transfer:
evidence from a service quality training program for German bank clerks”, International
Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 74-86.
Lim, D.H. and Johnson, S.D. (2002), “Trainee perceptions of factors that inﬂuence learning
transfer”, International Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 37-49.
McGhee, W. and Thayer, P.W. (1961), Training in Business and Industry, Wiley, New York, NY.
Mathieu, J.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Salas, E. (1992), “Inﬂuences of individual and situational
characteristics on measures of training effectiveness”, Academy of Management Journal,
Vol. 35, pp. 828-47.
May, G.L. and Kahnweiler, W.M. (2000), “The effect of a mastery practice design on learning and
transfer in behavior modeling training”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 53 No. 2, pp. 353-73.
Morgan, R.B. and Casper, W.J. (2000), “Examining the factor structure of participant reactions to
training: a multimedia approach”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 11 No. 3,
pp. 301-17.
Nikandrou, I., Brinia, V. and Bereri, E. (2009), “Perspective on practice: trainee perceptions of
training transfer: an empirical analysis”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. 33
No. 3, pp. 255-70.
Noe, R.A. (1986), “Trainee attributes and attitudes: neglected inﬂuences on training
effectiveness”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 11, pp. 736-49.
Noe, R.A. and Schmitt, N. (1986), “The inﬂuence of trainee attitudes on training effectiveness: test
of a model”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 39, pp. 497-523.
Phillips, P.P. and Phillips, J. (2001), “Symposium on the evaluation of training”, International
Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 240-7.
Quinones, M.A. (1995), “Pre-training context effects: training assignment as feedback”,Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 80, pp. 226-38.
Quinones, M.A. and Ehrenstein, A. (1997),Training for a Rapidly Changing Workplace: Application
of Psychological Research, American Psychology Association, Washington, DC.
Robotham, D. (2004), “Developing the competent learner”, Industrial and Commercial Training,
Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 66-72.
Ruona, W.E.A., Leimbach, M., Holton, E.F. and Bates, R. III (2002), “The relationship between
learner utility reactions and predicted learning transfer among trainees”, International
Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 218-28.
Russell, J.S., Terborg, J.R. and Powers, M.L. (1985), “Organizational performance and
organizational level training and support”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 38, pp. 849-63.
JEIT
34,7
670
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Saks, A.M. (1995), “Longitudinal ﬁeld investigation of the moderating and mediating effects of
self-efﬁcacy on the relationship between training and newcomer adjustment”, Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 80, pp. 211-25.
Smith, R., Jayasuriya, R., Caputi, P. and Hammer, D. (2008), “Exploring the role of goal theory in
understanding training motivation”, International Journal of Training and Development,
Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 54-72.
Stevens, C.K. and Gist, M.E. (1997), “Effects of self-efﬁcacy and goal orientation training on
negotiation skill maintenance: what are the mechanisms?”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 50,
pp. 955-78.
Tai, W.-T. (2006), “Effects of training framing, general self-efﬁcacy and training motivation on
trainees’ training effectiveness”,Personnel Review, Vol. 35, pp. 51-65.
Tannenbaum, S.I., Mathieu, J.E., Salas, E. and Cannon-Bowers, J.A. (1991), “Meeting trainees’
expectations: the inﬂuence of training fulﬁllment on the development of commitment,
self-efﬁcacy, and motivation”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 76, pp. 759-69.
Thorndike, E.L. and Woodworth, R.S. (1901), “The inﬂuence of improvement in mental fuction
upon the efﬁciency of other functions involving attention, observations and
discrimination”, The Psychological Review, Vol. 8 No. 6, pp. 553-64.
Tracey, J.B., Hinkin, T.R., Tannenbaum, S. and Mathieu, J.E. (2001), “The inﬂuence of individual
characteristics and the work environment on varying levels of training outcomes”,
Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 5-23.
Van Buren, M.E. (2001), The 2001 ASTD State of the Industry Report, Vol. 2001, ASTD,
Alexandria, VA.
Velada, R., Caetano, A., Michel, J.W., Lyons, B.D. and Kavanagh, M.J. (2007), “The effects of
training design, individual characteristics and work environment on transfer of training”,
International Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 282-94.
Vroom, V. (1964), Work and Motivation, Wiley, New York, NY.
Wang, G.G. and Wang, J. (2006), “HRD evaluation: emerging market barriers, and theory
building”, Advances in Developing Human Resource, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 22-36.
Warr, P.B. and Bunce, D. (1995), “Trainee characteristics and the outcomes of open learning”,
Personnel Psychology, Vol. 48, pp. 347-75.
Warr, P., Allan, C. and Birdi, K. (1999), “Predicting three levels of training outcomes”, Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 72, pp. 351-75.
Wexley, K.N. and Baldwin, T.T. (1986), “Post-training strategies for facilitating positive transfer:
an empirical exploration”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 29, pp. 503-20.
Further reading
Bandura, A. (1982), “Self-efﬁcacy mechanism in human agency”, The American Psychologist,
Vol. 37, pp. 122-47.
Brand, M.J. and Bax, E.H. (2002), “Strategic HRM for SMEs: implications for ﬁrms and policy”,
Education þ Training, Vol. 44 Nos 8/9, pp. 451-63.
Burke, L.A. and Hutchins, H.M. (2007), “Training transfer: an integrative literature review”,
Human Resource Development Review, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 263-96.
Chen, C.-Y. (2007), “Exploring potential factors leading to effective training: an exclusive study
on commercial banks in Cambodia”, Journal of Management Development, Vol. 26 No. 9,
pp. 843-56.
Individual and
training design
671
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Gregoire, T.K., Propp, J. and Poertner, J. (1998), “The supervisor’s role in the transfer of training”,
Administration in Social Work, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 1-18.
Huiban, J.-P. and Bouhsina, Z. (1998), “Innovation and the quality of labour factor: an empirical
investigation in the French food industry”, Small Business Economics, Vol. 10 No. 4,
pp. 389-400.
Nijman, D.-J.J.M. (2006), “Exploring differential effects of supervisor support on transfer of
training”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. 30 No. 7, pp. 529-49.
Noe, R.A., Hollenbeck, J.R., Gerhart, B. and Wright, P.M. (2006), Human Resource Management:
Gaining a Competitive Advantage, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill Irwin, Boston, MA.
Payne, S.L., Flynn, J. and Whitﬁeld, M.J. (2008), “Capstone business course assessment: exploring
student readiness perspectives”,Journal of Education for Business, Vol. 83 No. 3, pp. 141-6.
Rodriguez, C.M. and Gregory, S. (2005), “Qualitative study of transfer of training of student
employees in a service industry”, Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, Vol. 29,
pp. 42-66.
Seyler, D.L. and Holton, E.F. (1998), “Factors affecting motivation to transfer training”,
International Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 2 No. 1, p. 13.
Swanson, R.A. (2005), “The challenge of research in organizations”, in Swanson, R.A. and Holton, E.F.
(Eds), Research in Organizations: Foundations and Methods of Inquiry, Berrett-Koehler,
San Francisco, CA, pp. 11-26.
Tracey, J.B. and Tews, M.J. (2005), “Construct validity of a general training climate scale”,
Organizational Research Methods, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 353-74.
Yamnill, S. and McLean, G.N. (2005), “Factors affecting transfer of training in Thailand”,Human
Resource Development Quarterly, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 323-44.
About the authors
Muhammad Awais Bhatti is a PhD Candidate in the Faculty of Business and Accountancy,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. His areas of research are training effectiveness,
human behavior and knowledge management. He is also a professional trainer and has
conducted various training programs in Malaysia. For his distinguished work on managing
Malaysian human resources, the International Commission on Education for Sustainable
Development Practice (USA), in collaboration with the University of Columbia (USA) and the
University of Malaya (Malaysia) awarded him a Certiﬁcate of Appreciation. Currently, he is
working on a training transfer system in the Malaysian banking sector. Muhammad Awais
Bhatti is the corresponding author and can be contacted at: awaisbhatti_786@yahoo.com
Sharan Kaur is a Senior Lecturer in the Faculty of Business and Accountancy, University of
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. She has ten years of corporate experience in the area of human
resources management, in particular training, development and computerization. Her early
success as a practitioner includes winning the Best Performance ( Kaizen) Award of the Sony
Corporation, Japan in 1998 for the computerization of HR functions. Prior to joining the education
sector, she won the Value Award for her effort in putting more than 120 people on the
development pipeline in the British retail company to which she was attached. Currently, she
lectures in strategic management and human resource development. Her research areas include
training and development, knowledge management and innovation.
JEIT
34,7
672
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
View publication stats