<<<PAGE=1>>>
The K4DD helpdesk service provides brief summaries of current research, evidence, and lessons 
learned. Rapid evidence reviews  are not rigorous or systematic reviews; they are intended to provide 
an introduction to the most important evidence related to a research question. They draw on a rapid 
desk-based review of published literature and consultation with subject specialists.  
Rapid evidence reviews are commissioned by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth, & Development Office 
and other Government departments, but the views and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect 
those of FCDO, the UK Government, K4DD or any other contributing organisation.  
Rapid Evidence Review 
 
The effectiveness of training in 
building capacity for governance 
reform  
 
Izzy Birch 
Independent researcher  
January 2024 
What is the evidence on the effectiveness of individual training as a means of 
building capacity for governance reform?  
Contents 
1. SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... 2 
2. TRAINING, CAPACITY BUILDING, AND CHANGE ........................................... 3 
3. STATE GOVERNANCE ...................................................................................... 5 
4. DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE .......................................................................... 7 
5. REFERENCES .................................................................................................. 10 
6. ABOUT THIS REVIEW ...................................................................................... 12
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2 
1. Summary 
This rapid evidence review seeks to answer the following question: What is the evidence 
on the effectiveness of individual training as a means of building capacity for 
governance reform? ‘Governance reform’, in this context, is limited to state governance 
(such as public administration reform, or anti-corruption) and democratic governance 
(women’s political participation, parliament, political parties); it does not include economic 
governance, security sector reform, or governance in other sectors such as health, 
education, or the environment. The main region of interest is the Eastern Neighbourhood 
(Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova), but since rigorous evidence from here proved to 
be slim, the focus has been widened to other middle- or low-income countries. 
The effectiveness of training is concerned with whether it leads to change, at different levels 
and over time. Models of assessing training effectiveness may consider the initial response 
of trainees, the extent to which they demonstrate acquisition of the intended knowledge, 
skills, or attitudes, and subsequently apply these in their work, and finally whether there are 
any outcomes from the training such as benefits to an organisation or influence on a system. 
The further one moves along this trajectory, the harder it is to determine any kind of causal 
link (Simister & Haddock 2021).  
The literature on capacity building suggests that narrow interventions, conducted 
independently of wider change processes and systems, are unlikely to have effect 
(Brinkerhoff & Morgan 2010; Pearson 2011). As the understanding of capacity building has 
evolved and appreciation of its complexity has deepened, so the attention given to any one 
particular modality in the literature, such as training, appears to have declined. 
Consequently, it was difficult, within the scope of a rapid review, to locate evidence that 
directly answers the research question; the findings of this review are therefore only 
illustrative. However, taken as a whole, they suggest that training is more likely to contribute 
to the capacity needed for governance reform when it is: 
 Contextualised: relevant to the specific political and institutional context, in all its 
dimensions, and tailored to the priorities and needs of trainees and clients. 
 Purposeful: has a clear sense of what the training aims to achieve, and for whom. 
 Problem-centred: focuses on specific and practical challenges in a reform process, 
and encourages the analytical and critical skills to address these.    
 Connected: part of a comprehensive and strategic approach to organisational and 
institutional change, in which each intervention is designed to complement others. 
 Sustained: more than a one-off intervention, with mechanisms to reinforce its 
application over time. 
 Timely: provided when it has greatest value to the client – for example, at the right 
moment in an electoral cycle, or when an organisation is best-placed to apply it. 
 Quality: well-planned, carefully targeted, and thoughtfully designed, and applies the 
principles of adult learning.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3 
The report reviewed both academic and grey literature on different areas of intervention that 
fall within the two broad categories of state and democratic governance; these provide the 
structure for the detailed evidence in sections 3 and 4. Some studies refer to training taking 
place but do not analyse its effects. Others use ‘capacity building’ generically, or 
interchangeably with ‘training’, making it difficult to be confident about the nature of the 
intervention being discussed. One limitation of this review is therefore its reliance on 
keyword searching among adjacent literatures. The literature pays little attention to gender 
and none to disability. Women may be prioritised within certain areas of training, such as 
political empowerment, but within this, the particular needs and situation of marginalised 
women are neglected (Brechenmacher 2021: 5; UN Women 2018: 31). Other areas of 
training, such as anti-corruption, are assessed as gender-blind (Zinnbauer 2023: 19).   
2. Training, capacity building, and change 
Capacity is commonly said to operate at three levels: individual, organisational, and 
institutional (Kacou et al. 2022: 216). At the individual level, the traditional focus of capacity 
building has been to fill gaps in skills and knowledge through training (Brinkerhoff & Morgan 
2010: 4). Over time, approaches to capacity building have evolved, with a conceptual shift 
from ‘training’ to ‘learning’ (Pearson 2011: 9) and a more diverse set of learning methods 
applied (Kacou et al. 2022: 222). Linear assumptions of a causal link between training and 
organisational performance have been challenged on the grounds that change processes 
are by their nature complex and unpredictable (Vallejo & Wehn 2016); there are many 
factors that influence whether knowledge and skills are applied (Danquah et al. 2023: 251; 
Simister & Haddock 2021). Furthermore, isolating the direct contribution of training as one 
intervention among several is challenging (Gulzar & Prillaman 2023: 8).  
Brinkerhoff and Morgan (2010), building on a partnership with the European Centre for 
Development Policy Management, argue that the ability of external actors to influence 
endogenous processes of change is highly circumscribed. Their paper applies a systems 
perspective to capacity building which emphasises its multiple inter-connected elements. 
These are not just tangible (skills, resources, systems) but also intangible (such as values, 
vision, leadership, management style, and organisational culture), and therefore both harder 
to measure and often unrecognised (Brinkerhoff & Morgan 2010: 7-8). Since no single factor 
can explain the development of capacity, “narrow interventions, such as staff training, are 
not likely to make a significant difference in performance unless they can create opportunity 
space or leverage that can shift actors’ behaviors” (Brinkerhoff & Morgan 2010: 9). Similarly, 
Pearson (2011: 9) notes that “[t]raining individuals is rarely an adequate capacity 
development response in and of itself”. 
A stock-taking of the peer-reviewed literature on capacity building published over the last 50 
years concludes by outlining a ‘new pragmatism’ (especially when building capacity for 
public administration) which is sensitive to context and complexity, places diagnosis before 
prescription, and looks for ‘best-fit’ rather than ‘best-practice’ solutions (Kacou et al. 2022). A
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4 
similar shift has taken place within the field of technical assistance (TA).1 The new paradigm 
is ‘politically informed and adaptive’: it takes a problem-solving approach, looks for context-
specific solutions, aims for incremental improvements in capacity rather than comprehensive 
reform, and ensures that local actors lead the identification of both problems and solutions 
(Cox & Norrington-Davies 2019: iii). However, the transition from concept to practice can be 
slow: while there has been some uptake of these new approaches to TA there is as yet 
limited evidence of their effectiveness, and traditional approaches still dominate (Price 2019: 
5). 
With this background in mind, this rapid review seeks to answer the following question: What 
is the evidence on the effectiveness of individual training as a means of building capacity for 
governance reform? The search strings included both ‘capacity building’ and ‘capacity 
development’ which are often used interchangeably (Kacou et al. 2022: 227), although they 
are also differentiated: the first understood as intervention and the second as process 
(Danquah et al. 2023: 249; Timmis 2018: 3). 
A striking consensus across the literature reviewed is the weakness of the evidence. For 
example:  
 Capacity building: Timmis (2018: 2) finds “a dearth of rigorous evaluations of 
capacity building interventions”.  
 Technical assistance: “The body of evidence on the effectiveness of TA is relatively 
weak. There has been little detailed analysis of whether some types of TA have been 
more successful than others, or of the conditions under which TA is most likely to be 
effective” (Cox & Norrington-Davies 2019: 10). 
 Training: Garavan et al. (2019) analyse 217 quantitative empirical studies into the 
link between training and organisational performance, published between 1997 and 
2018, and find “significant validity threats…that raise questions about the 
methodological rigor of the field” (Garavan et al. 2019: 291). 
 Public sector institutional reform: “There is a lack of rigorous, systematic evidence on 
what external support for public sector institutional reform has or has not been 
effective, and on how and why this is the case” (Joshi & Carter 2015: 2). 
 Anti-corruption training: “there is very little publicly available empirical evidence [of] 
which types of training approaches work in practice or how training impacts have 
evolved and morphed over time” (Zinnbauer 2022: 5). 
 
1 TA is relevant to this review given its use in public sector reform and its close association with capacity building 
(Price 2019).
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5 
3. State governance 
3.1 Anti-corruption and integrity training 
Training has been central to anti-corruption efforts (Camargo & Passas 2017). Across the 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia region, a key determinant of its effectiveness is the 
working environment for civil servants, and specifically whether this encourages and 
facilitates the application of new knowledge and skills (OECD 2015: 72). A cross-country 
review of national prevention practices in Eastern Europe and Central Asia highlights 
Estonia’s public service ethics training, which is voluntary but in high demand. Three factors 
underpin its effectiveness: (i) high-level political commitment, which ensures 
sustainability; (ii) an emphasis on values-based reasoning, i.e. the ability of participants to 
recognise and analyse ethically problematic situations, rather than a simple focus on the 
regulations; and (iii) the competence of the trainers, who are drawn from a mix of 
professional and organisational backgrounds (OECD 2015: 71; OECD 2013: 36-41).  
Zinnbauer (2023, 2022) reviews the empirical literature on integrity training since 2013 and 
finds limited evidence of what works and what does not.2 The 24 studies and 8 meta-reviews 
in the sample have three general weaknesses: (i) little information about the training 
provided and its specific design features; (ii) short timeframes, which rarely look at 
effectiveness beyond 18 months; and (iii) inadequate attention to gender. None of the 
studies looked at gender-specific training and only two achieved close to gender parity in 
survey participation; most even lacked information about the gender breakdown of training 
participants (Zinnbauer 2023: 19). The lack of attention to gender is problematic – not just 
because it neglects the differing exposure of women and men to the risks associated with 
corruption, but also because anti-corruption training might benefit from experience in other 
fields about how to help women deal with power asymmetries (Zinnbauer 2023: 19-20). 
Whilst there is little clarity on which anti-corruption training approaches are more effective 
than others, and under what circumstances, the literature points to three features that make 
success more likely: (i) a balanced mix of training components across values, knowledge, 
and skills; (ii) careful attention to group composition and dynamics before and during 
training; and (iii) learner-driven and interactive formats. However, there is no clear 
evidence of effectiveness in terms of the optimum length of training or the merits of on-site 
versus online delivery (Zinnbauer 2023: 14-15). 
Zinnbauer (2023: 10-13) is optimistic that training effectiveness can be satisfactorily 
measured and points to a number of innovative data sources for doing so, such as 
experimental cheating games or textual analysis of organisational documentation. 
Recommendations for enhancing integrity training focus on ways to reinforce its application 
in real-life situations: 
 
2 ‘Integrity training’ covers compliance, ethics, and anti-corruption (Zinnbauer 2022: 2).
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6 
 Widening the repertoire of strategies and tactics that help participants resist 
corruption and manage situations of asymmetric power. 
 Introducing new pedagogies likely to incentivise the application of training, such as 
commitment devices, or direct engagement with stakeholders whom participants are 
likely to encounter in situations of corruption risk. 
 Broadening the function of training, for example by also contributing to research 
(drawing on participants’ reflections), or by building peer support networks that help 
participants deal with future integrity challenges, complemented by continued access 
to expertise and resources (Zinnbauer 2023: 16-18; Zinnbauer 2022: 9-14). 
Camargo and Passas (2017) emphasise the critical importance of context. Despite 
substantial investment in anti-corruption programmes globally, high levels of corruption 
persist, including in countries committed to reform. Drawing on comparative research in 
seven countries,3 the authors attribute this to the strength of social norms and the 
persistence of informal practices and networks. They argue that anti-corruption strategies 
should start from a deeper understanding of the logic of these informal mechanisms to those 
involved. Some of the lessons and recommendations have implications for training: 
 anti-corruption efforts should focus on networked corruption rather than on individual 
corrupt behaviour (Camargo et al. 2022); 
 a problem-solving approach may be more effective than a normative one (Camargo 
et al. 2022); 
 where the gap between formal reform processes and informal practice is large, the 
provision of technical assistance to government bodies risks deepening the façade 
and validating a commitment to anti-corruption that may not be genuine (Camargo & 
Passas 2017: 17).  
3.2 Public administration reform 
Few studies were found that consider the contribution of training to public administration 
reform in the Eastern Neighbourhood, and those that do are anecdotal, such as an EU-
funded civil service training programme in Azerbaijan whose implementation was negatively 
affected by its short timeframe and lack of flexibility (Wiskow 2017). Karini (2017) considers 
the process of policy learning for administrative capacity in the Western Balkans and 
identifies a number of constraints on training as a capacity-building instrument. Most of these 
suggest inadequate attention to context and needs assessment, and include: (i) high levels 
of turnover in public bodies; (ii) stand-alone training, rather than being integrated in wider 
programmes of administrative capacity-building; (iii) an over-emphasis on training for EU 
accession processes; and (iv) a narrow understanding of the actors with influence on policy 
transfer, particularly the informal networks of bureaucrats, contractors and civil society 
actors. Beyond the region, Lyu et al. (2022) consider the link between the quality of 
government and the outcomes of civil service training in south-east Asia (Vietnam, Laos, 
 
3 Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7 
Cambodia, Myanmar, and Indonesia) and suggest that the former is not necessarily a result 
of training programmes but rather an independent variable that affects training effectiveness. 
3.3 Using evidence 
The Building Capacity to Use Research Evidence (BCURE) programme supported 
governments and parliaments in 12 low- and middle-income countries in Africa and Asia 
between 2013 and 2017. Training was a key intervention, and the evaluation of BCURE 
identified a number of conditions under which its application was more effective: 
 where training and learning activities were well-targeted, contextualised, practical, 
and participatory, and where follow-up support was available; 
 where training was reinforced by other mechanisms, such as tools to help staff 
carry out their work, or incentives to encourage behaviour change (Vogel & Punton 
2018: 36-38). 
Parliaments in Kenya and Zimbabwe were supported with a mix of training, mentoring, 
exchange visits, and internships. There was more evidence of effectiveness in Kenya than in 
Zimbabwe, attributed to a number of factors: 
 Timing: the training came at a time when the parliamentary research unit was 
expanding and needing to equip new staff. 
 Leadership: senior managers already recognised the value of evidence; a team-
working culture encouraged trainees to share skills with other colleagues; career 
incentives, such as assignments to high-profile parliamentary committees, were used 
to recognise good performance. 
 Sustained and comprehensive approach: technical support was ongoing, flexible, 
and joined-up (Vogel & Punton 2018: 81-85). 
The evaluation also tested the assumption that training a critical mass of evidence users 
would lead to broader change, but found that this required specific and targeted strategies 
that take account of organisational context. In summary, building capacity for evidence use 
requires a politically-informed approach in which interventions at multiple levels (individual, 
organisational, institutional) combine to affect the system as a whole. Since government 
reform processes are unpredictable and context-specific, a flexible and tailored process of 
accompaniment is more effective than ad hoc or isolated support (Vogel & Punton 2018: 34). 
4. Democratic governance 
4.1 Women’s political power and participation 
There is a persistent gender gap in political participation and leadership which is a function 
of multiple constraints rooted in individual resources, social norms, and the functioning of 
institutions (UN Women 2018: 4). Capacity building programmes have been one strategy to 
address this gap, particularly as it concerns access to information and knowledge. Recent 
studies on efforts to enhance the political participation and leadership of women include:
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8 
 An evidence review of more than 220 papers published since 2000, limited to those 
with clear theories of change and rigorous and replicable methodologies (Gulzar & 
Prillaman 2023). 
 A rapid evidence assessment of the lessons from 119 country-level and thematic 
evaluations posted to UNDP’s Evaluation Resource Centre and UN Women’s Global 
Accountability and Tracking of Evaluation Use database since 2012 (Guerraggio & 
Tateossian 2022). 
 A study of EU support for women’s political participation since 2016, based on four 
country case studies4 (Brechenmacher 2021). 
 A corporate evaluation of UN Women’s contribution to women’s political participation 
and leadership between 2011 and 2017, drawing on a sample of 43 countries with 
in-depth analysis in 24 of these (UN Women, 2018). 
These reports draw similar conclusions about capacity building in general and training in 
particular:5 
Interventions that aim to fill gaps in women’s political knowledge and skills can be 
effective, but only if other barriers to women’s political participation and power are 
also addressed (Gulzar & Prillaman 2023; Brechenmacher 2021; UN Women, 2018). These 
barriers may be social norms, financing, political violence, or candidate selection processes.6 
For example, skills training for women candidates may not be a good fit in situations where 
political parties are clientelistic, and where the women selected tend to be those with close 
ties to male politicians (Brechenmacher 2021: 5). Stronger theories of change may help to 
position capacity building within a broader vision for change and avoid the fragmented 
nature of current support (Brechenmacher 2021: 5).  
The timing of training matters. Effectiveness may be undermined if it takes place too far in 
advance of an election (UN Women 2018: 47), or equally too close and leaves insufficient 
time to work with candidates (Guerraggio & Tateossian 2022: 6), or if support is not 
sustained throughout the electoral cycle (Brechenmacher 2021: 5). 
Capacity building that is collectively or institutionally-based is more likely to lead to 
sustainable improvement than that which is individually-based or ad hoc. Examples 
include working through women’s parliamentary groups, caucuses, or forums at different 
levels of government in El Salvador, Pakistan, Turkey, and Kyrgyzstan (UN Women 2018: 
54, 67; Guerraggio & Tateossian 2022). 
Political turnover may affect the sustainability of capacity building results, particularly 
since some evidence suggests that women’s political careers are shorter than those of men. 
 
4 Bosnia and Herzegovina, Morocco, Sri Lanka, Zambia. 
5 It is not always clear whether ‘capacity building’ is being used generically, or as a substitute for ‘training’. 
6 The latter is illustrated by Egypt, where female candidates tended to be placed at the bottom of their party lists 
(Guerraggio & Tateossian 2022: 6).
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9 
This highlights the importance of post-training follow-up and longer-term tracking that 
considers the effects of training beyond political life (UN Women 2018: 67). 
These overall conclusions are echoed in a study of women’s political participation in North 
Macedonia. This argues for a systemic, multi-year approach to the transfer of knowledge 
and skills, which is tailored to the particular needs of different categories of women, and 
prioritises learning through practice rather than one-off short-term training (Kolozova & 
Savovska 2019: 42-43).  
4.2 Institutionalising training in electoral bodies 
There is relatively little research in general on the training provided by electoral management 
bodies (EMBs) to their staff, particularly cross-country studies (James et al. 2023: 416). The 
institutionalisation of training is defined, in this context, as “the strength of the mechanisms 
for ensuring that training provision is embedded into electoral processes by electoral 
management bodies” (James et al. 2023: 420). It may be achieved through a mix of 
institutional incentives, legal requirements, and accountability mechanisms. 
Institutionalisation is explored through survey responses from 49 EMBs.7 The authors 
caution that institutionalisation is not synonymous with quality, but suggest that greater 
attention to it could accelerate the effects of training quality (James et al. 2023). 
4.3 Training and capacity building for political parties 
Between 2011 and 2015, Sweden’s strategy for democracy support through its Party 
Affiliated Organisations sought to strengthen “democratic development and increased 
respect for human rights in developing countries” (Bryld et al. 2015: 13). However, the 
approach to capacity development focused on the training of individual politicians rather than 
supporting strategic processes of party reform (Bryld et al. 2015: 49). While the evaluation 
found evidence of enhanced awareness and understanding among those trained, there was 
little evidence that this contributed to organisational or institutional change. In the few cases 
where this was achieved, including in Ukraine and South Africa, it was attributed to either 
targeting the right person or taking a more strategic approach to capacity development 
that centred on longer-term institutional reform (Bryld et al. 2015: 32-33). The same 
evaluation also notes a lack of data to assess the quality of programme outputs and 
outcomes, and a lack of follow-up or tracer studies post-training (Bryld et al. 2015: 41). 
 
 
7 Among the surveyed countries, training institutionalisation in 2021 was classified as average in Moldova (where 
poll worker training, testing, and certification is required under the Electoral Code) and very low in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (James et al. 2023: 430).
<<<PAGE=10>>>
10 
5. References  
Brechenmacher, S. (2021) Bolstering Women’s Political Power: Lessons from the EU’s 
Gender Action Plan II. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 
https://carnegieendowment.org/files/Brechenmaher_Gap_II_Study_final_updated.pdf  
Brinkerhoff, D. W. & Morgan, P. J. (2010) Capacity and capacity development: Coping with 
complexity Public Administration and Development 30, 2-10 DOI: 10.1002/pad.559 
Bryld, E., Masri-Pedersen, N., Ouerdane, N. & Uggla, F. (2015) Evaluation of the 
Implementation and Results of the Swedish Strategy for Democracy Support for 
Party Affiliated Organisations 2012-2014 
https://cdn.sida.se/publications/files/sida61841en-evaluation-of-the-implementation-and-
results-of-the-swedish-strategy-for-democracy-support-for-party-affiliated-organisations-
2012-2014---final-report.pdf  
Camargo, C. B., Costa, J. & Kassa, S. (2022) Informal networks and what they mean for 
anti-corruption practice. Basel Institute on Governance Policy Brief 9 
https://baselgovernance.org/publications/policy-brief-9-informal-networks-and-what-they-
mean-anti-corruption-practice  
Camargo, C. B. & Passas, N. (2017) Hidden agendas, social norms and why we need to re-
think anti-corruption. Basel Institute on Governance 
https://baselgovernance.org/sites/default/files/2018-12/biog_working_paper_22.pdf  
Cox, M. & Norrington-Davies, G. (2019) Technical assistance: New thinking on an old 
problem. Open Society Foundations. Agulhas Applied Knowledge 
https://agulhas.co.uk/app/uploads/2020/10/OSF-Landscaping-Study-on-TA-final-version-
2.pdf  
Danquah, J. K., Crocco, O. S., Mahmud, Q. M., Rehan, M. & Rizvi, L. J. (2023) Connecting 
concepts: bridging the gap between capacity development and human resource 
development. Human Resource Development International 26:3, 246-263 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13678868.2022.2108992  
Garavan, T., McCarthy, A., Sheehan, M., Lai, Y., Saunders, M. N. K., Clarke. N., Carbery, R. 
& Shanahan, V. (2019) Measuring the organizational impact of training: The need for 
greater methodological rigor. Human Resource Development Quarterly 30, 291–309 
DOI: 10.1002/hrdq.21345 
Guerraggio, A. & Tateossian, F. (2022) Lessons from evaluations: Boosting women’s 
political participation. UNDP Independent Evaluation Office 
http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/reflections/Women_Political_Participation.pdf  
Gulzar, S. & Prillaman, S. A. (2023) What works for women’s political participation and 
leadership. USAID https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00ZVWP.pdf
<<<PAGE=11>>>
11 
James, T. S., Garnett, H. A., Asplund, E. & Campion, S. (2023) Election staff training: 
Tracing global patterns of institutionalisation. South African Journal of International 
Affairs, 30:3, 4150435 https://doi.org/10.1080/10220461.2023.2269890  
Joshi, A. & Carter, B. (2015). Public Sector Institutional Reform: Topic guide. Birmingham, 
UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham. https://gsdrc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/PSIR_TG.pdf  
Kacou, K. P., Ika, L. A. & Munro, L. T. (2022) Fifty years of capacity building: Taking stock 
and moving research forward. Public Administration and Development 42: 215-232 
DOI: 10.1002/pad.1993  
Karini, A. (2018) Facilitators and Constraints of Policy Learning for Administrative Capacity 
in the Western Balkans. NISPAcee Journal of Public Administration and Policy 10:2 
https://sciendo.com/issue/NISPA/10/2  
Kolozova, K. & Savovska, M. (2019) Women’s political participation in North Macedonia: 
Study and scientific research papers. Foundation for Democracy of Westminster, 
North Macedonia https://www.ceeol.com/search/gray-literature-detail?id=948822  
Lyu, H-S., Kim, T. H., Sung, D. & Moon, M. J. (2022) Linking quality of government to 
outcomes of civil service training: evidence from southeast Asian countries. Asia 
Pacific Journal of Public Administration 44:2, 172-190 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23276665.2022.2028172  
OECD (2015) Prevention of Corruption in the Public Sector in Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia. OECD Anti-Corruption Network for Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
https://www.oecd.org/corruption/anti-bribery/acn/prevention-of-corruption-in-eastern-
europe-and-central-asia.htm  
OECD (2013) Ethics Training for Public Officials. OECD Anti-Corruption Network for Eastern 
Europe and Central Asia and SIGMA 
https://www.oecd.org/corruption/acn/resources/EthicsTrainingforPublicOfficialsBrochureE
N.pdf  
Pearson, J. (2011) Training and Beyond: Seeking Better Practices for Capacity 
Development. OECD Development Co-operation Working Papers, No. 1, OECD 
Publishing http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgf1nsnj8tf-en  
Price, R. A. (2019) Technical assistance and capacity building in institutional reform: lessons 
learned. K4D Helpdesk Report 669. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies. 
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/20.500.12413/14754  
Simister, N. & Haddock, P. (2021) M&E of training. INTRAC https://www.intrac.org/wpcms/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/ME-of-training.pdf  
Timmis, H. (2018) Lessons from donor support to technical assistance programmes. K4D 
Helpdesk Report. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
12 
https://www.ids.ac.uk/publications/lessons-from-donor-support-to-technical-assistance-
programmes/  
UN Women (2018) Corporate Evaluation of UN Women’s Contribution to Women’s Political 
Participation and Leadership: Synthesis Report. UN Women 
https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Headquarters/Attachments/Sections/Library/
Publications/2018/Corporate-evaluation-Womens-political-participation-en.pdf  
Vallejo, B. & Wehn, U. (2016) Capacity Development Evaluation: The Challenge of the 
Results Agenda and Measuring Return on Investment in the Global South. World 
Development 79, 1-13 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.10.044  
Vogel, I. & Punton, M. (2018) Final Evaluation of the Building Capacity to Use Research 
Evidence (BCURE) Programme. ITAD https://www.itad.com/knowledge-product/final-
evaluation-of-the-building-capacity-to-use-research-evidence-bcure-
programme/#:~:text=The%20evaluation%20had%20a%20focus,of%20the%20six%20BC
URE%20programmes  
Wiskow, M. (2017) Strengthening the Eastern Partnership in Azerbaijan: Challenges in 
Implementing a Civil Service Training Capacity Program with a Focus on EU Affairs 
In: Kirsch, R., Siehl, E. & Stockmayer, A. (eds.) Transformation, Politics, and 
Implementation: Smart Implementation in Governance Programs. Nomos 
Verlagsgesellschaft, Baden-Baden https://www.nomos-
elibrary.de/10.5771/9783845280516.pdf  
Zinnbauer, D. (2023) Anti-corruption and integrity training: learning how to resist corruption. 
U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre https://research.cbs.dk/en/publications/anti-
corruption-and-integrity-training-learning-how-to-resist-cor  
Zinnbauer, D. (2022) Training for Integrity and How to Make It Work – What Do We Know, 
Where Could We Go? (December 10, 2022). Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4306575  or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4306575  
6. About this review 
6.1 Suggested citation 
Birch, I. (2024). The effectiveness of training in building capacity for governance reform. K4DD Rapid Evidence 
Review 19. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies. https://doi.org/10.19088/K4DD.2024.010 
6.2 Acknowledgements 
We thank the following experts who voluntarily provided suggestions for relevant literature or other advice to the 
author to support the preparation of this review.  The content of the review does not necessarily reflect the 
opinions of any of the experts consulted. 
• Dr Peter J. Evans, Governance consultant (former Team Leader, DFID’s Governance Research Team; 
and Director, U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre) 
• Graham Teskey, Principal Global Lead for Governance, Abt Associates
<<<PAGE=13>>>
13 
6.3 Review overview 
This review is based on six days of desk-based research. The K4DD research helpdesk provides rapid syntheses 
of a selection of recent relevant literature and international expert thinking in response to specific questions 
relating to international development.  
K4DD services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations working in international development, led 
by the Institute of Development Studies (IDS), with the University of Birmingham, Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine (LSTM), the University of Manchester Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute (HCRI), 
Association of Commonwealth Universities, and Royal United Service Institute (RUSI). 
This review was prepared for the UK Government’s Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) and 
its partners in support of pro-poor programmes. Except where otherwise stated, it is licensed for non-commercial 
purposes under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. K4DD cannot be held responsible for errors or 
any consequences arising from the use of information contained in this review. Any views and opinions 
expressed do not necessarily reflect those of FCDO, K4DD or any other contributing organisation.  
Follow K4DD on X: @K4D_info or visit k4d.ids.ac.uk to explore 
all of our outputs. 
© Crown copyright 2024.