<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 5 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Caitlin B. Mapitsa1
Marcel T. Korth2
Affiliations:
1Centre for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results, 
University of the 
Witwatersrand, South Africa
2Wits School of Governance, 
University of the 
Witwatersrand, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Marcel Korth,  
marcel.korth@wits.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 12 Dec. 2016
Accepted: 23 Feb. 2017
Published: 28 Apr. 2017
How to cite this article:
Mapitsa, C.B. & Korth, M.T., 
2017, ‘Designing diagnostics 
in complexity: Measuring 
technical and contextual 
aspects in monitoring and 
evaluation systems’, African 
Evaluation Journal 5(1), a196. 
https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.
v5i1.196
Copyright:
© 2017. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction 
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results – Anglophone Africa (CLEAR) recently 
conducted a diagnostic of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems and capacity across the City 
of Johannesburg’s departments and entities (CLEAR 2016). The process has illustrated that there 
is a multitude of perspectives on the purpose and role of M&E in the city. Some departments 
locate M&E as a management tool to achieve predetermined objectives efficiently and accountably, 
while others see M&E as a strategic governance tool to guide the alignment of programmes 
towards certain outcomes. Since there is not capacity to play both roles, the absence of an 
agreement on M&E’s purpose and role for the city’s planning and programme management 
means that it has been difficult not only to enhance capacity across the city’s departments and 
entities, but also that developing diagnostic tools for measuring M&E systems and related 
capacity requirements has been challenging.
This article looks specifically at what these divergent purposes of M&E mean for how M&E 
systems are assessed, and how context-appropriate diagnostic studies can be designed for such 
studies in the future. Instead of presenting detailed results of the survey, which are explored 
elsewhere (Smith & Ndhlovu, in this issue), this article looks at the design of the diagnostic studies 
themselves, and how these, applied in the context of the City of Johannesburg, have influenced 
the results found. Taking a methods-focused approach to the diagnostic study made it clear that 
if M&E practitioners have different perspectives on what M&E can and should contribute to an 
organisation’s performance, this can lead to a mismatch around what constitutes an appropriate 
and effective M&E system. This in turn means that building matching capacity becomes a 
challenge, particularly in a heterogeneous and decentralised organisation, such as the City of 
Johannesburg administration.
Background: This article emphasizes the importance of reflecting on the methods employed 
when designing diagnostic tools for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems. It sheds light 
on a broader debate about how we understand and assess M&E systems within their political 
and organisational contexts. 
Objectives: The article looks at what divergent purposes of M&E mean for how M&E systems 
are assessed, and how context-appropriate diagnostic studies can be designed. 
Method: The article draws on two different approaches: a survey that looks at the technical 
components of an M&E system and a complexity framework that analyses the way a system 
functions in a broader political and organisational context. The foundation is provided by 
survey and interview data from over 70 officials from across the City of Johannesburg’s 
administration. 
Results: The study revealed great diversity as to respondents’ understanding of what M&E 
structures and processes should do and achieve within the city, ranging from a management 
function closely linked to auditing and oversight responsibilities to a governance role that is 
more linked to learning and planning. Limitations in M&E capacity and/or performance were 
linked to contested political and bureaucratic structures.
Conclusion: The mixed method approach to diagnostics proposed in this article contributes to 
the call in the ‘Made in Africa’ debate for more contextualised methods and tools around the 
practice and the assessment of M&E. The article proposes the development of a synthetic tool 
that covers both M&E technical components and capacity on one hand, and an analysis of how 
these are embedded in a political and organisational context on the other.
Designing diagnostics in complexity: Measuring 
technical and contextual aspects in monitoring  
and evaluation systems
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 5 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
CLEAR has assisted a range of partners in southern Africa 
through diagnostics of their existing M&E systems over the 
last two years, with the aim of identifying areas for 
appropriate capacity building. The City of Johannesburg 
diagnostic is the fifth such process implemented. A synthesis 
research piece on these tools is an emergent piece of research 
that will be developed by CLEAR in the coming year, but the 
results of some of the diagnostic studies are available on 
CLEAR’s website. Each of these five was custom designed, 
and there is considerable variance among the five processes 
due to the different levels of analysis, purposes, priorities 
and administrative arrangements around the M&E systems 
in question. As a result, however, with each subsequent piece 
of work, we have improved our understanding of how the 
design of the diagnostic study impacts on the assessment 
outcomes.
Building on that experience and drawing on the specific 
involvement in the fifth of these reviews, that is, the diagnostic 
in the City of Johannesburg, this article argues that having an 
iterative diagnostic process employing mixed methods 
allows for multiple approaches to complement each other, 
giving a more holistic picture of the M&E system and required 
capacity in the organisation under review. We assert that 
assessments of M&E systems in an African bureaucratic 
context need to consider both technical aspects and contextual 
factors related to the political and organisational environments 
within which the system is operating.
This is in keeping with the emergent ‘Made in Africa’ themed 
research from regional evaluators at the African Evaluation 
Association (AfrEA), the South African Monitoring and 
Evaluation Association (SAMEA) and other relevant platforms 
(Abrahams 2015). While members of the M&E community in 
sub-Saharan Africa are increasingly arguing that there is 
something unique in the context of M&E in the region, the 
debate is only just emerging about how this context can best 
be taken into account through regionally relevant methods 
and approaches.
The article starts by describing the diagnostic process and 
approaches used in the City of Johannesburg. It then outlines 
the scope and aim of each tool before discussing in some 
detail how both describe certain aspects of M&E systems, 
and how they address issues of capacity within the system. 
Finally, we explore how each different approach implies a 
specific purpose for M&E, and discuss what these diverse 
views mean for the diagnostic study as a whole – and how 
they can complement each other.
Methodology
Diagnostic studies are designed to understand areas of 
strength and weakness in a system. They generally involve 
applying a particular diagnostic tool that inspects and 
describes various elements of a system, culminating in an 
analysis that identifies the strong and weak aspects of that 
system. The concept of a diagnostic study comes from the 
medical field, but is now applied widely to a range of 
organisational and other systems. A diagnostic approach 
is particularly appropriate for systems that are poorly 
documented or described, as the process involves a large 
component of information gathering. As such, it is now 
common practice in the assessment of M&E systems to begin 
with a diagnostic study, so as to be able to describe the 
components of the system and understand their strengths 
and weaknesses. While this seems straightforward on the 
surface, as we begin to look at the application of different 
approaches to diagnostic studies, we will see that developing 
an appropriate diagnostic approach for an M&E system is 
actually an act of determining and designing the role M&E 
should play in an organisation. The more complex the 
organisation and environment within which the M&E system 
is located, the more it is necessary to bring different 
approaches together.
When CLEAR and the City of Johannesburg entered into a 
partnership in 2016 to strengthen M&E capacity within the 
municipality, a diagnostic study was carried out as part of 
this process. The first step was to gather basic information 
about the M&E system through an online survey of key role 
players within the system itself. This then informed a series 
of workshops, which would build a theory of change for the 
enhancement of the city’s M&E processes and structures. 
Simultaneously, interviews with key stakeholders were 
carried out to get a deeper understanding of the context and 
meaning of the survey information and workshop results. 
Finally, on the basis of all of these activities, a diagnostic 
report was drafted, directly informing a subsequent training 
and technical assistance programme. This article is being 
written as training is being rolled out. It aims to highlight the 
importance of including in the diagnostic process both a 
technical and a wider contextual lens, the combination of 
which will outline both the technical needs for enhancing the 
system’s functioning but also the bottlenecks emanating 
from political or organisational factors.
As part of a mixed methods approach to understand the 
M&E systems within the City of Johannesburg, we used two 
tools. The first was an online survey, which was distributed 
to 80 key individuals across the municipality who had a 
leading role in the municipality’s M&E structures. The tool 
was adapted from the 12 components of an M&E system as 
developed by Görgens-Albino and Kusek (2009). It aimed to 
better describe the existing components of the M&E system 
across the City of Johannesburg administration, such as 
knowing which departments within the municipality had 
dedicated M&E units, the nature of individuals’ existing 
M&E capacity within departments and entities, and what 
duties departmental M&E units fulfilled. The categories in 
the survey included:
•	 Demographic information of individuals and their role 
within the metro
•	 Objectives of M&E system
•	 Organisational structures and functions
•	 Data and Information Management
•	 Leadership and capacity on M&E
•	 Linkages to organisational performance and use
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 5 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
In essence, this step sought to collect data that is technical in 
nature, from those in the know about these aspects of the 
current M&E practice across the city. This is an important 
part of gaining a strong understanding of M&E practice in 
the city. It is all the more important in an environment where 
M&E systems are decentralised, with different practices 
having emerged over the last five years across different 
departments. With a high response rate of 70 % and a 100 % 
coverage of the departments and entities targeted, the survey 
itself presents a comprehensive view of the city’s M&E 
systems from a broad range of organisational perspectives.
After the online survey was complete and workshops were 
held to reflect on the results, to draft a diagnostic report on 
the M&E system, CLEAR used the five dimensions of 
complexity framework proposed by Bamberger et al. (2015) 
to analyse all emerging data. Data sources included the 
online survey discussed in this article, but also included 
interviews, document reviews and other data sources. The 
five dimensions in the tool are:
•	 Embeddedness and nature of the system
•	 Causality and change
•	 Evaluation
•	 Intervention
•	 Institutions and stakeholders
The following sections reflect on the different nature of these 
two tools used in the diagnostic study and their inherently 
different, albeit mutually illuminating, approaches to reflecting 
on M&E structures and processes.
Findings
While the full findings from the diagnostic study are 
discussed in detail elsewhere (Smith and Ndhlovu, in this 
issue), this section discusses specifically how the different 
tool designs have led us to a more nuanced and more 
comprehensive understanding of the M&E systems used 
within the City of Johannesburg. The online survey, with 
its  technical focus, provided data with regard to technical 
aspects currently in place or aspired to. The complexity 
approach proposed by Bamberger et al. (2015) moves beyond 
the technical focus and sheds light on the broader political 
and organisational context, within which the technical 
aspects are situated and are meant to operate. With a view to 
emphasising each tool’s contribution to understanding the 
city’s M&E systems, this section outlines the key findings we 
obtained through each of these tools.
Among other facts (see Smith and Ndhlovu, in this issue), the 
online survey revealed that great diversity exists among 
the respondents as to their understanding of what M&E 
structures and processes should do and achieve within the 
city. The purpose of M&E, as reported by respondents, ranges 
from a management function closely linked to auditing 
and oversight responsibilities in some departments and 
entities, to a governance role that is more linked to learning 
and planning in others. This varied understanding, in 
combination with the city’s decentralised M&E system and 
individual departments’ M&E units’ relative autonomy, 
contributes to fragmented systems and great variance in 
capacity within these. There is a spectrum across departments 
and entities, from robust data systems for reporting that are 
used for decision-making, to emergent evaluation systems 
that, however, lack strong monitoring structures to allow 
them to operate effectively. Similarly, some M&E units in 
departments and entities lack plans or budgets, while other 
departments or entities, despite having plans and budgets in 
place, lack a dedicated unit to carry them out. As Osborne and 
Gaebler (1992) discuss, it is not clear whether the M&E system 
is there as a mechanism for rowing, or for steering. Parts of 
both are in place, but not a full system to do either effectively.
This diverse landscape is not surprising given the rapid 
introduction of M&E competencies to the South African 
public service, the size and complexity of the overall City of 
Johannesburg’s metro system and the speed of change of the 
actual municipal context itself – through rapid in-migration, 
dynamic political change and more (Heller & Evans 2010; 
Parnell & Robinson 2012). It does, however, render tools 
that simply describe technical aspects of M&E functions 
insufficient. In a more rationalised bureaucratic system that 
may characterise metro areas in regions of the northern and 
western hemisphere where many diagnostic tools were 
designed, this description may come with an implicit 
assumption that these functions and the systems to execute 
them are fully defined, shared and operational.
An advantage of a technical focus is that it can bring forward 
much-needed descriptive information in an often poorly 
understood system. In our case, this tool helped shed light on 
the divergent expectations around M&E. For example, some 
departments had quite strong data systems, but relatively 
weak structures to encourage the use of results. Other 
departments reported quite elaborate processes in the 
absence, however, of a dedicated M&E unit.
Integrating, in the second step of our process, the survey 
results with additional interview data and emerging voices 
from the subsequent workshops meant that we began to take 
a broader, contextual perspective. Officials suggested that by 
exclusively analysing technical strengths and weaknesses, 
we would be risking not getting to the root causes of some of 
the shortcomings emerging from the online survey. Reports 
emphasised that these would often be found in the city’s 
contested political and bureaucratic environment. These 
dynamics were brought out by using the complexity tool 
as an analytical framework. This helped map various 
stakeholders that operate within the M&E system, with an 
understanding that the implementers of M&E processes are 
not always the primary custodians of the system, and there 
are often other role players that play an important role in 
supporting and enabling effective use of the system. 
Furthermore, the data emerging during this phase helped 
articulate how change is seen to take place within the 
municipality, and what the role of M&E is considered to be 
within this landscape.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 5 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Officials’ reports speak directly to the assumption underlying 
both commonly applied diagnostic approaches: that if only 
we get the technical processes right and engage high-quality 
staff, M&E processes will ultimately function well. However, 
this assumption means that political and organisational 
factors are largely excluded in the assessment of M&E systems, 
leaving the ‘steering’ role to other structures. That does not do 
justice to M&E’s role in a space of decision-making, where 
political support to the establishment and conscientious use of 
M&E structures is key in making M&E data relevant for policy 
and programme design.
By combining data emerging from the online survey tool 
with that emerging through the complexity tool, we hence 
begin to see both how the M&E system is located within the 
municipality and what structures and capacity exist. Both of 
those are critical pieces of information to understand what 
constraints there are to effective use of evidence within the 
municipality, as well as how best to direct capacity building 
interventions.
Discussion
In related work over the last 18 months, CLEAR has found, 
particularly through engagement with parliamentarians 
(Crawley 2016), that behind logistical and technical 
limitations that are manifested, there are often political 
and value-based root causes. Diagnostic designs ought to 
recognise that technical deficiencies that are uncovered 
during the diagnostic process may well be rooted, at best, in 
the lack of adequate political will and support, or indeed in 
deliberate resistance from political stakeholders. This is a 
particularly important consideration in the context of 
southern Africa, where some M&E structures have been 
established without the corresponding capacity (Cingolani, 
Thomsson & de Crombrugghe 2015; Van der Meer, 
Raadschelders & Toonen 2015).
In our recent experience, government clients are often 
supportive of evaluations uncovering ‘hard truths’, and there 
is little political disincentive from airing critical findings. 
However, there is also a significant lack of available empirical 
information about either technical capacity or the political 
landscape. For the assessor, gathering this information 
during the diagnostic process is an important starting point. 
The online survey played this information gathering function 
well, but was insufficient to establish whether the M&E 
system could play a ‘steering’ role, which is more context 
dependent. For a more nuanced analysis on aspects like 
political context and organisational values to be included in 
a diagnostic assessment, it requires a different set of skills 
and approaches for the assessor, in addition to various 
approaches to data collection and analysis, and different 
relationships with the client. This needs to be explored in 
more detail in the future, and research around it has just 
begun within CLEAR. The first step, through this article, 
is of analysing the strengths and weaknesses of various 
approaches to collecting relevant data.
On one hand, having a complexity framework for analysis 
provided a helpful lens for understanding the steering role of 
the municipality’s systems, trying to bring about change in an 
already rapidly changing environment (Craig et al. 2008). On 
the other hand, however, it de-emphasised the actual technical 
components of an M&E system, and the ability of this system 
to deliver on specific functions. As a result, this framework 
could not stand alone. Without the survey, which was 
designed to scope the technical components and capacity of 
the M&E system, the actual elements and capacity may have 
been overlooked. These can constrain and shape the role of 
the M&E system, and influence everything from use of 
evidence to management culture within the municipality. In 
other words, looking at political and organisational context 
only would have easily neglected the fact that there were 
indeed technical and capacity aspects to take into consideration 
when aiming at strengthening the role that M&E can play 
within the city.
Due to the critical role of systems capacity in the region, 
we do not advocate for taking an exclusively contextual 
approach to a diagnostic of M&E systems. In fact, stemming 
from a developmental evaluation approach (Patton 2011, 
2015), clients often want a depoliticised analysis of the 
components of an M&E system. This is an argument in 
favour of taking a more descriptive and technical approach 
to a diagnostic study. From the point of view of the user, it is 
then easier to accept the outcomes of the study as an advocacy 
tool internally. A more political analysis that undoubtedly 
exposes, even if constructively and with supportive 
intentions, a political or organisational environment in 
which leadership steer away from evidence-informed 
decision-making, can create even more resistance to engaging 
with M&E processes. At the same time, focusing only on the 
technical dimensions of M&E can alienate people within the 
M&E system itself, who are very aware that shortcomings 
in resourcing, capacity and systems often have roots in 
executives’ or political principals’ non-commitment. This 
reflects a problem in adopting an overly technically focused 
approach to diagnostics of M&E systems and processes; 
different users have different interests, and the approaches 
chosen ought to mediate these diverse needs.
Our experience in this diagnostic of triangulating approaches 
that collect both technical and contextual data implies specific 
methodological suggestions. One is the need for a robust 
mixed methods approach. No individual tool or engagement 
approach would, in isolation, have been sufficient to 
understand the context, systems and needs of the metro’s 
M&E system as a whole. Rather, it is only through our long-
term engagement with a range of different stakeholders, 
towards a range of different objectives, that a more 
comprehensive view is emerging. In fact, by applying two 
different tools that take very different approaches to 
understanding and measuring M&E systems, in some ways, 
the process of carrying out the diagnostic study allowed the 
CLEAR team to speak to and mediate differing views within 
the municipality: one that assumes that M&E ought to be a
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 5 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
largely technical function, versus one that recognises that it 
could play a more expansive role in governance.
Conclusion
This article reflected on different ways of designing diagnostic 
tools for the assessment of M&E systems in public sector 
organisations by examining two tools recently employed in a 
diagnostic study conducted across the City of Johannesburg 
administration. Taking into consideration the decentralised 
design of the city’s M&E system across its departments 
and entities, with a vast array of different practices and 
understandings of what M&E can and should contribute to 
decision-making processes, we demonstrated the value of 
drawing on a basket of tools in the design of diagnostics. This 
is particularly relevant in a political and bureaucratic context 
where no shared understanding of the purpose and usability 
of M&E exists – such as in many public sector environments 
across sub-Saharan Africa.
The greater the role of context in a diagnostic assessment, the 
more space there is to debate the political and organisational 
elements of an M&E system – the steering role – which are 
central to understanding how a technical process will 
ultimately operate and what contribution it can make to 
decision-making. At the same time, however, this debate 
cannot happen in isolation of a sufficient understanding of 
technical capacity and processes. As our understanding on 
this develops, it will be important to shape our future research 
across the region. Across African public sector institutions, 
there are variations in the extent to which capacity 
constraints are technical and internal, versus contextual and 
environmental. Maintaining a dynamic understanding of the 
connectivity between the two should remain fundamental 
to informing our understanding of M&E systems in the 
region.
An awareness of the implications of each approach, as well 
as the implicit assumptions linked to each tool, is a first 
step to making an informed choice about which approach 
to use. However, there are still two clear needs implied by 
the research process so far. The first is that in order to 
sufficiently understand the effectiveness of an M&E system, 
there needs to be a broadly shared view on the purpose of 
such a system. While this will be an important output of the 
collaborative initiative between CLEAR and the City of 
Johannesburg, ensuring that the consensus that will be 
developed is inculcated and reinforced in organisational 
culture and practice is a long-term task.
Secondly, there may be space for developing a synthetic tool 
that includes both an adequate description of the system’s 
technical components and capacity on one hand, and an 
account of how these components are embedded in a political 
and organisational context on the other. As CLEAR continues 
its diagnostic work of complex M&E systems in a variety of 
settings across southern Africa, we will trial integrated tools, 
and document the process – thereby continuously contributing 
to the ‘Made in Africa’ debate for more contextualised 
methods and tools around the practice and the study of M&E.
Acknowledgements
This work is based on ongoing technical assistance cooperation 
between CLEAR-AA and the City of Johannesburg, the design 
and implementation of which rests on the contributions of a 
range of CLEAR-AA colleagues. We also acknowledge the 
enormously helpful comments and advice received from the 
peer reviewers.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationship that may have inappropriately influenced them 
in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
C.B.M. and M.T.K. contributed equally to this article in terms 
of the conceptual background work, the analysis and the 
final argument and conclusions. M.T.K. was also involved in 
the technical assistance design and implementation through 
which the data presented was gathered.
References
Abrahams, M.A., 2015, ‘A review of the growth of monitoring and evaluation in South 
Africa: Monitoring and evaluation as a profession, an industry and a governance 
tool’, African Evaluation Journal 3(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v3i1.142
Bamberger, M., Vaessen, M.J. & Raimondo, E. (eds.), 2015, Dealing with complexity in 
development evaluation: A practical approach, Sage, Los Angeles, CA.
Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR), University of the Witwatersrand, 
2016, City of Johannesburg Monitoring and Evaluation Assessment Survey , 
Johannesburg, Unpublished raw data.
Cingolani, L., Thomsson, K. & de Crombrugghe, D., 2015, ‘Minding Weber more 
than ever? The impacts of state capacity and bureaucratic autonomy on 
development goals’, World Development 72, 191–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
worlddev.2015.02.016
Craig, P ., Dieppe, P ., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., Petticrew, M. et al., 2008, 
‘Developing and evaluating complex interventions: The new Medical Research 
Council guidance’, BMJ 337, a1655. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1655
Crawley, K., 2016, ‘Strengthened oversight capacity within African legislatures’, Paper 
Presented to the African Evidence Network Conference, 21–23 September 2016, 
viewed 1 February 2017, from http://www.africaevidencenetwork.org/
strengthened-oversight-capacity-within-african-legislatures/
Görgens-Albino, M. & Kusek, J.Z., 2009, Making monitoring and evaluation systems 
work: A capacity development toolkit, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Heller, P . & Evans, P ., 2010, ‘Taking Tilly south: Durable inequalities, democratic 
contestation, and citizenship in the Southern Metropolis’, Theory and Society  
39(3–4), 433–450. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-010-9115-3
Osborne, D. & Gaebler, T., 1992, Reinventing government: How the entrepreneurial 
spirit is transforming the public sector, Addison-Wesley, Boston MA.
Parnell, S. & Robinson, J., 2012, ‘(Re)theorizing cities from the Global South: Looking 
beyond neoliberalism’, Urban Geography  33(4), 593–617. https://doi.org/ 
10.2747/0272-3638.33.4.593
Patton, M.Q., 2011, Developmental evaluation: Applying complexity concepts to 
enhance innovation and use, Guilford Press, New York, NY .
Patton, M.Q., 2015, ‘The sociological roots of utilization-focused evaluation’, The 
American Sociologist 46(4), 457–462. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12108-015-9275-8
Van der Meer, F.M., Raadschelders, J. & Toonen, T. (eds.), 2015, Comparative civil 
service systems in the 21st century, Springer, New York, NY .