<<<PAGE=1>>>
TAXONOMY
OF
EDUCATIONALOBJECTIVES
The Classificationof EducationalGoals
<<<PAGE=2>>>
I
TAXONOMY
OF
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
The Classificationof EducationalGoals
HANDBOOK 1 COGNITIVE DOMAIN
By
!.
A Committee of College
and UniversityExaminers
Benjamin S. Bloom, Editor
UniversityExaminer
Universityof Chicago
Max D. Engelhart
Director, Department of Examinations
Chicago City Junior Colleges
Edward J. Furst
Chief, Evaluationand Examination Division
Universityof Michigan
Walker H. Hill
Examiner, Board of Examiners
Michigan StateUniversity
David R. Krathwohl
Coordinator of Research
Bureau of Research and Service
Michigan StateUniversity
LONGMANS
<<<PAGE=3>>>
I.(IN (;M 1\N S, G R E E NAN D CO L T D
1H Grosvenor Street,London WI
/1sSf}cial(:'dcompanies, branches and representatives
throughout the world
TAXONOMY OF
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
COPYRIGHT 1956
BY DAVID McKAY COMPANY, INC.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REPRODUCE
THIS BOOK, OR ANY PORTION THEREOF, IN ANY FORM
PUBLISHED SIMULTANEOUSLY IN THE DOMINION OF CANADA
Printed in the United Statesof America
EDWARDS BROS ..•ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN
To Ralph W. Tyler,
whose ideas on evaluationhave been
a constantsource of stimulationto
his colleaguesin examining, and whose
energy and patiencehave never failedus.
~,o·\ q C~) \\
<<<PAGE=4>>>
List of participantswho contributed
to the development of the taxonomy
throughattendingone or more of the
conferences heldfrom 1949 to 1953
jii
I,
!
Anderson, Gordon V.
Universityof Texas
Bloom, Benjamin S.
Universityof Chicago
Churchill,Ruth
AntiochCollege
Cronbach, L. J.
Universityof Illinois
Dahnke, Harold L., Jr.
Michigan State University
Detchen, Lily
Pennsylvania College
for Women
Dressel, Paul L.
Michigan StateUniversity
Dyer, Henry S.
EducationalTesting Service
Ebel, Robert L.
Universityof Iowa
Engelhart, Max
Chicago Public Schools
Findley, Warren
l~ducationalTesting Service
II'urst,Edward J.
Universityof Michigan
Gage, N. L.
Universityof Illinois
Harris, Chester W.
Universityof Wisconsin
Hastings, J. Thomas
Universityof Illinois
Heil, Louis M.
Brooklyn College
Hill,Walker H.
Michigan StateUniversity
Horton, Clark W.
Dartmouth College
Krathwohl, David R.
Michigan StateUniversity
Loree, M. Ray
LouisianaStateUniversity
Mayhew, Louis B.
Michigan StateUniversity
McGuire, Christine
Universityof Chicago
McQuitty, John V.
Universityof Florida
Morris, John B.
Universityof Mississippi
<<<PAGE=5>>>
CONTENTS
,I,
Plumlee, Lynnette
EducationalTestingService
Pace, C. Robert
Syracuse University
Remmers, H. H.
Purdue University
Stern,George G.
Syracuse University
Sutton,Robert B.
Ohio StateUniversity
Thiede, Wilson
Universityof Wisconsin
Travers, Robert M.
Human Resources Research Center
San Antonio,Texas
Tyler, Ralph W.
Center for Advanced Studyin the Behavioral Sciences
Stanford,California
Warrington, Willard G.
Michigan StateUniversity
*Watt, Rex
Universityof SouthernCalifornia
PART I
Introductionand Explanation
Foreword
History
Problems
Organizationalprinciples
Three domains-cognitiveo affective,and
psychomotor
Development of the cognitivedomain
Chapter 1: The Nature and Development of the
Taxonomy
The taxonomy as a classificationdevice
What is tobe classified
Guidingprinciples
Developingthetaxonomy
The problem of a hierarchy-classification
versus taxonomy
Is the taxonomy a usefultool?
Chapter 2: EducationalObjectivesand Curriculum
Development
Knowledge as a taxonomy categoryWhat isknowable
Justificationfor the development of knowledge
Curriculardecisionsto'be made aboutknowl-
edge objectives
The natureof abilitiesand skills
Arts or skills+ knowledge = abilities
Justificationfor the development of intellectual
abilitiesand skills
1
4
5
6
7
8
10
10
11
13
15
17
20
25
28
31
32
36
38
38
39
*Deceased
Chapter 3: The Problems of ClassifyingEducational
Objectivesand Test Exercises 44
Three levelsof definitionin each taxonomy
category 44
The classificationof objectives 45
Test yourselfon the classificationof objectives 50
The problems of classifyingtestexercises 51
Test yourselfon the classificationof testexer-
cises 54
Key to the classificationof educationalobjectives59
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Testing for Synthesis, and illustrativetest items 173
5.10 Production of a unique communication 177
5.20 Production of a plan, or proposed set of
operations 180
5.30 Derivation of a set of abstract relations 183
5.00 Synthesis 162
Educational significanceof Synthesis objectives 166
5.10 Production of a unique communication 168
5.20 Production of a plan, or proposed set of
operations 170
5.30 Derivation of a set of abstract relations 171
6.00 Evaluation 185
6.10 Judgments in terms of internal evidence 188
6. 20 Judgments in terms of external criteria 190
Testing for Evaluation, and illustrativetest items 193
6.10 Judgments in terms of internal evidence 196
6.20 Judgments in terms of external criteria 197
,I.
PART II
The Taxonomy and Illus~rativeMaterials
1.00 Knowledge
1.10 Knowledge of specifics
1.20 Knowledge of ways and means of dealing
with specifics
1.30 Knowledge of the universals and abstrac­
tions in a field
Testing for Knowledge, and illustrativetest items
1.10 Knowledge of specifics
1.20 Knowledge of ways and means of dealing
with specifics
1.30 Knowledge of the universals and abstrac­
tions in a field
2.00 Comprehension
2.10 Translation
2.20 Interpretation
2.30 Extrapolation
Testing for Comprehension, and illustrativetest
items
2.10 Translation
2.20 Interpretation
2.30 Extrapolation
62
63
68
75
78
79
81
86
89
91
93
95
97
99
109
118
Appendix
A condensed version of the Taxonomy of Educa­
tional Objectives 201
3.00 Application 120
The educational implications of objectives in
the applicationcategory 122
Testing for Application,and illustrativetest items 125
4.00 Analysis 144
4.10 Analysis of elements 145
4.20 Analysis of relationships 146
4.30 Analysis of organizational principles 147
Testing for Analysis, and illustrativetest items 149
4.10 Analysis of elements 151
4.20 Analysis of relationships 155
4.30 Analysis of organizational principles 161
<<<PAGE=7>>>
zz0 0H H£-l £-lH UQ
<l:1
£-l ;:,lZZ~ Q<l:1
<l:1<l:1
0
....:1
p.,
~
p.,£-l x:Z ~H
i
j
!I!
<<<PAGE=8>>>
r
II
I ~ ~
FOREWORD
Taxonomy--"Classification,esp. of animals and
plantsaccordingto theirnaturalrelationships...,,1
Most readers willhave heard of thebiologicaltaxono­
mies which permit classificationinto such categoriesas
phyllum, class, order, family, genus, species,variety.
Biologistshave foundtheirtaxonomy markedly helpfulas a
means of insuringaccuracy of communication abouttheir
science and as a means of understandingtheorganization
and interrelationofthevariouspartsoftheanimal and plant
world. You are reading aboutan attempt tobuilda tax­
onomy of educationalobjectives. Itis intendedtoprovide
for classificationof the goals of our educationalsystem.
Itis expectedtobe of generalhelp toallteachers,admini­
strators,professionalspecialists,and research workers
who deal with curricularand evaluationproblems. It is
especiallyintendedto help them discuss these problems
with greaterprecision. For example, some teachersbe­
lievetheirstudentsshould"reallyunderstand,IIothers de­
siretheirstudentsto "internalizeknowledge," stillothers
want theirstudentsto"grasp thecore or essence"or "com­
prehend." Do theyallmean the same thing? Specifically,
what does a studentdo who "reallyunderstands" which he
does not do when he does not understand? Through refer­
ence to the taxonomy as a set of standard classifications,
teachers shouldbe able to definesuch nebulousterms as
thosegivenabove. This shouldfacilitatethe exchange of
informationabouttheircurriculardevelopments and evalu­
ationdevices.Such interchangesare frequentlydisappoint­
ingnow because alltoofrequentlywhat appears tobe com­
mon ground between schools disappears on closerexami­
nationof the descriptiveterms being used.
But beyond this,the taxonomy shouldbe a source of
constructivehelp on theseproblems. Teachers buildinga
1 Websterts New CollegiateDictionary, Springfield,
Mass.: G. & C. Merriam Co., 1953, p. 871.
1
<<<PAGE=9>>>
2
curriculum shouldfindhere a range ofpossibleeducational
goalsor outcomes in thecognitivearea ("cognitive"is used
to includeactivitiessuch as remembering and recalling
knowledge, thinking,problem solving,creating).Compar­
ingthe goalsof theirpresent curriculum withtherange of
possibleoutcomes may suggest additionalgoals theymay
wish to include. As a furtheraid, sample objectivescho­
sen from a range of subject-matterfields(thoughmostly
from the upper educationallevels)are used to illustrate
each of the taxonomy categories These may he suggestive
of the kinds of objectivesthatcould be includedin their
own curriculum.
Use of thetaxonomy can alsohelpone gaina perspec­
tiveon the emphasis givento certainbehaviors by a par­
ticularsetof educationalplans. Thus, a teacher,in clas­
sifyingthe goals ofa teachingunit,may find thattheyall
fallwithinthetaxonomy categoryofrecallingor remember­
ingknowledge. Lookingatthetaxonomy categoriesmay sug­
gesttohim that,for example, he couldincludesome goals
dealingwith theapplicationof thisknowledge and with the
analysisof the situationsin which the knowledge is used.
Curriculum buildersshould find the taxonomy helps
them to specifyobjectivesso thatitbecomes easiertoplan
learningexperiences and prepare evaluationdevices. To
returnto theillustrationof theuse of theterm "understand­
ing," a teachermight use thetaxonomy to decidewhich of
severalmeanings he intended. Ifitmeant thatthe student
was sufficientlyaware of a situationor phenomenon to de­
scribeitin terms slightlydifferentfrom those originally
used indescribingit,thiswouldcorrespond tothetaxonomy
categoryof "Translation."Deeper understandingwould be
reflectedinthenext-higherlevelof thetaxonomy, "Inter­
pretation,"where thestudentwould be expectedto summa­
rize and explainthephenomenon inhis description. And
thereare otherlevelsof thetaxonomy which the teacher
coulduse toindicate.stilldeeper "understanding."In short,
teachers and curriculum makers shouldfindthisa rela­
tivelyconcise model for theanalysisof educationalout­
comes in the cognitivearea of remembering, thinking,and
problem solving.
3
Once they have classifiedtheobjectivestheywish to
measure, teachersand testersworking on evaluationprob­
lems may referto thediscussionsof theproblems ofmeas­
uring such objectives.The Handbook includesconstructive
suggestionsformeasuring each classof objectivesand of­
fers a number ofexamples of thedifferentitemtypeswhich
have been used by examiners.
Some research workers have found the categoriesof
use as a fram.eworkforviewingtheeducationalprocess and
analyzingitsworkings. For instance,the AERA Com­
mittee on Criteriaof Teacher Effectivenesssuggestsits
use inanalyzingthe teacher'ssuccess in classroom teach­
ing.2 Bloom used them in analyzingthekindsof learning
thattakeplace in classdiscussions.3 Equallyimportant,
thepsychologicalrelationshipsemployed by theclassifica­
tionscheme are suggestiveof psychologicalinvestigations
which could furtherour understandingof the educational
process and provide insightinto the means by which the
learnerchanges in a specifieddirection.
But any of theseuses demands a clearunderstanding
of thestructureof thetaxonomy, itsprinciplesof construc­
tion,and itsorganization. We hope thiscan be easilyac­
quiredby a studyof theintroductorychapters. In addition,
itis suggested thatthe reader refer early and repeatedly
to the condensed version of the taxonomy which has been
placedat theback of thebook in an appendix for easy ref­
erence. The condensed version gives an over-allview of
theclassificationsystem, briefdefinitionsofthecategories,
and a few examples of theobjectivesbelongingin each cate­
gory. For quickreferenceand a generalgrasp of thepro­
ject, the condensed version of the taxonomy willbe found
tobe one of themost valuableparts of thebook. The brief
overview of historicalbackground plus the descriptionof
problems and of theorganizationof thetaxonomy projectfound in the remainder of this Foreword should further
2Remmers, H. H., et al,"Report of the Committee on
the Criteriaof Teacher Effectiveness,"Review of Educa­
tionalResearch, 22 (1952),pp. 245,246.
---3Bloom, B. S., "The Thought Processes of Students
in Discussion," inSydney J.French, Accent on Teaching,
New York: Harper & Bros., 1954.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
4
orientthe reader. Part I of the Handbook is intendedto
developsome insightintotheprinciplesof development and
organizationof the taxonomy, to developan understanding
of thenatureand significanceof the cognitivedomain, and
to give some help on themanner in which objectivesmay
be classifiedin the taxonomy.
Part IIis the taxonomy proper. Itconsistsof thetax­
onomy categories,sequentiallyarranged as listedin the
condensed versionand in the Table of Contents. Each one
of the categoriescontains,in order: (1)a definitionof the
category;(2)illustrativeobjectives;(3)a discussion of
problems and considerationsin testingobjectivesin the
category;and (4)examples of items testingobjectivesin
the category. Each testexample is brieflydiscussed to
notewhat isrequiredof thestudentand how thisisachieved.
History
The idea for thisclassificationsystem was formed at
an informalmeeting of collegeexaminers attendingthe1948
American PsychologicalAssociationConventionin Boston.
At thismeeting,interestwas expressed in a theoretical
framework which couldbe used to facilitatecommunication
among examiners. This group feltthatsuch a framework
could do much to promote the exchange of testmaterials
and ideasabouttesting. In addition,itcouldbe helpfulin
stimulatingresearch on examining and on therelationsbe­
tween examining and education.Afterconsiderablediscus­
sion,therewas agreement thatsucha theoreticalframework
might bestbe obtainedthrougha system of classifyingthe
goals of the educationalprocess, sinceeducationalobjec­
tivesprovidethebasisforbuildingcurriculaand testsand
represent the startingpoint for much of our educational
research.
This meeting became thefirstof a seriesof informal
annualmeetings of collegeexaminers. Gatheringat a dif­
ferentuniversityeach year and with some changes inmem­
bership' thisgroup has considered theproblems involved
in organizinga classificationofeducationalobjectives.The
group has also considereda greatmany otherproblems of
examining and of educationalresearch. This is thefirst
productof thesemeetings.
5
The committee named on the titlepage was delegated
thetask oforganizingand writingthevariousparts of the
"cognitive"portionof thetaxonomy, while the group con­
tinuedin itseffortstodevelopthe "affective"portionof the
taxonomy. As yet,however, the group is stillan informal
one withoutdues, regular membership, or the usual offi­
cers. Under such conditions,the committee"and the editor
must takeresponsibilityfor thepresentproduct, although
"credit"for ideas,suggestions,and sound criticismshould
be distributedmore widely anlOng all those who have at­
tendedone or more meetings of thegroup.
Problems
One of the firstproblems raised in our discussions
was whether or noteducationalobjectivescouldbe classi­
fied.Itwas pointedoutthatwe were attemptingto classify
phenomena which couldnotbe observed or manipulatedin
thesame concreteform as thephenomena of such fieldsas
thephysicaland biologicalsciences, where taxonomies of
a very highorder have alreadybeen developed. Neverthe­
less,itwas theview of thegroupthateducationalobjectives
statedin behavioralform have theircounterpartsin the
behavior of individuals. Such behavior can be observed
and described, and these descriptivestatements can be
classified.
There was some concern expressed in theearlymeet­
ingsthattheavailabilityof thetaxonomy mighttend toabort
the thinkingand planningofteacherswithregard tocurric­
ulum' particularlyifteachers merely selectedwhat they
believedtobe desirableobjectivesfrom thelistprovided
in thetaxonomy. The process of thinkingabout educational
objectives,definingthem, and relatingthem toteachingand
testingprocedures was regarded as a very importantstep
on thepart of teachers.Itwas suggestedthatthetaxonomy
could be most usefulto teachers who have already gone
throughsome of the stepsin thinkingabouteducationalob­
jectivesand curriculum.
Some fearwas expressed thatthetaxonomy might lead
to fragmentationand atomizationof educationalpurposes
<<<PAGE=11>>>
6
such thatthepartsand pieces finallyplaced intothe clas­
sificationmight be very differentfrom themore complete
objectivewithwhich one started.Althoughthiswas recog­
nizedas a very realdanger, one solutionfor thisproblem
appeared tobe settingthetaxonomy at alevelofgenerality
where the loss by fragmentationwould not be too great.
The provisionofmajor categoriesas wellas subcategories
inthe taxonomy enablestheuser of thetaxonomy to select
thelevelof classificationwhich does leastviolenceto the
statementoftheobjective.Further,thehierarchicalchar­
acter of the taxonomy enables the ,user to more clearly
understandtheplaceof a particularobjectivein relationto
otherobjectives.
Or ganizational..2rinciples
In discussingtheprinciplesby which a taxonomy might
be developed,itwas agreed thatthe taxonomy shouldbe an
educational-logical-psychologicalclassificationsystem.
The terms in thisorder express theemphasis placed on
the differentprinciplesby which thetaxonomy couldbe de­
veloped. Thus, firstimportance shouldbe givento educa­
tionalconsiderations.Insofaras possible,theboundaries
between categoriesshouldbe closelyrelatedto thedistinc­
tionsteachers make inplanningcurriculaor inchoosing
learningsituations.Itispossiblethatteachersmake dis­
tinctionswhich psychologistswould notmake in classifying
or studyinghuman behavior. However, ifone of themajor
valuesof thetaxonomy is in theimprovement of communi­
cationamong educators,theneducationaldistinctionsshould
be givenmajor consideration.Second,the taxonomy should
be a logicalclassificationin that every effortshould be
made to defineterms as preciselyas possibleand touse
them consistently.Finally,thetaxonomy shouldbe con­
sistentwithrelevantand acceptedpsychologicalprinciplesand theories.
Itwas furtheragreed thatinconstructingthetaxonomy
every effortshouldbe made toavoidvaluejudgments about
objectivesand behaviors.Neutralitywithrespectto educa­
tionalprinciplesand philosophieswas to be achieved by
constructinga system which, insofaras it was possible,
7
would permit the inclusionof objectivesfrom all educa­
tionalorientations.Thus, itshouldbe possibleto classify
all objectiveswhich can be statedas descriptionsof stu­
dentbehavior.
Three domains --cognitive,affective,and psychomotor
Our originalplans calledfor a complete taxonomy in
three major parts- -the cognitive,the affective,and the
psychomotor domains. The cognitivedomain, which is the
concern of thisHandbook, includesthoseobjectiveswhich
dealwiththerecallor recognitionof knowledge and thede­
velopment of intellectualabilitiesand skills. This is the
domain which ismost centralto thework ofmuch current
test development. It is the domain inwhich most of the
work in curriculumdevelopment has takenplace and where
theclearestdefinitionsofobjectivesare tobe foundphrased
as descriptionsof studentbehavior. For thesereasons we
startedour work here, and thisis thefirstof our work to
be published.
A second part of the taxonomy is theaffectivedomain.
It includesobjectiveswhich describe changes in interest,
attitudes,andvalues,and the development of appreciations
and adequate adjustment. Much of our meeting time has
been devoted to attempts at classifyingobjectivesunder
thisdomain. Ithas been a difficulttask which is stillfar
from complete. Several problems make it so difficult.
Objectivesin thisdomain are not statedvery precisely;
and, in fact,teachersdo not appear tobe very clearabout
the learningexperiences which are appropriateto these
objectives.Itis difficultto describethebehaviorsappro­
priateto theseobjectivessincetheinternalor covertfeel­
ings and emotions are as significantfor thisdomain as are
theovertbehavioralmanifestations. Then, too,our test­
ingprocedures for theaffectivedomain are stillin themost
primitivestages. We hope to completethe taskbut are not
able topredicta publicationdate.
A thirddomain is themanipulativeor motor -skillarea.
Althoughwe recognizetheexistenceof thisdomain, we find
so littledone about it in secondary schools or colleges,
thatwe do not believethe development of a classification
<<<PAGE=12>>>
8
of these objectives would be very useful at present. We
would appreciate comments on thispoint from teachers and
other educational workers who are especially interested in
this domain of educational objectives.
Development of the cognitive domain
We were naturally hesitant about publishing the cogni­
tive-domain handbook withoutsecuring as widespread com­
ment and criticism as possible. Members of thegroup have
discussed the taxonomy with their colleagues in their own
institutions,with graduate students in curriculum and test­
ing, and with other groups of teachers and educational spe­
cialists. The criticisms and suggestions of these groups
have, whenever possible, been taken into consideration in
the present volume. A somewhat more formal presentation
was made in a symposium at the American Psychological
Association meetings in Chicago in 1951.4
In spite of these means of communication, we stillfelt
the need for the comments, suggestions, and criticisms of
a larger and more representative group ofeducators, teach­
ers, and educational research workers. With this in mind,
we were very pleased when Longmans, Green and Company
agreed to print a preliminary editionof 1000 copies before
printing the finalversion of the Handbook. The preliminary
editionwas sent to a large group of college and secondary
school teachers, administrators, curriculum directors, and
educational research specialists. This group was asked to
read the preliminary edition carefully and to offer criti­
cisms and suggestions, as well as additionalillustrations
ofobjectives and testmaterials. They responded very gen­
erously and the present version of the Handbook has taken
many of theirideas into consideration. We are truly grate­
fulfor the time and thought given to thiswork.
4 Symposium: The Development of a Taxonomy of Edu­
cational Objectives, H. H. Remmers, Chairman. Partici­
pants: B. S. Bloom, Intellectualdomain; D. R. Krathwohl,
Affectivedomain. Discussants: 0. K. Buros, O. H. Mowrer,
and J. M. Stalnaker. Fifty-ninth Annual Meeting of the
American Psychological Association, August 31-September
5, Chicago, Illinois.
9
Thus, thisHandbook is truly a group product. Itis the
direct outgrowth of the thinkingof over thirtypersons who
attended the taxonomy conferences. Itis based on thework
of countless test constructors, curriculum workers, and
teachers. Several hundred readers of the preliminary edi­
tion have contributed criticisms, suggestions, and illustra­
tive materials. The committee which took responsibility
for the actual writing hope that this Handbook justifiesthe
enormous amount of time and effort devoted to it by the
many persons involved. We regard the work as well worth
the effort ifthe taxonomy is found of value as a means of
communicating within the fieldof education. We submit it
in thehope that itwillhelp tostimulate thoughtand research
on educational problems.
Since thisis a handbook inwhich a classificationscheme
isdescribed and illustrated,the reader iscautioned against
attempting to read itas though itwere a narrative or an ex­
position of a point of view which could easily be read from
cover to cover. The reader may find itprofitableto read
the introduction and the condensed version of the taxon­
omy in the Appendix in order to get a quick overview of
the entire book. The chapter on educational objectives and
curriculum development followed by the chapter on the clas­
sificationof educational objectives and test exercises will
enable him to secure a more thorough understanding of
the taxonomy and itspossible uses. The remaining sec­
tions of the volume- -the taxonomy with illustrativeobjec­
tives and test items--should be read as the reader finds
these sections relevant to specific teaching, curriculum,
testing and research problems.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
CHAPTER 1
THE NATURE AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE TAXONOMY
The taxonomy as a classificationdevice
The major purpose in constructinga taxonomy of edu­
cationalobjectivesis tofacilitatecommunication. In our
originalconsiderationof theprojectwe conceivedof it as
a method of improving the e,*changeof ideasand materials
among testworkers, as well as other persons concerned
with educationalresearch and curriculum development.
For instance,theuse of thetaxonomy as an aid in devel­
opinga precisedefinitionand classificationofsuch vaguely
definedterms as "thinking"and "problem solving" would
enable a group of schools to discern the similaritiesand
differencesamong the goalsof theirdifferentinstructional
programs. They could compare and exchange testsand
other evaluativedevices intendedto determine the effec­
tivenessof theseprograms. They could,therefore,begin
to understand more completely the relationbetween the
learningexperiences providedby these variousprograms
and the changes which takeplacein theirstudents.
Set at thislevel,thetaskofproducinga taxonomy, that
is,a classificationof educationaloutcomes, is quiteanalo­
gous to the development of a plan forclassifyingbooks in a
library. Or, put more abstractly,itis like establishing
symbols for designatingclassesofobjectswhere themem­
bers of a class have something in common. In a library
thesesymbols mightbe thewords "fiction"and "nonfiction"
and would apply to classes ofbooks having something in
common. Iftheproblem is essentiallyone of findingnew
symbols for the classes, any set of symbols, numbers,
nonsense syllables,or words could be used. Thus, we
couldhave used the symbols "F" and "NF" forfictionand
nonfiction. Further, since thesymbols selectedare not
intendedto convey thatone classisof a higherorder than
anotheror thatthereis anyparticularrelationshipbetween
the classes,theycan be selectedinvery arbitraryfashion.
10
11
The labels"fiction"and "nonfiction"do not imply thatthe
one classofbook isbetter,more abstract,or more com­
plex thantheotherkind.
Of course, such a classificationprocedure cannotbe
a privatefantasysinceitisofvalueonly ifused by thework­
ers who wish to communicate with each other. Thus, the
classifications"fiction"and "nonfiction"are of value only
iflibrariansuse them. Acceptance of such classifications
by potentialusers is likelyto be facilitatedif the class
names are terms which are reasonably familiarto them
and iftheseterms are givenprecise and usabledefinitions.
Thus, one might expectmore ready acceptanceof a library
classificationscheme ifhe took such a term as ''fiction,''
which is already in use, and defineditso thatany com­
petentlibrarianwould easilybe able to determine which
books fitthe classification.
In summary then,themajor taskin settingup any kind
of taxonomy is thatof selectingappropriatesymbols, giv­
ing them precise and usable definitions,and securingthe
consensus of the group which is to use them. Similarly,
developinga classificationofeducationalobjectivesrequires
the selectionof an appropriatelistofsymbols to represent
allthemajor types of educationaloutcomes. Next, there
is the taskof definingthesesymbols with sufficientpreci­
sion to permit and facilitatecommunication about these
phenomena among teachers, administrators,curriculum
workers, testers,educationalresearchworkers, andothers
who are likelytouse thetaxonomy. Finally,there'is the
taskof tryingthe classificationand securingtheconsensus
of the educationalworkers who wish to use the taxonomy.
What is tobe classified
Before one can builda classificationscheme, itmust
be clearwhat itis thatis tobe classified.This is notmuch
of a problem when one is classifyingbooks. But descrip­
tionsof curriculaare setup on such differentbases as de­
scriptionsof teacherbehavior,descriptionsofinstructional
methods, and descriptionsof intendedpupilbehaviors. As
achievement testersand educationalresearchworkers, the
<<<PAGE=14>>>
12
major phenomena with which we are concerned are the
changes produced inindividualsas a resultof educational
experiences.Such changesmay be representedby theglobal
statements of theeducationalobjectivesof an educational
unit, or theymay be representedby the actualdescription
of the studentbehaviorswhich are regarded as appropriate
or relevantto theobjectives. Objectivesmay alsobe in­
ferredfrom thetasks,problems, and observationsused to
testor evaluatethepresence of thesebehaviors.
We are of theopinionthat althoughtheobjectivesand
testmaterialsand techniquesmaybe specifiedin an almost
unlimitednumber ofways, the studentbehaviors involved
in theseobjectivescanbe representedby a relativelysmall
number of classes. Therefore, thistaxonomy is designed
tobe a classificationof the studentbehaviorswhich repre­
sent the intendedoutcomes of the educationalprocess. It
is assumed thatessentiallythesame classes ofbehavior
may be observed in the usualrange of subject-mattercon­
tent,at differentlevelsof education (elementary,high­
school,college),and in differentschools. Thus, a single
set of classificationsshouldbe applicablein allthesein­
stances.
It shouldbe noted thatwe are not attemptingto clas­
sifythe instructionalmethods used by teachers, theways
in which teachers relatethemselves to students, or the
differentkindsof instructionalmaterialstheyuse. We are
not attemptingto classifytheparticularsubjectmatter or
content. What we are classifyingis theintendedbehavior
of students--theways in which individualsare toact,think,
or feel as the resultof participatingin some unitof in­
struction. (Onlysuch of these intendedbehaviors as are
relatedtomental acts or thinkingare includedin thepart
of thetaxonomy developedin thisHandbook.)
Itis recognized thatthe actualbehaviors of the stu­
dentsaftertheyhave completed theunitof instructionmay
differin degree as wellas inkindfrom theintendedbehav­
iors specifiedby the objectives. That is, the effectsof
instructionmay be such thatthestudentsdonotlearna given
skillto the desiredlevelof perfection;or, for thatmat­
ter, theymay not developthe intendedskillto any degree.
13
This is a matter of grading or evaluatingthe goodness of
theperformance. The emphasis in the Handbook is on ob­
tainingevidenceon the extenttowhich desiredand intended
behaviors have been learned by the student. Itis outside
the scope of the taskwe setourselvestoproperlytreatthe
matter of determining theappropriatevalue tobe placed
on the differentdegrees of achievement of the objecthTl'!s
of instruction.
Itshouldalsobe notedthattheintendedbehaviorsspec­
ifiedby educationalobjectivesdo notincludemany of the
behaviorswhich psychologistsare interestedinclassifying
and studying. One reason is thatthe intendedbehaviors
representthe socialgoalsimposed uponyoungstersby their
societyor culture.Thus, theintendedor desiredbehaviors
includedin educationalobjectivesusuallydo not include
undesirableor abnormal behaviorswhich are sociallydis­
approved. Similarly,certainnaturalor unsocializedbe­
haviors which might be of interestto psychologistsmay
falloutsidethe categoriesof the taxonomy.
Our presentstudiesoftheaffectivearea have indicated
thattheselectivenatureof intendedbehaviorswillbe even
more apparenttherethanin the cognitivedomain. The fact
thatwe includeobjectiveswhich specifysocialand emotional
adjustment as a part of theaffectivedomain pointsup thisfact.
Guidingprinciples
Sincethedeterminationof classesand theirtitlesis in
some ways arbitrary,therecouldbe analmost infinitenum­
ber ofways of dividingand naming the domains of educa­
tionaloutcomes. To guideus in our selectionofa single
classificationsystem and tomake theproductmore readily
understoodand used, we establishedcertainguidingprin­
ciples. First, sincethetaxonomy is tobe used in regard
to existingeducationalunitsand programs, we are of the
opinionthatthemajor distinctionsbetween classes should
reflect,inlargepart,thedistinctionsteachersmake among
studentbehaviors. These distinctionsare revealed in the
ways teachersstateeducationalobjectives.They are also
<<<PAGE=15>>>
14
found in theircurricular plans, theirinstructionalmaterial,
and their instructionalmethods. To the extent itwas pos­
sible,the subdivisions of thetaxonomy are intended to rec­
ognize these distinctions.
A second principle is that the taxonomy should be logi­
cally developed and internallyconsistent. Thus, each term
should be defined and used in a consistent way throughout
the taxonomy. In addition, each category should permit
logicalsubdivisions which can be clearly defined and fur­
ther subdivided to the extent that appears necessary and
useful.
A third principle is that the taxonomy should be con­
sistentwith our present understanding ofpsychological phe­
nomena. Those distinctionswhich are psychologically un­
tenable, even though regularly made by teachers, would
be avoided. Further, distinctions which seem psycho­
logicallyimportant, even though notfrequently made inedu­
cationalobjectives, would be favorably considered for in­
clusion. Perhaps itshould be reiterated that, since the
taxonomy deals only with educationallyintended behavior,
itfallsconsiderably short of being a classificationscheme
for allpsychological phenomena.
A fourth principleis that the classificationshould be a
purely descriptive scheme in which every type of educa­
tionalgoal can be represented ina relativelyneutralfashion.
Thus, the Dewey decimal classificationsystem forlibraries
describes allthe classes of books. Itdoes not indicate the
value or qualityof one class as compared with another, nor
does itspecify thenumber and kind of books any particular
library should possess. Similarly, to avoid partialityto
one view of education as opposed to another, we have at­
tempted to make the taxonomy neutral by avoiding terms
which implicitlyconvey value judgments and by making the
taxonomy as inclusive as possible. This means that the
kinds of behavioral changes emphasized by any institution,
educational unit, or educational philosophy can be repre­
sented in the classification. Another way of saying this is
that any objective which describes an intended behavior
should be classifiablein this system. On the other hand,
the taxonomy will probably include a greater variety of
behaviors than those emphasized by any one school, course,
15
or educational philosophy. Thus, one course might have
objectives classifiablein four of the categories, another in
only three of the categories, and so on.
In one sense, however, the taxonomy is not completely
neutral. This stems from the already-noted fact that itis
a classificationof intended behaviors. Itcannot be used to
classify educational plans which are made in such a way
that eitherthe student behaviors cannot be specifiedor only
a single (unanalyzed) term or phrase such as "understand­
ing," or "desirable citizen,IIis used to describe the out­
comes. Only those educational programs which can be
specified in terms of intended student behaviors can be
classified.
Deve loping the taxonomy
Keeping in mind theaforementioned principles,we be­
gan work by gathering a large listof educational objectives
from our own institutionsand the literature..We determined
which part of the objective stated thebehavior intended and
which stated the content or object of the behavior. We then
attempted to find divisions or groups intowhich the behav­
iors could be placed. We initiallylimited ourselves to
those objectives commonly referred to as knowledge, intel­
lectualabilities,and intellectualskills. (This area, which
we named the cognitive domain, may also be described as
including the behaviors: remembering; reasoning; problem
solving; concept formation; and, to a limited extent, crea­
tive thinking.) We proceeded to divide the cognitive objec­
tives into subdivisions from the simplest behavior to the
most complex. We then attempted to find ways of defining
these subdivisions in such a way that allof us working with
the material could communicate with each other about the
specific objectives as well as the testingprocedures to beincluded.
We have not succeeded in findinga method of classifi­
cation which would permit complete and sharp distinctions
among behaviors. (This is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 3, which considers the problem of classifyingob­
jectives and test exercises.) There are two basic views.
First, we were again made aware of what any teacher
knows -two boys may appear to be doing the same thing;
II
II
I
II
I
!i
!II
II
<<<PAGE=16>>>
16
but ifwe analyzethe situation,we find theyare not. For
example, two studentssolve an algebra problem. One
studentmay be solvingit from memory, havinghad the
identicalproblem in classpreviously. The other student
has never met theproblem before and must reason out the
solutionby applyinggeneralprinciples. We can only dis­
tinguishbetween theirbehaviorsas we analyzethe relation
between theproblem and each student'sbackground of ex­
perience. This then introducesa new aspectto the classi­
ficationproblem, namely, Lhe expericntialbackgrounds of
thestudentstowhom theobjectiveis to apply. As is indi­
catedin Chapter 3, thismay be a very importantfactorin
usingthe taxonomy to classifytestexercises.
A second difficultyin classificationresultsfrom the
factthatthemore complex behaviors includethe simpler
behaviors. Ifwe view statementsof educationalobjectives
as intendedbehaviorswhich thestudentshalldisplayat the
end of some periodof education,we can thenview thepro­
cess as one of change. As teacherswe intendthelearning
experiences to change the student'sbehaviorfrom a sim­
pler typeto anothermore complex one which in some ways
atleastwillincludethefirsttype.
One may taketheGestaltpointofview thatthecomplex
behavior ismore than the sum of the simpler behaviors,
or one may view the complex behavioras being completely
analyzableintosimpler components. But eitherway, so
long as the simplerbehaviorsmay be viewed as components
of themore complex behaviors,we canview theeducational
process as one ofbuildingon thesimpler behavior. Thus,
a particularbehavior which is classifiedin one way at a
giventime may develop and become integratedwithother
behaviorsto form a more complex behaviorwhich is clas­
sifiedin a differentway. In order tofinda singleplace for
each typeofbehavior,thetaxonomy must be organizedfrom
simple to complex classesof behavior. Furthermore, for
consistencyin classification,a rule ofprocedure may be
adoptedsuchthataparticularbehaviorisplacedin themost
complex classwhich is appropriateand relevant.
But,havingspecifiedthattheclassesshallbe arranged
from simpleto complex, we have exceeded thesimpleclas­
sificationscheme which calledprimarilyfora seriesofcate­
gorieswithoutorder or rank, The next sectionaddresses
itselfto thisproblem.
17
The problem of a hierarchy-classificationversustaxonomy
We have so far used the terms "classification"and
"taxonomy" more or less interchangeably.Itis necessary,
however, that we examine the relationshipbetween these
terms because,strictlyspeaking,they are notinterchange­
able. Taxonomies, particularlyAristoteliantaxonomies,
have certainstructuralrules which exceed in complexity
the rulesof a classificationsystem. While a classification
scheme may have many arbitraryelements, a taxonorIlY
scheme may not. A taxonomy must be so constructedthat
the order of the terms must correspond to some "real"
order among thephenomena representedby the terms. A
classificationscheme may be validatedby referenceto the
criteriaof communicability,usefulness,and suggestive­
ness;while a taxonomy must be validatedby demonstrating
itsconsistencywiththe theoreticalviews in research find­
ings of thefielditattemptstoorder.
As educatorsand specialistsinresearch,we areinter­
estedin along-term inquiryintothenatureofthephenomena
with which we deal,and no simple set of terms and defini­
tionsby itselfreallyisa satisfactorytool inmaking this
inquiry.We need amethod oforderingphenomena such that
the method of ordering revealssignificantrelationships
among thephenomena. This is thebasicproblem of a tax­
onomy-to order phenomena inways which willrevealsome
of theiressentialpropertiesas well as the interrelation­
ships among them. Members of thetaxonomy group spent
considerabletime inattemptingtofinda psychologicalthe­
ory whichwouldprovidea soundbasis fororderingthecate­
goriesof thetaxonomy. We reviewedtheoriesofpersonality
and learningbut were unableto finda singleview which,in
our opinion,accountedforthevarietiesofbehaviorsrepre­
sentedintheeducationalobjectiveswe attemptedtoclassify.
We were reluctantlyforcedtoagree with Hilgard1 thateach
theoryoflearningaccountsfor some phenomena very well
but islessadequateinaccountingforothers.What is needed
is alargersynthetictheoryoflearningthanatpresentseems
tobe available. We are of the opinionthatour method of
orderingeducationaloutcomes willmake itpossibletodefine
1Hilgard,E. R., Theories of Learning (CenturyPsy­
chologySeries),New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,194&
Ii
i
I
II
I
I
II
il
<<<PAGE=17>>>
18
the range ofphenomena for which such a theory must ac­
count. The taxonomy alsouses an order consistentwith
research findingsand it shouldprovide some clues as to
thenatureof thetheory which may be developed. This is
an extremely complex problem; and althoughit has prob­
ably not been solved completely satisfactorily,it is the
opinionof thewriters thatwe have made some progress
toward a solution.
As the taxonomy is now organized,itcontainssixma­
jor classes:
1.00 Knowledge
2.00 Comprehension
3.00 Application
4.00 Analysis
5.00 Synthesis
6.00 Evaluation
Althoughitispossibleto conceive of thesemajor classes
in severaldifferentarrangements, thepresentone appears
to us to represent something of thehierarchicalorder of
the differentclasses of objectives. As we have defined
them, theobjectivesin one classare likelytomake use of
and be builton thebehaviorsfoundinthepreceding classes
in thislist. The reader is referredto the condensed ver­
sion of thetaxonomy in theAppendix for a brief definition
of each class and itssubclasses. Fullertreatmentof the
taxonomy willbe foundin Part IIof thisvolume.
Our attempttoarrangeeducationalbehaviorsfrom sim­
ple tocomplex was based on theideathataparticularsimple
behaviormay become integratedwithother equallysimple
behaviors toform amore complex behavior. Thus our clas­
sificationsmay be said tobe in theform where behaviors
of type A form one class, behaviorsof type AB form an­
other class,whilebehaviorsof typeABC form stillanother
class. Ifthisisthe realorder from simple to complex, it
shouldbe relatedto an order of difficultysuch thatprob­
lems requiringbehavior A aloneshouldbe answered cor­
rectlymore frequentlythan problems requiringAB. We
have studieda largenumber ofproblems occurringin our
comprehensive examinationsand have foundsome evidence
tosupportthishypothesis.Thus, problems requiringknowl­
edgeofspecificfactsaregenerallyanswered correctlymore
19
frequentlythanproblems requiringa knowledge of theuni­
versals and abstractionsin a field. Problems requiring
knowledgeofprinciplesand conceptsare correctlyanswered
more frequentlythanproblems requiringboth knowledgeof
theprincipleand some abilityto apply itin new situations.
Problems requiringanalysisand synthesisare more diffi­
cultthanproblems requiringcomprehension. Scatterplots
of theperformances of individualson one testcomposed of
items at a simple level in the taxonomy againsttheirper­
formances on another test composed of HeIns at a rnore
complex levelin thetaxonomy show thatitismore common
tofind thatindividualshave low scores on complex prob­
lems and high scores on the less complex problems than
the reverse. Our evidenceon thisis not entirelysatisfac­
tory, but thereisan unmistakabletrend pointingtoward a
hierarchyofclassesofbehaviorwhich isin accordancewith
our presenttentativeclassificationof thesebehaviors.
While we have been primarilyconcerned with the cog­
nitivedomain, we have done some thinkingaboutthe clas­
sificationversus taxonomy problem as itappliesto allthe
domains. The arrangement ofbehaviors from simple to
complex and thedifferentiationofbehaviorsintothree do­
mains-the cognitive,thepsychomotor, and the affective­
were made primarilyfrom an educationalviewpoint. That
is, these are the distinctionswhich teachersmake in the
development of curriculum and teachingprocedures. We
as educationaltestersalsomake similardistinctions.As
we examine the classificationsystem so far developed,
however, we note an additionaldimension not usuallycon­
sideredin educationaland teachingprocedures. One of the
major threadsrunningthroughallthe taxonomy appears to
be a scaleof consciousnessor awareness. Thus, thebe­
haviors in the cognitivedomain are largelycharacterized
by a ratherhigh degree of consciousnesson thepart of the
individualexhibitingthebehavior, while thebehaviors in
the affectivedomain are much more frequentlyexhibited
witha low levelof awareness on thepart of theindividual.
Further,inthe cognitivedomain especially,itappears that
as thebehaviors become more complex, the individualis
more aware of theirexistence. We are of the opinionthat
thisappliesto the otherdomains as well. Clearlythereis
no precise scale of consciousness which may be used to
<<<PAGE=18>>>
20
testthese speculations. However, some of our research
on the thoughtprocessesinvolvedin problem solving2 indi­
catesthatstudentsare ableto givemore complete reports
of theirattackon a problem as theproblem becomes more
complex, thatis,as theproblem is classifiedin themore
complex classesof intellectualabilitiesand skills.
Ifthelevelof consciousnesscan be demonstrated tobe
an importantdimension in the classificationofbehavior,it
would pose a greatrange of problems and pointtoa whole
new set of relationshipswhich would be of interestto re­
searchers in thefieldof educationalpsychology.One might
hope thatitwouldprovidea basisforexplainingwhy behav­
iors which are initiallydisplayedwith a highlevelof con­
sciousnessbecome, aftersome time and repetition,auto­
matic or are accompanied by a low levelof consciousness.
Perhaps thiswould provide a partialbasis for explaining
why some learning,especiallyof the affectivebehaviors,
is so difficult.Perhaps it will also help to explainthe
extraordinary retentionof some learning- especiallyof
thepsychomotor skills.
Is thetaxonomy a usefultool?
We have subjectedthisclassificationscheme toa series
ofchecks,primarilyofcommunicabilityand comprehensive­
ness. A major check of communicabilitywas to determine
whether a number of workers couldagree in theirclassifi­
cationof specificeducationalobjectivesand testmaterials.
Members of thetaxonomy group discussed the classifica­
tionofparticularobjectivesincertaincategories,andmany
ambiguitiesand inconsistencieswere pointedoutwhich we
have attemptedtoremedy. Perhaps themos t complete test
of the classificationsand theirdefinitionshas been the at­
tempt of members of the group to claSsifya largenumber
of testitems. One of themajor problems in theclassifi­
cationof testitems which thisstudyrevealed is thatitis
necessary in allcases to know or assume thenatureof the
~Bloom, B. S., and Broder, Lois, Problem-solving
processes of collegestudents (A Supplementary Educa­
tionalMonograph), Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press,Summer, 1950.
21
examinees I prior educationalexperiences. Thus, a test
problem could require a very complex type of problem­
solvingbehavior ifitis a new situation,while itmay re­
quire littlemore than a simple kind of recallifthe indi­
vidualhas had previouslearningexperiences in which this
very problem was analyzedand discussed. This suggests
that,in general,testmaterialcan be satisfactorilyclassi­
fiedby means of thetaxonomy onlywhen thecontextinwhich
the testproblems were used isknown or assumed.
Comprehensiveness, of course,is never finallydeter­
mined. We have repeatedlytakenlistsof objectivesfound
in courses of study and other educationalliteratureand
have attempted to classifythem. As yet, in the cognitive
domain we have encounteredfew statements of studentbe­
haviors which couldnot be placed withintheclassification
scheme. However, althoughwe have littledifficultyin de­
termining the major class withinwhich a behavior falls,
we stillare not satisfiedthatthereare enough clearlyde­
finedsubclassificationstoprovide adequatelyfor the great
varietyof objectiveswe have attemptedto classify.
In additionto comprehensiveness andcommunicability,
the taxonomy shouldsatisfytwo other criteriaifitis tobe
['egardedas a usefuland effectivetool. First, itshould
stimulatethoughtabouteducationalproblems. Ifthetax­
onomy is toprove a usefultoolfor educationalresearch
workers, itmust aid them informulatinghypothesesabout
thelearningprocess and changes in students.Ifitis tobe
llsefulfor teachers and testers,it shouldprovide a basis
['orsuggestions as to methods for developingcurricula,
instructionaltechniques,and testingtechniques.As a highly
organized and presumably comprehensive plan for classi­
ryingeducationalbehaviors, it shouldform thebasis for
easilydetermining the availabilityof relevantevaluation
instruments,techniques,and methods so thateach worker
can determine their appropriateness for his own work.
Properlyused, a taxonomy shouldprovide avery suggestive
source of ideas and materialsfor each worker and should
['csultinmany economies in effort.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
22
The earlydraftsofthetaxonomy have alreadybeen ex­
tensivelyused. Some of the examiners have foundituseful
as an aid inhelpingthefacultyformulateobjectivesmore
preciselyand in seeinga possiblerange of educationalob­
jectives.The major categoriesof thetaxonomy have been
used in severalinstitutionsas a basis for classifyingtest
material. The parallelismofobjectivesindifferentsubject­
matterfieldsishighlightedby thisprocedure,thus suggest­
ingpointsofpossibleintegration. Further, the transfer­
abilityoftestingtechniquesfrom one subjectfieldtoanother
becomes clear. In atleastone institution,diagnosticre­
portsof testresultsto studentsare made in relationto the
taxonomy. In thissame institution,reportsto thefaculty
on therelationof thetestresultsto theobjectivesandlearn­
ing experiencesare analyzedin terms of thetaxonomy.
Stimulationof thoughton educationalproblems may
also occur through the use of the taxonomy in organizing
some of the literatureon educationalresearch. Used in
thisway, itgives a relativelyfresh view to some of this
researchandrevealsmany problems whichhave beenlargely
ignoredby educationalpsychologists,curriculum workers,
and testers.Some of thestudieson therelationshipbetween
measures of scholasticaptitudeor intelligenceand the evi­
dence on thedevelopmentofparticularclassesofbehaviors
have been brought together.3 This has revealed rather
strikinglythe relativelylow relationshipbetween testsof
some of themore complex cognitiveabilitiesand skillsand
measures of intelligence.Thus, theview thatmeasures of
thehighermentalprocesses aresynonymous withmeasures
of scholasticaptitudedoes not seem to be well-founded.
This view has frequentlybeen used to support the conten­
tionthat,since intelligenceis presumed to be constant,
littlecan be done to developsome of thehighermental pro­
cesses througheducativeexperiences.
3Furst, Edward J., "Relationshipbetween testsof
intelligenceand testsof criticalthinkingand knowledge,"
Journal of EducationalResearch, Vol. 43, No.8, April
1950, pp. 614-25.
23
Availableevidence has also been assembled on the
interrelationsamong educationalobjectives.4, 5 These
data give considerablesupport to the generalizationthat
the relationshipsamong measures of differentobjectives
are determined by thenature of the learningexperiences
which the studentshave had. Thus, itseems possibleun­
der one curriculum to integratevariousbehaviorsin such
a way thatvery high correlationsare obtainedamong the
measures of the differentobjectiveswhile under another
curricularplan the correlationsamong the measures of
the differentobjectivesdo not depart very much from
chance. This has been a long-neglectedarea in curricu­
lar planningand educationalresearch.
We have alsoattemptedtoorganizesome of thelitera­
tureon the growth, retention,and transferof the different
typesof educationaloutcomes or behaviors. Here we find
very littlerelevantresearch.I> For themost part,research
on problems in retention,growth, and transferhas not
been very specificwithrespect totheparticularbehavior
involved.Thus, we are usuallynot ableto determine from
thisresearch whether one kind of behavior is retainedfor
a longerperiod oftime thananotheror which kinds of edu­
cativeexperiences are most efficientinproducing a par­
ticularkindofbehavior. Many claims have been made for
differenteducationalprocedures, particularlyin relation
topermanence oflearning;but seldom have thesebeen but­
tressedby research findings.
Altogether,the taxonomy is suggestiveinpointingto
a large number ofproblems in the fieldof educationand
testing. Ifthe taxonomy coulddo nothingmore thanthis,
itwould be useful. Althoughthereare dangers in devising
4 Furst,Edward J.,IlEffectoftheorganizationoflearn­
ingexperiencesupontheorganizationoflearningoutcomes,II
Journal of Experimental Education, XVIII (March 1954),
pp. 215-28.
5 Dressel, Paul L., and Mayhew, Lewis B., General
Education: Explorationsin Evaluation,Washington,D. C.:
American Councilon Education,1954, pp. 249-53.
6 Several of the more relevantreferences are listed
in thefootnoteson page 42.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
24
a classificationscheme which might tend to rigidifyour
thinkingabout education,the relativelychaoticnatureof
our fieldatpresent and the greatemphasis on persuasive
skillsratherthan on research findingsfor claims in the
fieldof educationjustifysome procedure such as thisfor
orderingthephenomena withwhich we deal.
A finalcriterionis thatthetaxonomy must be accepted
and used by theworkers in thefieldifitis tobe regarded
as a usefuland effectivetool.Whether or not itmeets this
criterioncan be determined only aftera sufficientamount
of time has elapsed.We have attemptedto secure thepar­
ticipationof a large number of achievement testers and
evaluationspecialistsin the actualdevelopment and criti­
cism of the classificationscheme. The bulk of the com­
ments from administrators,teachers,curriculum special­
ists,and educationalresearch workers on thepreliminary
editionof the taxonomy indicatethatthereis a real need
for thiskindof device. We do not regard itas perfector
as completed. We expect to continueto work on the de­
velopment of the otherdomains and torevisethisHandbook
as experiencedictatestheneed for improvement. We soli­
cityour help in itsfurtherdevelopment by askingthatyou
send us thesuggestionswhich occur toyou as you attempt
to understand it and as you develop a body of experience
throughitsuse.
CHAPTER 2
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES AND
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
We have had some questionabouttherelevanceof this
sectionin a handbook devotedto the detailsof a classifica­
tionsystem. We have finallyincludeditbecause we be­
lievetheclassificationand evaluationof educationalobjec­
tivesmust be considered as a part of the totalprocess of
curriculumdevelopment. Some of theseconsiderationshelp
1.0 clarifythe distinctionsmade in the taxonomy. Itis
hoped thatmany teachers willfindthischapter usefulas a
summary of some ofthearguments forinclusionofa great­
(T range of educationalobjectivesthan is typicalat the
secondary schoolor collegelevel.
Problems of developingcurriculumand instructionare
Iisual\yconsidered in relationto fourmajor typesof ques­tions.
1. What educationalpurposes or objectivesshould
the schoolor 'Courseseek to attain?
2. What learningexperiences can be providedthat
are likelytobringaboutthe attainmentof these
purposes?
3. How can theselearningexperiencesbe effective­
lyorganized tohelp provide continuityand se­
quence for the learner and tohelphim in inte­
gratingwhat might otherwiseappear as isolated
learningexperiences?
4. How can the effectivenessof learningexperi­
ences be evaluatedby theuse of testsand other
systematicevidence-gatheringprocedures?
1The contentof thissectionhas been largelydrawn
I'mm Ralph W. Tyler, "Achievement Testingand Curricu­
1111ll Construction," Trends in StudentPersonnel Work,
I';.G. Williamson, Ed., Minneapolis, Minn.: University
"I'Minnesota Press, 1949, pp. 391-407.
25
<<<PAGE=21>>>
26
We are here concerned primarily with the first of these
questions: the formulation and classificationof education­
al objectives.
By educational objectives, we mean explicitformula­
tions of the ways in which students are expected tobe
changed by the educative process. That is, the ways in
which they willchange in their thinking,their feelings,and
their actions. There are many possible changes thatcan
take place in students as a result of learning experiences,
but since the time and resources of the school are limited,
only a few of the possibilitiescan be realized. It isim­
portant that the major objectives of the school or unit of
instructionbe clearly identifiediftime and effortare not
to be wasted on less important things and ifthe work of the
school is to be guided by some plan.
The formulation of educational objectives is a matter
of conscious choice on the part of the teaching staff,based
on previous experience and aided by consideration of sev­
eral kinds of data. The finalselection and ordering of the
objectives become a matter of making use of the learning
theory and philosophy of education which the faculty ac­
cepts.
One type of source commonly used in thinking about
objectives is the information available about the students.
What is theirpresent level ofdevelopment? What are their
needs? What are their interests? Another source for ob­
jectives is availablefrom investigationsof the conditions
and problems of contemporary lifewhich make demands on
young people and adults and which provide opportunities
for them. What are the activitiesthat individualsare ex­
pected to perform? What are the problems they are likely
to encounter? What are the opportunitiesthey are likelytohave for service and self-realization?
Another source of suggestions for objectives comes
from the nature of the subjectmatter and thedeliberations
of subject-matter specialists on the contributions their
subject is able to make to the education of the individual.
What is the conception of the subject field? What are the
27
types of learning which can arise from a study of that sub­
jectmatter? What are the contributions that the subject
can make in relation to other subjects?
Itis likelythata consideration of these three sources
will result in a suggested list of objectives which require
more time and effort than the school has at its disposal.
The problem of selecting among possible objectives as well
as the determination of relative emphasis to be given to
v~ariousobjectives requires the use of some guiding con~
ceptions. The philosophy of education of the school serves
as one guide, since the objectives to be finallyincluded
should be related to the school's view of the "good lifefor
the individualinthe"good society." What are the important
values? What is the proper relation between man and so­
ciety? What are the proper relations between man and
man?
Finally, educational objectives must be related to a
psychology of learning. The facultymust distinguishgoals
that are feasible from goals that are unlikely to be at­
tained in thetime available,under the conditions which are
possible, and with the group of students to be involved.
The use of a psychology of learning enables the facultyto
determine the appropriate placement of objectives in the
learning sequence, helps them discover thelearning condi­
tions under which itis possible to attainan objective, and
provides a way ofdetermining theappropriate interrelation­
ships among the objectives.
Itshould be clear from the foregoing that objectives
are not only the goals toward which the curriculum is
shaped and toward which instruction is guided, but they
are also the goals that provide the detailed specification
for the construction and use of evaluative techniques. Sev­
eral of thesources which may be of value to the reader are
listedin the footnotes.2,3,4,5,6
2 Dressel, Paul L., "Evaluation Procedures for Gen­
eral Education Objectives,"Educational Record, April 1950,
pp. 97-122.
3 Lindquist, E. F., (Editor), Educational Measure­
ment, Washington, D. C.: American Council on Education,
1951, chap. 5.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
I
I
-
28
A testof theachievement ofstudentsis a testof theextent to
which the students have attained these educational objec­
tives. An achievement test is an adequate and valid test if
itprovides evidence of the extent to which students are at­
tainingeach of the major objectives of the unit of instruc­
tion.
The cognitive objectives derived from a process like
that described in the foregoing paragraphs may, for dis­
cuss ion purposes, be divided into two parts. One would be
the simple behavior of remembering or recallingknowledge
and the other, the more complex behaviors of the abilities
and skills. The following section discusses these two divi­
sions in turn, considering their nature, their appearance
in the taxonomy, and their place in the curriculum.
Knowledge as ~ taxonomy category
Probably the most common educational objective in
American education is the acquisition of knowledge or in­
formation. That is,itis desired thatas the resultof com­
pletingan educational unit,the student willbe changed with
respect to the amount and kind of knowledge he possesses.
Frequently knowledge is the primary, sometimes almost
the sole kind of, educational objective in a curriculum. In
almost every course itis an important or basic one. By
knowledge, we mean that the student can give evidence that
he remembers, eitherby recalling or by recognizing, some
idea or phenomenon with which he has had experience in
the educational process. For our taxonomy purposes, we
are definingknowledge as littlemore than the remembering
4 Thomas, R. Murray, Judging Student Progress, New
York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1954, chap. 1.
5 Remmers, H. H., and Gage, N. L., Educational
Measurement and Evaluation, Revised Edition, New York:
Harper & Bros., 1955, chap. 1.
6 Tyler, Ralph W., and Smith, Eugene, Appraising
and Recording Student Progress, Vol. III, New York:
Harper & Bros., 1942, chap. 1.
29
of the idea or phenomenon in a form very close to that in
which itwas originallyencountered.
This type of objective emphasizes most the psycho­
logical processes of remembering. Knowledge may also
involve the more complex processes of relating and judg­
ing, since itis almost impossible to present an individual
with a knowledge problem which includes exactly the same
stimuli, signals, or cues as were present in the original
learning situation.Thus, any testsituationinvolving knowl­
edge requires some organization and reorganization of the
problem to furnish the appropriate signals and cues linking
it to the knowledge the individual possesses. It may be
helpfulin this case to thinkof knowledge as something filed
or stored in the mind. The task for the individual in
each knowledge test situation is to find the appropriate
signals and cues in the problem which will most effective­
ly bring out whatever knowledge is filed or stored. For
instance, almost everyone has had the experience of being
unable to answer a question involving recallwhen the ques­
tion is stated in one form, and then having littledifficulty
in remembering the necessary information when the ques­
tion is restated in another form. This is well illustrated
by John Dewey's story in which he asked a class, "What
would you find ifyou dug a hole in the earth?" Getting no
response, he repeated the question; again he obtained no­
thing but silence. The teacher chided Dr. Dewey, "You're
asking the wrong question." Turning to the class, she
asked, "What is the state of the center of the earth?" The
class replied in unison, "Igneous fusion."
John Dewey's story also illustratesthe rote recall na­
ture of some knowledge learning. The emphasis on knowl­
edge as involving littlemore than remembering or recall
distinguishes itfrom those conceptions of knowledge which
involve "understanding," "insight," or which are phrased
as "really know," or "true knowledge." In these lattercon­
ceptions itis implicitlyassumed that knowledge is of little
value ifitcannot be utilized in new situationsor in a form
very differentfrom that in which itwas originallyencoun­
tered. The denotations of these latterconcepts would usu­
ally be close to what have been defined as "abilitiesand
skills"in the taxonomy.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
II
I-
30
Whether or not one accepts thislatterposition,itis
sufficientto notethatknowledge by itselfis one of themost
common educationalobjectives.The most cursory read­
ingof the standardizedtestsavailableor of teacher-made
testswould indicatethattremendous emphasis is givenin
our schoolsto thiskind of remembering or recall.A com­
prehensive taxonomy of educationalobjectivesmust, in
our opinion,includeallthe educationalobjectivesrepre­
sented in American education withoutmaking judgments
about their value, lueaningfulness,or appropriateness.
Knowledge, therefore,is one of our taxonomy categories.
The knowledge category in particularand, asnoted
earlier, the classificationsof the taxonomy in general
range from the simple tothe more complex behaviors and
from the concreteor tangibleto theabstractor intangible.
By simple we mean elemental, isolablebitsof phenomena
or information,e.g.,"thecapitalof Illinoisis Springfield:'
or "Arkansas containsmuch bauxite."Thus, our base sub­
classificationis titled"knowledge of specifics." At the
upper end of theknowledge category the subclassifications
refertomore complex phenomena. Thus, remembering a
theoryis a more complex taskthanremembering a specific
such as the capitalof a state. Knowledge of thetheoryof
evolution,for instance,would be very complex. Accord­
ingly,the subclassificationat thecomplex end of theknowl­
edge category is titledthe "knowledge of theoriesand
structures."
The knowledge categoriesmay alsobe viewed as run­
ningfrom concreteto abstract. Thus, ingeneral,Imowl­
edge of specificswillreferto concrete, tangiblephenom­
ena: "Insectshave sixlegs;""Most glassisbrittle." But
the more complex categories,as, for example, thename
"knowledge of theoriesand structures"implies, tend to
dealwith abstractphenomena.
Itmight sometimes be usefulfor taxonomy purposes
to distinguishknowledgewith regard to thedifferentspeci­
alties,fieldsof knowledge, or subdivisionsof work in our
schools.Thus, itwould be possibletodistinguishknowledge
31
aboutthe socialsciencesfrom knowledge aboutthephysical
sciences,and knowledgeofphysicsfrom knowledgeofchem­
istry,etc. Likewise, knowledge aboutman couldbe dis­
tinguishedfrom knowledge aboutphysicalobjects,etc. The
taxonomy as developedhere shouldbe applicableto any of
the subdivisionsofknowledge or educationalunitsinwhich
schoolcurriculaare divided,but no attempt willbe made
to make all the possibleapplicationsor subdivisionsin
thisHandbook. The readermay wish todevelopsuch further
classificationsas arcnecessaryforhis work, using thetax­
onomy as a basis.
What is knowable
One of themajor problems withregard toknowledge is
determiningwhat isknowable,for thereare differentways
in which something canbe saidtobe known. Adding to this
problem is the factthatdifferentcriteriaof accuracy and
authenticityare appliedtoknowledge in differentareas, at
leasttheknowledge tobe learnedin school.To a large ex­
tentknowledge, as taughtin American schools, depends
upon some externalauthority;some expertor group of ex­
perts is thearbiterofknowledge. Some informationis the
resultoflittlemore than conventionand consensus. That
is, a group of workers or expertsin thefieldhas come to
some agreement on the ways in which particularterms
willbe defined,on the particularreferentsfor selected
symbols, or themost effectiveor practicalways inwhich
to organizea fieldor attackproblems in it. For instance,
lexicographersappear tomake many arbitrarydecisions
inpreparinga dictionary.The symbol system for punctu­
ationissolelya matter ofconvention.Memorizing thecon­
jugationof verbs and thedeclensionof nouns is accepted
as theproper approach tolearningsome foreignlanguages.
Other informationisknown as the resultoflogicaltestsof
consistencyeitherby definitionor by some logic of rela­
tionship.Certainkindsof geometry, mathematical propo­
sitions,and mathematical models are examples. Finally,
some knowledge or informationisknown as theresultof
some historical,experiential,or pragmatic test. Thus,
historicalinformationisknown as the resultof a number
of observationswhich are in agreement or which satisfy
,II
Ii
II
II
<<<PAGE=24>>>
I
I-
32
particularhistoricaltestsof theirauthenticity.Scientific
informationisknown as a resultofsome observation,experi­
ment, or testwhich meets the canons of scientificmethod­
ology.
Itshouldalsobe notedthatthevalidity,accuracy, and
meaningfulness of informationare relativein many ways
and alwaysare relatedto a particularperiodoftime. Thus,
what isknown in 1955 was not known in the same way in a
previousera and willpresumably undergo some changes in
thefuture. Compare theway we picturedtheatom twenty
years ago withtoday'sview of it.
There is also a geographical and culturalaspect to
knowledge in thesense thatwhat isknown to one group is
not necessarilyknown to anothergroup, class,or culture.
Itmust be clear from allthis,thatknowledge is always
partialand relativeratherthan inclusiveand fixed.
Justificationfor thedevelopment ofknowledge
Knowledge or informationmay be justifiedas an im­
portantobjectiveor outcome of learningin many ways.
Perhaps themost common justificationis thatwithincrease
inknowledge or informationthereisa development of oner S
acquaintancewithreality.Such realitymay representwhat
isknown by conventionor definition,what are known as the
findingsor outcome of inquiryin thevariousfields,what
are known as themore fruitfulways of attackingproblems
in thefield,or what are known as the more usefulways
of organizinga field. It is assumed thatas thenumber
of thingsknown by an individualincreases, his acquaint­
ance with theworld inwhich he livesincreases. But, as
has been pointedoutbefore,we recognizethepointofview
thattruthand knowledge are onlyrelativeand thatthere
are no hard and fasttruthswhich existfor aU time and
allplaces. Nonetheless, most educators hold it desir­
able thatthe learner increase his knowledge of what is
currentlyknown or accepted by theexperts or specialists
in a field,whether or not such knowledge, in a philosophi­
cal sense, corresponds to Itreality."
33
The selectionof knowledge as an educationalobjective
usuallyassumes some stabilityinthe world,in the culture,
or in the subjectfield. If the knowledge learned at one
time is not regarded as very usefulor accurateat another
time, therewould be littlepointin thestudentlearningit.
Itislikelythatthe stabilityof knowledge varies consider­
ablywith the fieldor problem under consideration. Some
fieldsor topicsare undergoing such rapid transitionthat
what is known at one time is not accepted or is altered
shortlythereafter.. Under such conditionsthe acquisition
of knowledgecouldnotbe justifiedforitsown sakebutwould
have tobe justifiedin relationto theothereducationalob­
jectives,a positionwhich is discussednext.
Another justificationfor the teachingof knowledge is
thatitis quitefrequentlyregarded as basic to alltheother
ends or purposes of education. Problem solvingor think­
ing cannotbe carriedon in a vacuum, but must be based
upon knowledge of some of the "realities.l1 The intellec­
tualabilitiesrepresented in the taxonomy assume knowl­
edge as a prerequisite. Knowledge becomes eitherthe
material with which the problem solvingdeals or itbe­
comes thetestof theadequacy and accuracyof theproblem
solving.Thus in fieldsundergoingrapidtransition,knowl­
edge may be taught,not so much with the expectationthat
it willprove eternally"true," but as a basis forlearning
themethodologyof thefieldand as a basis for attackingthe
problems therein. Even themanipulativeand motor skills
assume some knowledge about thematerials, methods, or
toolsthatare used. Further, in anothersense, allof the
affectiveclassificationsmake use of or are based upon
knowledge. Thus, itis generallyheld thatinterestsare
developedas the resultof an increasein information;like­
wise, attitudesand appreciationsare regarded as having
some base in knowledge or information. Even the objec­
tivesinvolvingpersonal adjustment are quitefrequently
based upon the notionthata person must have some knowl­
edge about himself before he can proceed to resolve his
conflicts,anxieties,or otherindividualdifficulties.Itis
clearthatjustificationof knowledge for alltheseuses will
usuallyinvolveknowledge in relationto other objectives,
ratherthanknowledge for itsown sake.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
34
Stillanotherjustificationfor thedevelopment ofknowl­
edge as an objectiveof educationarisesfrom the statusof
knowledge in our own culture. Many workers assume a
positiverelationshipbetween increase in knowledge and
increaseinmaturity.In fact,quitefrequentlytheincreas­
ingmaturityof individualsor groups is judgedin terms of
theirincreasingknowledge about themselves or aboutthe
world in which theylive.Knowledge is alsofrequentlyre­
garded as an importantcriterionof brightnessor intelli­
gence. This is refleccedin intelligencetestingwhere
vocabulary or knowledge questions predominate and are
regarded as signsofintelligence.In many schools,knowl­
edge isregarded as theprimary index of thelevelof edu­
cationan individualhas attained. This is indicatedby the
contentof our standardizedachievement test. The layman
frequentlyregards knowledge and educationas being syn­
onymous. The greatemphasis on radio quizprograms and
testsofeitherhistoricalor contemporary informationwhich
appear in newspapers and magazines furtherreflectsthe
statusofknowledge in our culture. There is littledoubt
thatour cultureplacestremendous weighton knowledge or
informationas an importantcharacteristicoftheindividual.
Many teachersand educatorsprizeknowledge to some
extentbecause of the simplicitywithwhich itcan be taught
or learned. Mass methods, such as lectures,audio-visual
methods, printedmaterial,andthe like,can be readilyused
for theacquisitionofinformation.Quitefrequentlywe tend
to thinkofknowledge as something which is learnedas the
resultof simply presentingitto thelearner in one form of
communication or another. Clearlyrelatedto thisis the
ease withwhich itispossibletogauge theextentto which
thestudenthas acquiredknowledge. Practicallyallteach­
er.shave considerableconfidencein theirabilityto build
testsof knowledge. Because of the simplicityof teaching
and evaluatingknowledge, itisfrequentlyemphasized as
an educationalobjectiveoutof allproportionto itsuseful­
ness or itsrelevanceforthedevelopment oftheindividual.
In effect,theteacherand schooltendtolook where thelight
isbrightestand where it is leastdifficultto develop theindividual.
35
Requiring thata studentlearn certainknowledge as­
sumes a predictionthatthe studentislikelytobe able to
make some use of the knowledge in thefuture. Thus,
knowledge aboutphenomena relevantto the specialization
of theengineerismaximally useful ifthe studentis tobe­
come an engineer.Requiringthestudenttolearn about en­
gineeringphenomena means thatwe canpredictthathe will
be an engineer or thattheknowledge willtransferto other
areas where he islikelytobe able touse it. Knowledge
requiredof studentspriorto theirmaking a firmvocational
choicewillneed tohave more generalrelevanceand wide­
spread usefulnessthanaftera firm choice ismade. Ex­
tensiveknowledgerequirementsinrapidlychangingspecial­
ized fieldsneed to be checked againstthe best possible
predictionofwhat knowledge willbe of continuinguse and
what knowledge is necessary for a grasp of the current
known field. The teacher and the curriculum specialist
must takeallthesefactorsintoaccountindeterminingwhat
knowledge to select.
Undoubtedly the greatestpredictabilityarises within
the schoolitselfwhere itmay be known thattheknowledge
learnedin one class willbe used inone way or anotherin
a subsequentcourse. Conversely, thereisleastpredict­
abilityin theattempttorelatewhat is learnedintheclass­
room towhat thestudentmay need as a citizenor specialist.
Our general understanding of learningtheory would
seem toindicatethatknowledge which is organizedand re­
latedisbetterlearned and retainedthanknowledge which
is specificand isolated. By thiswe mean thatlearninga
largenumber of isolatedspecificsis quitedifficultsimply
because of themultiplicityof itemstobe remembered. Fur­
ther, theycannotbe retainedvery well iftheyare kept in
such isolation.Thus one hundred nonsensesyllableswould
be more difficulttolearn thanan equalnumber of syllables
in a meaningfulpoem. Specificscan be learnedin relation
to a generalabstraction,and as a resultcan be remem­
bered or retainedbest inthisrelationship.When learning
takesplacein thisway, itis possibleforan individualwho
remembers the generalizationtoproceed relativelyeasily
tosome ofthespecificssubsumed under thatgeneralization.
<<<PAGE=26>>>
I
1
I!I'
36
On theother hand, generalizationsor abstractions are rela­
tivelydifficulttolearn unless they are related to appropri­
ate concrete phenomena. A generalization isolated from
the phenomena itcovers is very difficultto learn and very
hard to retain. As a matter of fact, some definitionsof
intelligence7 regard the abstractness of the ideas an indi­
vidual can understand as a good index of the level of intel­
ligence.
Curricular decisions to be made about knowledge objectives
Four decisions to be made with respect to the nature
oftheknowledge objectivesincluded inthecurriculum should
be noted. These relate to "How much knowledge should be
required learning? ";"How precisely need the student learn
therequired knowledge? ";"How isknowledge best organized
for learning? ';and "How meaningful need required knowl­
edge -learningbe to the student?"
Decisions with respect to "How much knowledge should
be required learning?" must strike a balance between at­
tempts toinclude alltheknowledge theindividualmight con­
ceivably acquire in a particularsubject and only thatknowl­
edge which is most basic to the subject. Rarely does the
educator lean toward the latter of these two alternatives.
Some educators frequentlyassume that theknowledge which
the expert or specialist needs to possess about a field or
topic and the knowledge which the beginning student may
reasonably be expected to learn are identical. Such an as­
sumption tends tooverestimate thestudent's abilitytolearn
and retain information. These educators must decide
whether the student's time and effort are best used in be­
coming acquainted with the major knowledge in the fieldor
in thoroughly mastering thatknowledge which is basic to
further learning in the field. For instance, in the fieldof
mathematics itwould be possible for the student to become
aware of the existence and nature of the major mathemati­
cal techniques or to concentrate on learning the fundamen­
tals which would permit him to later pick up these tech­
niques on his own.
'(See Stoddard, George D., The Meaning of Intelli­
gence, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1944.
37
A second decision, the degree of precision to be re­
quired of the student, is not unrelated to the first. Thus,
requiring thestudent to"become aware of the existence and
nature of the major mathematical techniques" would pre­
sumably permit the student some latitude in the precision
of his recall of the detailsof the techniques. On the other
hand, to "thoroughly master that mathematical knowledge
which is basic to further learning" implies a rather high
standard of precision in thelearning of this material. This
decision about the precision to be required of the student
exists at all levels of knowledge. Thus, even in the sim­
plest type of objective such as knowledge of terminology,
itis quite conceivable for a student to learn definitionsof
terms at many differentlevels of accuracy and precision.
Usually greater precision is required at later stages of
training. Thus, the student is introduced to an item of
knowledge at a general but accurate level, gradually mak­
ing finer and finer distinctionsas he uses the item until
he has reached the more detailed and precise level of the
expert.
A third decision relates to the best organization of
knowledge to facilitatelearning. As previously noted, the
cases of the specialistand the student are not identical.The
organization the specialistfinds most useful is not neces­
sarily the organization that provides the easiest learning
path for the student. The decision to be made is whether
to use an organization externallyimposed by some authority
or expert as compared with an organization that fitsthe in­
ternal state of the learner at his particular stage of de{,.el­
opment.
A fourth decision with respect to the nature of knowl­
edge objectives in the curriculum relates to the immediate
as opposed to the future need of the student for this infor­
mation. A student can memorize a body of information
whether or not he finds immediate use for it or whether it
meets any of his present needs. This is particularlytrue
once the student becomes habituated to thiskind oflearning,
as many of our students have, Many schools orient their
students in this direction by the use of grades, examina­
tions, and competition. It is likely that if the teacher
believes the learning of knowledge is important or can
<<<PAGE=27>>>
-
38
communicate theimportance ofittothestudents,therewill
be littledifficultyin obtaininglearningof even the most
artificialand esoterickindsof information.
The natureof abilitiesand skills
Althoughinformationor knowledge isrecognizedas an
important outcome of education,very few teachers would
be satisfiedto regard thisas theprimary or the sole out­
come of instruction.What isneeded is some evidencethat
thestudentscan do something with theirknowledge,thatis,
thatthey can apply the informationto new situationsand
problems. Itis also expected that studentswillacquire
generalizedtechniquesfor dealingwithnew problems and
new materials. Thus, itis expected thatwhen the student
encountersa new problem or situation,he willselectan ap­
propriatetechniquefor attackingitand willbring tobear
thenecessary information,both factsand principles.This
has been labeled"criticalthinking"by some, "reflective
thinking"by Dewey and others, and "problem solving"by
stillothers, Inthetaxonomy we have used theterm "in­
tellectualabilitiesand skills." The most general opera­
tionaldefinitionof these abilitiesand skillsis thatthe
individualcan findappropriateinformationand techniques
inhis previousexperiencetobringtobear on new problems
and situations.This requiressome analysisor understand­
ingofthenew situation;itrequiresa background ofknowl­
edge or methods which can be readilyutilized;and italso
requiressome facilityin discerningtheappropriaterela­
tionsbetween previous experience and the new situation.
Arts or skills+ knowledge = abilities
Sometimes in educationalachievement testingwe wish
to distinguishbetween what we might call "intellectual
abilities"and "intellectualartsand skills." "Arts and
skills"refer tomodes of operationand generalizedtech­
niquesfor dealingwithproblems. In testingfor artsand
skills,theproblems and materials are of such a nature
thatlittleor no specializedand technicalinformationis
required. Whatever informationis requiredis assumed to
be part of thegeneralfundof knowledge of the group being
39
tested.The emphasis intestingis on theexaminee's com­
petencein usinga generalizedmethod ofoperatingor deal­
ingwitha new problem situation.The artsand skillsem­
phasizethementalprocessesof organizingand reorganizing
materialto achievea particularpurpose.
The intellectualabilities,on the other hand, refer
to situationsin which the individualis expected to bring
specifictechnicalinformationtobear on a new problem.
They representcombinations of knowledge and intellectual
arts and skills.In solvingproblems requiringintellectual
abilities,the studentis expectedto organizeor reorganize
a problem, to recognize what material is appropriate,to
remember such material,and tomake use of itintheprob­
lem situation. In the case both of abilitiesand of skills,
theproblems are intendedtobe new and unfamiliarto the
student.
Although this distinctionbetween intellectualabili­
tiesandintellectualskillsmay be made inachievement test­
ing' itis.ratherdifficultto classifyeducationalobjectives
and testitems as abilitiesor skillswithouta fullknowledge
of theprior experienceof thestudents. Itisfor thisrea­
son thatthe distinctionhas been omitted in the taxonomy
and isonlybrieflymentioned here.
Justificationforthedevelopment ofintellectualabilitiesandskills
Justificationfor thedevelopment of intellectualabili­
tiesand skillscan readilybe derivedfrom a consideration
of thenatureof thesocietyand cultureinwhich we live,the
knowledge thatisavailabletous,and thekind ofcitizenthe
schoolsseek to develop. Further justificationmay be de­
rived from what isknown in educationalpsychology about
thepermanence ofvariouskinds oflearningand the extent
to which various kinds of learningcan be transferredto
new situations.
The development of problem-solving skills(intellec­
tualabilitiesand skills)is not equallynecessary in all
societiesand cultures. Itis possibleto imagine a society
or culturewhich is relativelyfixed.Such a societyrepre-
<<<PAGE=28>>>
I
~
40
sentsa closedsystem inwhich itispossibletopredictin
advanceboththekindsofproblems individualswillencounter
and the solutionswhich are appropriatetothoseproblems.
Where such predictionscan be made inadvance, itispos­
sibleto organizetheeducationalexperiences so as to give
each individualthe particularknowledge and the specific
methods needed forsolvingtheproblems he willencounter.
Probably thenearestone can come to such a closedsystem
in our cultureis in some aspectsof militarylife. For in­
stance,if one is trainingan individualtobe a radiotechni­
cianfor militarywork, itisfrequentlypossibleto know in
advance exactlywhat kindof radiocircuitshe willhave to
work with. Under theseconditionsitispossibleto reduce
the amount of trainingto onlytheseparticularradiocir­
cuitsand to teachtheindividualhow to solve aU thefore­
seeabledifficultieshe willencounterinworking with them.
Such trainingcan be quick and efficient,but it is highly
restrictedsinceitisapplicableto onlya very limitedrange
of situations.
Whatever the case in the past, itis very clear that
in the middle of the 20thcentury we find ourselves in a
rapidlychangingand unpredictableculture.Itseems almost
impossible toforesee theparticularways in which itwill
change in thenear futureor theparticularproblems which
willbe paramount infiveor tenyears. Under thesecondi­
tions,much emphasis must be placedin the schoolson the
developmentof generalizedways ofattackingproblems and
on knowledge which can be appliedtoa wide range of new
situations.That is, we have the taskofpreparingindivi­
dualsfor problems thatcannotbe foreseenin advance,and
aboutall thatcan be done under such conditionsis tohelp
the studentacquire generalizedintellectualabilitiesand
skillswhich willserve him well inmany new situations.
This places faithin the intellectualvirtuesas providing
some form of stabilityfor the individualwho must findor
make some order inhis world.
However, even in the relativelystablecultureor so­
ciety'we do have torecognizethatallknowledge ispartial
and thateach situationthe individualencounters has some
unique characteristics.Forced toact, the individualhas
'I
!I
41
the task of takingwhat knowledge he has (which is only
partiallyappropriate to a situation)and determining its
relevance to the new situation. Since each situationis
unique, the individualmust be able to recognizewhich es­
sentialcharacteristicsof thenew situationare relatedto
situationshe has alreadyencountered; thenhe must apply
thecorrectknowledge and method with appropriatemodi­
fications.Clearlyitis impossibleto givetheindividualall
theknowledge he willever need for every new situationhe
willencounLer.Ilispossible,however, tohelphi11.1.acquire
thatknowledge which hasbeen foundmost usefulinthepast,
and to help him develop those intellectualabilitiesand
skillswhich willenablehim to adapt thatknowledge to the
new situations.
The importance of the intellectualabilitiesand skills
is furtherillustratedby our recognitionof the individual's
abilityto independentlyattackhis problems as a desirable
signofmaturity.Individualsare expected,as theymature,
tosolveproblems on theirown and tomake decisionswisely
on thebasisof theirown thinking.Further,thisindepend­
ent problem solvingis regarded as one indicationof the
individual'sadjustment. Itis recognized thatunless the
individualcan do his own problem solvinghe cannotmain­
tainhisintegrityas an independentpersonality.
Closely alliedto thisconcept ofmaturity and integ­
rityistheconceptof theindividualas a member of a demo­
cracy. Citizensare expectedtomake importantand inde­
pendent decisionsabout governmental problems and about
theirpoliticalfuture. Itis clearthatmany of thesedeci­
sionsrequire problem solvingof a very high order. Itis
impossible to tellan individualin advance how tovote or
even thebases on which he shouldvote. These are matters
he must decide repeatedlythroughouthislifewhenever a
major electiontakesplace. But more thanspecificelec­
tionsand votingis theconceptof individualsina democracy
as independentdecision-makers who, in thelastanalysis,
are responsiblefor the conduct ofa democratic political
system as wellas a democratic way of life.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
42
The above justificationsfor the development of intel­
lectualabilitiesand skillsreflecta number of valuecompo­
nentsin relationto theconceptof thegoodlife.The follow­
ing two reasons have to do primarily with the efficiencyof
thelearningprocess.
As we have definedintellectualabilitiesand skills,
theyare more widelyapplicablethanknowledge. Ifwe are
concerned withtheproblem of transferof training,by defi­
nitionwe would selectintellectualabilitiesand skillsas
having greatertransfervalue.
A second reason for the efficiencyof intellectualabil­
itiesand skillsin learningis theirpermanence. From
psychologicaltheory (e.g.,reinforcementtheory)itwould
seem reasonableto expectgreaterpermanence oflearning
for thoseoutcomes of educationwhich can be generalized
and appliedina number of differentsituationsthroughout
theindividual'sformaleducationalexperiencethanforthose
outcomes which are so specificthatthey are likelytobe
encounteredonlyonce or at themost a few times through­
out the educationalprogram. Itwould seem desirableto
determine whether research evidence is in support of our
logicaland pedagogicaldistinctions.While onlya few stu­
dies intheliteraturedeal withthisproblem, thefindings
are in generalsupportof theforegoing.8,9,10
Finally,the foregoingdiscussionhas illustratedthe
importanceof theabilitiesand skillsforboth theindividual
and his society,and ithas noted thelearningefficiencyof
theabilitiesand skills.But common observationwould in­
dicatethatindividualsingeneraltendtoavoidrealproblem
solving.When presentedwithproblems, theyusuallyapply
a limitedstock of techniquesto them and are frequently
satisfiedifa partialsolutionis obtained.Ifthe techniques
8 Freud, H., and Cheronis, N. D., "Retentionin the
Physical Science Survey Course," Journal of Chemical
Education,17 (1940),pp. 289-93.
9 Frutchey, F. P., "Retentionin High School Chem­
istry,"Journalof Higher Education,8 (1937),pp. 217-18.
10Tyler, R. W., "Permanence of Learning," in Con­
structingAchievement Tests, Columbus: Ohio StateUni­
versity,1934.
43
do not work, thereis a strongtendency eitherto reorder
theproblem completely(thatis, tomake ita new problem)
or to escape from it entirely. Rarely do individualsstay
with a difficultproblem for any considerablelengthof time
and try increasinglyvaried procedures for attackingit.
Yet, we need more than ever to help studentsdevelop
problem-solving methods which willyieldmore complete
and adequatesolutionsin a wide range of problem situa­
tions.Itis tobe hoped thatthetaxonomy's analysisof this
area willfacilitatethe explorationof new methods ofteach­
ingforhigh-levelproblem solvingand assistin evaluating
thesemethods.
<<<PAGE=30>>>
1
IIIIL.......
CHAPTER 3
THE PROBLEMS OF CLASSIFYING
EDUCA TIONAL OBJECTIVES
AND TEST EXERCISES
Three levelsof definitionin each taxonomy category
The taxonomy Handbook in itspresent form definesa
class or sub-classof educationalobjectivesin three ways.
The firstand major typeof definitionisrepresentedby a
verbaldescriptionor definitionof each classand sub-class.
The exactphrasingof thesedefinitionshas been thesubject
ofmuch debateamong us and, while thepresent definitions
are farfrom ideal,every efforthas been made to describe
themajor aspectsof each categoryas carefullyas possible.
A second type of definitionis provided by the listof
educationalobjectiveswhich are includedunder each sub­
classof thetaxonomy. The objectivesused here have been
selectedfrom the publishedliteratureon curriculum and
testingas well as from unpublishedmaterials availablein
the filesof the examiners and curriculum specialists.In
a number of cases, theobjectiveshave been slightlymodi­
fiedinorder tomore preciselyexpress thestudentbehav­
ior intended.Most of theobjectiveslistedin thisHandbook
have been selectedfrom courses and programs at thegen­
eraleducationand secondaryeducationlevels.While some
attempthas been made toselectobjectivesfrom different
subjectfields,itislikelythateach subjectis not equally
well represented intheselists. Inclusionof an objective
in thisvolume does not mean thatwe believeitis an im­
portantobjectiveor even thatitis thebestway of formu­
latingsuch an objective.We do believethattheobjectives
finallyincludedare representativeof those found in the
literatureand thattheyare appropriatelyclassified.
The thirdtype of definitionattemptstomake clear the
behavior appropriateto each category by illustrationsof
the examinationquestionsand problems which are regarded
as appropriate.In away, thisrepresentsthe most detailed
and precisedefinitionof the sub-class since it indicates
44
45
the tasks the studentis expectedtoperform and the speci­
ficbehaviorhe is expectedto exhibit.The illustrativetest
exercises includedin thisHandbook have been selected
f:r'mnpublishedexaminationsas wellas from examinations
availablein thefilesof the cooperatingexaminers. While
some efforthas been made to draw theseexamples from
the differentsubjectfieldsand from secondary as wellas
collegecourses, it is likelythatparticularareas and
particularlevelsare not as fullyillustratedas desirable.
The reader win note the high proportionof so called"ob­
jective"or recognitionforms of testquestions. This does
not reflecta bias againstcarefullydevised essay or other
types of testsituations. We have made use of illustrations
which were readilyavailableand selectedexamples which
most clearlyillustratedthe category.
In order to help the reader getan over-allview of the
taxonomy and to help him in its use, we have printeda
<;ondensedversionof thetaxonomy in the Appendix. Each
of the classes of objectivesis definedin greater detailin
the appropriatesectionof thisvolume where itis accom­
paniedby a discussionof theparticularobjectivesand test
illustrationswhich are relevant.
The classificationof objectives
To help the reader inmaking use of thetaxonomy, this
chapteris devotedto a discussionof theproblems of clas­
sifyingeducationalobjectivesand testexercises. A num­
ber of illustrativeobjectivesand testexercisesareprovided
for thereader toclassifyforhimself.He can then compare
his classificationwith thosemade by thewriters. The in­
tentof thischapteris thustobring the reader closertothe
taxonomy and to convertitfrom an empty setof terms and
definitionsto one thatthereader findsworkable and appli­
cable tohis own situation.
We begin by selectingthree objectivesfrom Volume I
of Higher EducationforAmerican Democracyl which ap­
pear tobe relevantto the cognitivedomain of thetaxonomy.
1A Report of the President'sCommission on Higher
Education. Higher Education for American Democracy,
Volume I, Establishingthe Goals. U. S. Government
PrintingOffice,Washington, December, 1947.
<<<PAGE=31>>>
46
(A) tounderstandthe ideasof othersand to
express one'sown effectively(p.52)
(B) toacquiretheknowledge (andattitudes)basic
to a satisfyingfamilylife(p. 56)
(C) to acquireand use the skillsand habitsinvolved
in criticaland constructivethinking(p. 57)
All threeof thesewould appear to represent desirableout­
comes of learning. However, they are such broad objec­
tivesthatthe kindsof learningexperienceswhich might be
appropriateare farfrom clear. At thislevelof generality
one would alsohave greatdifficultyin determiningthetypesof evaluationevidence which could reveal whether or not
studentshave actuallydevelopedthenecessary competence.
As they are stated,these broad objectivescould only be
classifiedunder such broad categoriesas knowledge or
intellectualabilities.Thus, objectiveA includesboth un­
derstandingofideasand (theability)toexpressideaseffec­
tively. At thislevel of generalitythe objectivecouldbe
includedunder each of thesixmajor categoriesof thistax­
onomy. ObjectiveC quiteclearlygoes beyond theknowl­
edge category,but itcouldquiteproperlybe includedunder
each of the remaining five categoriesof Comprehension,
Application,Analysis,Synthesis,and Evaluation. Objec­
tive B includesboth knowledge and attitudes.However, if
only the knowledge aspect ofthisobjectiveis considered,
it couldquiteproperly be classifiedunder category 1.00
of thistaxonomy-Knowledge. Itis, however, impossible
to determinewhich of thedifferentsubclassesofknowledge
are appropriate.
The user of the taxonomy willfindthat,alltoo fre­
quently,educationalobjectivesare statedso broadlythat
littlecan be done with them for curricularor evaluation
purposes untiltheyhave been more adequatelydefined. As
broad outcomes they are extremely usefulin suggesting
generalpolicyfor a particulareducationalinstitution,for a
group of institutions,or for a typeof educationalprogram.
And, in fact,thislevelof generalityis typicalof college
catalogsand the printedstatements of aims of secondary
schools. The majorityofpublicationsinwhich some educa­
tionalpolicygroup or generalcurriculum group attemptsto
defineor suggest the desired outcomes of education are
couched in terms equallybroad. When facultygroups first
47
begin to statetheireducationalobjectivestheytend to make
use of aims statedas generallyas thosefound in the report
of the President'sCommission on Higher Education. Al­
though the taxonomy is not too useful in classifyingsuch
broadly statedoutcomes of learning,itis usefulin helping
to determine thelevelof specificityat which.statementsof
objectivescan be utilizedin planninglearningexperiences
and suggestingtypes of evaluationevidencewhich might be
appropriate. The taxonomy is also usefulas a means of
raisingquestionswhich can have the effectofmore clearly
definingsuch generalizedoutcomes. All thisis to say that
the reader shouldnotbe overlyfrustratedat encountering
and attemptingto dealwith educationalobjectiveswhich are
so broad thatlittlecan be done withthem as far as classi­
ficationis concerned. He shouldalsorecognizethatat this
levelof generalitylittlecan be done with them as far as
specificproblems of curriculum and evaluationare concern­
ed. Nevertheless,it is repeatedthatsuch broad aims are
usefulin pointingup generalpolicyand directionsfor cur­
riculum development.
A somewhat more clearlydefinedset of educational
objectivesfor purposes of illustrationis offeredby the
report "A Design for General Education."2 This report,
like the President'sCommission report on Higher Educa­
tion,has a listof broad outcomes of general education.
Three of them which are parallelto those reported on
page 46 are:
(D) to communicate throughhis own languageinwriting
and speakingat thelevelof expressionadequateto
theneeds of educatedpeople (p. 14)
(E) to thinkthroughtheproblems and to gainthe basic
orientationthatwillbetterenablehim tomake a
satisfactoryfamilyand maritaladjustment (p.14)
(F) toact in thelightof an understandingof thenatural
phenomena inhis environment in itsimplicationsfor
2American Councilon EducationStudies. "A Design
for General Education," American Council on Education,
Washington, June 1944.
<<<PAGE=32>>>
I
--
48
human societyand human welfare,to use scientific
methods in the solutionof hisproblems, and to em­
ploy usefulnonverbal methods of thoughtand com­
munication (p.14)
These are obviouslytoobroad to classifywithany precision
in the taxonomy. However, in additionto thesebroad out­
comes, the Design includesover 200 objectiveswhich are
more clearlydefinedinterms of studentbehavior and sub­
jectmatter content. These more spec.ificobjectivesare
grouped under ten broad outcomes. The specificobjec­
tivescan be classifiedwith some precisionunder theappro­
priatecategoriesand sub-categoriesof the cognitivedomain.
Five of these are selectedfor purposes of discussion.
(G) (Knowledge and understanding)of reliable
sources of informationon health (p.31)
Althoughthefullintentof theword 'kderstanding'is not
clear,the emphasis on knowing,and possiblyremembering,
placesthisobjectiveratherclearlyunder the generalhead­
ingof1.00 Knowledge. Sincetheemphasis appears tobe on
the knowledge of reliablesources ratherthanon the ability
tolocatenew sources or the abilityto analyzethe accuracy
and reliabilityof sources, thisobjectiveis classifiableas
1.12 Knowledge of specificfacts.
(H) To read significantwritingswith critical
comprehension (p.34)
Although the fullintentof the word "critical"is not
clear, the emphasis on readingand comprehension suggests
thatthisobjectiveis appropriatelyclassifiedunderthemajor
category, 2.00 Comprehension. Although a case couldbe
made for includingthisobjectiveunder 2.10 Translationor
2.30 Extrapolation,it is likelythatthe objectiveis more
accuratelyclassifiedas 2.20 Interpretation,since thisis
the sub-category of Comprehension which emphasizes the
graspingof themeaning of a writtenwork.
(I) The abilityto applyprinciplesto new
situations(p. 43)
This objectiveis describedin such a way as toapply
most directlyto category 3.00 Application.
49
(J) The abilityto recognizeform and patternin
literaryworks as a means of understanding
theirmeaning (p.44)
This objectiveapparentlyinvolvesa competence inana­
lyzingthe organizationof a literarywork to determine its
formal and structuralcharacteristics.This typeof skillis
includedunder the category 4.00 Analysis. Since itcan be
definedas involvingan analysisof the structureand organi­
zationof a communica.tion,it is appropriatelycJ.assified
under 4.30 Analysisof organizationalprinciples.
(K) The abilityto selectand organizeideasand
experiences with reference to sociallyde­
sirablepurposes of communication (p. 33)
In thisobjectivethe emphasis appears to be on the put­
tingtogetherof elements and parts so as to form a whole.
As such it would be an example of what we have termed
5.00 Synthesis. Itcan furtherbe definedas thefirstsub­
categoryof synthesis,5.10 Productionof a unique commu­
nication,sincefor theindividualwriter or speaker the em­
phasis is on the communication, ratherthan on the other
types of synthesisdefinedunder thismajor category.
(L) The abilityto identifyand appraisejudgments
and valuesthatare involvedin the choiceof a
course of action(p.41)
The identificationof thejudgments and values involved
in the choiceof a course of actionsuggestsa typeof com­
prehension or analysis. However, the appraisalof the
judgment and values represents a kind of evaluation.The
rulewe have adoptedistoplace the objectiveunder thehigh­
esttypeof classification(themost complex) which is appro­
priate. Therefore, thisobjectivewould be classifiedas
6.00 Evaluation. Since the evaluationof judgments and
valuesmust, ifitistobe based on cognitivegrounds, refer
to some sortof externalcriteria,the appropriateclassifica­
tionofthisobjectiveis 6.20 Judgments in terms of externalcriteria.
<<<PAGE=33>>>
50
Test yourselfon the classificationof objectives
The reader may wish totry hishand atclassifyingother
objectivesunder the categoriesof the condensed versionof
the taxonomy in theAppendix. For thispurpose thefol1ow­
inglOobjectiveshavebeen selectedfrom "A Design for Gen­
eral Education," The Key to the classificationof each of
theseobjectiveswillbe foundon page 59.
1. (Knowledge)of community organizationsand services
for healthmaintenance and improvement (p, 31)
2. (Knowledge)of acceptableusage in articulation,pro­
nunciation,capitalization,grammar, and spellingas
a means of effectivepresentation(p, 33)
3, (Ability)to listento important oral statements with
concentrationand judgment (p,34)
4., (Knowledge) of the criteriaof normal and neurotic
adjustment (p,35)
5. (Knowledge)of the trendsin American societyaffect­
ing the structureand functionsof thefamily and the
role of women and childrenin our society (p. 36)
6. The abilityto read graphs, diagrams, and blueprints
(p,43)
7. (Knowledge) of the techniquesand methods used by
scientistsin seeking to answer questionsabout the
world,and ofthe proper functionsof scientifictheory
and experiment (p,42)
8. The abilityto recognize artisticqualityincontempo­
rary works of music and art (p.45)
9. The abilityto formulateexplicitlyand systematically
a patternofvalues as a basisof individualand social
action (p,41)
10. The abilityto evaluatepopularhealthbeliefscriti­
cally (p. 32)
51
The problems of classifyingtestexercises
The task of classifyingtestexercisesissomewhat more
complicatedthan thatof classifyingeducationalobjectives,
Before the reader can classifya particulartestexercise
he must know, or at leastmake some assumptions about,
the learningsituationswhich have preceded the test. He
must also actuallyattempt to solve the testproblem and
note the mental processes he utilizes.The reader should
also take intoconsiderationthepossibilitythattheproces­
ses used in selectingthe correct answer in a recognition
form of questionmay be somewhat differentfrom thoseused
in consideringthe incorrectalternativesin thesame ques­
tion. For purposes of illustrationwe have selecteda series
of testexercisesfrom thebook, The Measurement of Under­
standing.3
(I) As thenumber of mechanical inventionsincreases and
societybecomes more complex: (1)Each worker does more
specializedwork. (2)Each person takes care directlyof
more of his needs. (3)People depend lesson each other,
(4)Each worker does a greatervarietyof work. (p. 88)
It is assumed thatthe studenthas had learningexperi­
ences which stressspecializationof functionwith increas­
ing industrializationand complexityof the society.Although
the particularformulation of the test·item may be new,
the conceptof specializationisfamiliar.With thisassump­
tion,the item is clearlyclassifiedunder L 00 Knowledge.
Sincethe emphasis is on a generalizedconceptrather than
particularconcretefacts,itis appropriatetofurtherclas­
sifyitunder the sub-category 1,31 Knowledge ofprinciples
and generalizations,
(II) From which couldyou obtaininformationconcerning
thelocationof theprincipaloilfieldsof theUnited States?
(1)Department of State (2)Department of Interior(3)De­
partment of Education (4)Department of Agriculture(p.91)
3Brownell, William A., Chairman, et at. The Meas­
urement of Understanding,The Forty-fifthYearbook of the
NationalSocietyforthe Studyof Education,Part I,Chicago:
The Universityof Chicago Press, March 1946.
<<<PAGE=34>>>
52
It is assumed thatthe studenthas learned about the
functionsof the differentdepartments and thathe has
learnedaboutthetypesofpublicationsand kindsof informa­
tionone might in general secure from each department.
This would thenbe readilyclassifiedunder 1.00 Knowledge.
Sincewhat isasked for is a relativelydetailedbitof infor­
mation,itwould be furtherclassifiedas 1.12 Knowledge of
specificfacts.
53
othersare irrelevant.Some merely repeatthe conclusion,
whileothers statethe generalizationsor principleswhich
have explanatoryvalue. Selectingthe appropriateexplana­
tory generalizationsrequiresthatthestudentbe ableto re­
late the appropriategeneralizationsto the situation.This
would then be classifiedas 3.00 Application.
(IV) Statementoffacts:
(III) The underlinedstatement at the end of the problem
is assumed tobe a correctanswer. You are to explainthe
underlinedconclusionby selectingstatementsfrom thelist
followingtheproblem. (Thestudentcheckstheexplanations.)
If a person is planningto bathe in the sun, at what time of
day is he most likelyto receivea severe sunburn? He is
most likelyto receive ~ severe sunburn in the middle of
the day (11 A. M. to 1 P.M.) because:
Family Income
Under $1200 •
$1200to $3000
$3000 to $5000
$5000 to $10,000
Over $10,000
Per Cent of Family Members
Who Received No Medical
AttentionDuring the Year
47
40
33
• 24
14
We are slightlycloserto the sun atnoon thanin the
morning or afternoon.
The noon sun willproduce more "burn" than the
morning or afternoonsun.
When thesun'srays falldirectly(straightdown) on a
surface, more energy is received by that surface
than when the rays fallobliquelyon the surface.
When thesun'srays falldirectly(straightdown) on a
surface,less sunshine is reflectedfrom the surface
thanwhen the sun'srays fallobliquelyon thatsurface.
When thesun is directlyoverhead the sun'srays pass
throughless absorbingatmosphere thanwhen the sun
is lower in the sky.
Justas a bulletshotstraightintoa block ofwood pene-
tratesfartherintothewood, so willthe directrays
at noon penetratemore deeply intothe skin.
The air is usuallywarmer at noon than at other
times of the day.
The ultravioletof the sunlightismainly responsible
for sunburn. (114)
It is assumed thatthisis a new problem for the student
and thatthe taskisone of selectingthe correctexplanatory
principle.Some of the alternativesofferedare factually
correctwhileothersare incorrect. Some are relevant,
Conclusion: Members offamilieswith small incomes are
healthierthanmembers with largeincomes.
The conclusionisnot completelyjustifiedby the facts
given. Itmay be justified,however, ifan assumption is
made; thatis, ifa factornot statedin the givenfactsis tak­
en for granted. What is thisfactor? That is,what must be
assumed in additionto thefactsgivenin order thatthe con­
clusionbe true? (p. 127)
Ifitis assumed thatthedata and theproblem are essen­
tiallynew to the student,itrequiresthatthe studentbe able
to identifythe assumption which must be made to support
the conclusionin relationtothe data. Itis thusan example
of 4.10 Analysisof elements.
(V) A 6A classwaS studyingthegeographyof Europe and
the land of the Dutch people. Someone in the class said
thatthehomes of the Dutch peoplewho liveinAmerica are
always neat and clean. The teacher asked thisquestion,
"What reasons can you give for thinkingthatthey are al­
ways neat and clean?"
<<<PAGE=35>>>
54
Here are some of the reasons the childrengave. Read
them carefullyand decidewhich are thebest and which are
the poorest~
I heard someone say thatthey were neat and clean.
I was in one Dutch home and it was clean.
Our geography book said they were clean.
I have been in many Dutch homes and allof them
were neat and clean.
I read in the story book thatthese houses were
always neat and clean. (p.93)
Here thestudentis expectedto judgethe valueofreasons
in relationto a new questionwhich isposed in theproblem.
Itis clearlyan example of 6.00 Evaluation. Sincethe em­
phasisis on qualityof evidencein relationtothe sources
and the comprehensiveness of theinformationitcouldappro­
priatelybe placedunder the sub-categoryof ~.~_<!lldgmentsin terms of externalcriteria•
Test yourselfon the classificationof testexercises
The reader may now wish to try hishand at classifying
additionaltestexercises. The followingexercises have
been selectedfrom the book, Measurement of Understanding•The key tothe classificationoftheseexerciseswillbe found
on page 59.
In thefollowingproblem, assume thatthe studenthas
studiedtariffsin some detail.
1. Which has been a resultof thiscountry'spolicyof
maintaininga highprotectivetariff?(1)Higher prices for
domestic goods (2)lower pricesforforeigngoods (3)in­
creased foreigntrade (4)higherpricesforfarm products
soldinforeignmarkets (p. 88)
I
.•...
.
....
.:
(I)
"0;:l....
0)
(I)
,.q....
o....
!?;
<J)
.:
<J)
•••
cd
<J)
0)
....•
()
•••
<J)
~
<J)
bO
.S
t;!:
o
....•
....•
o
.....
<J)
,.q....
.S
ctl
....
ctl
'"d
(I)
,.q.•..
....
cd
,.q....
(I)
§
0)
0)
<l:1
"0
(I).•..
....•
.:p
(I)
,.q 0)....•..
cd
.S :::1
0)0.•.•"0
~l'.H
(I)0
@~~ §
:> tIl
o ;:lbOO
(1):5
~ .S
0) (I)
:::1 •.•
cd cd
•••.•0)
0.•.•
tIl §
<J) 0
~~"0
.:
(I) tIl
~~
<J) ••.••
:>
"0 •.•(I)(I)
.S 0)
,.Qc;j8....o .:
() <J)
(I) @:5 •..
tIl <J)
!?;~
o bO
,.q 0)
Ul;:l
!?;.8o •.•
~ cd
] :>
<J) •.•
~ 0
,.Q•••.•
ctl 0)
•••• <J)
<J) ••••
,.q ctl
E-iUl
oC'fl0)
....•
oN0)
....•
o
....•
0)
....•
....•
•..$:; ••..•..5
<J)<J)0 01p., () .•.•
§
j
•.•$:; ••..•2
<J)<J)0 0p., () .•.•
....
.:
;:1
o
~
....•
•.•$:; ••..•~
<J)<J)0 0
p., () .•.•
....
.:
;:1
o
~
'"-:~ '"-:r-:c:'"-:c: Ie;0)11')C'fl0"'" 11')11')0N •.•••'<;j<0
....•
000 N •.•••0 0 1C'fl0011') •.•••'<;j<0 '<;j<'<;j<00 '<;j<11')'<;j<11')N •.•••
11')'N' •.•.•0) ~' ~' •.•••lCD'NI:-'<;j< 0) •.•••0) '<;j<•.••• N N 11')C'fl
~"* ,*
11')CD N CD N CD C'fl10
o ~ .;0 cO r.-:~ 10•.•.• •.••••.•.•'<;j<0
....•
C'fl011') 0 0 0 N 10
11')0l:-NOl1')N N
OO'<;j<CO'<;j<CO •.•••I:-~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
'<;j<N co '<;j<11')•.•.•11')I.....
I:-C'flN NN •.•••0
•.••••.•.•C'flI:-* *
I:-C'fl'<;j<11')0) '<;j<co 10
~ .n.n0 .nM';10•.••• •.•.•N C'fl0
....•
011') N N 0 •.•.•11')111')ONO<.oONCD I:­'<;j<'<;j<C'fl•.•.•C'flCD N '<;j<
~ 0)" 0" N" co"CD" co'l co
'<;j<•.•••N I1')CO'<;j<I:­•.•.•C'fl* *
I
.: tIl
•.• <J)
~ tIl
o .: Q .:
bO<J)o 00) Q
p.. •..•••..• h.. 0
~ ><l ~ ..j..o) I") a> .r-(
•.•(I)(),.q~~"'"'cd<J).•.•<J).•.••.•? ctl ()
Q Q -0 c;j ()~::1;:1
<J)~"'(I)<J):::j~"Oo Qp.,::r:O::iI<;;>!i::r
......
•.••• NC'fl'<;j<I1')CDI:-
55
<<<PAGE=36>>>
56
For thepurpose of checkingthe statementsat theend of this
problem, thedata alone:
(1)are sufficienttomake thestatementtrue.
(2)are sufficienttoindicatethatthestatementisprobablytrue.
(3)are not sufficientto indicatewhether thereisany degree
oftruthor falsityinthe statement.
(4)are sufficientto indicatethatthestatementisprobablyfalse.
(5)are sufficienttomake thestatementfalse.
Mark each of thefollowingstatementswiththenumber of
one of theforegoingstatementswhich indicatesyour inter­pretationofthe datainthe table.
2. In1935less was spentfor generalgovernment ex-
penses thanfor highways.
3. The highway expendituresof New York, Ohio, and
illinoistogetherwere atleasttwiceas largein1930 as in1910.
4. In1930more thanfivetimes as much money was
spentfor highways as for health.
5. In1929 atleast35 per centof the totalexpenditures
of the stateswas for education.
6. The expendituresfor each typeof serviceshown in
the tableincreasedbetween 1910and 1930. (p.94)
Assume thatthe studenthas learnedsomething aboutmete­
orology,but thattheparticularrelationshipsbetween the
factand thestatementshave not been studiedin thisform.
7. Tellwhether each of the statementsfollowingthefactis
(A)a cause ofthefact,(B)a resultof thefact,or (C)notrelatedto thefact.
Fact: A flashof lightningoccurs.
Statements
A roar of thunder can be heard.
Electricitypassed between cloudsand theearth.
Itis dangerous to standunder a tree duringa
rainstorm. (p.135)
57
Some additionaltestexercisesdrawn from thefilesof the
cooperatingexaminers are presentedbelow.
8. A brick can be pulledalonga fairlysmooth surface by
means of a string;thestringwould break, however, if
jerkedsharply. Which of thefollowingprinciplesis
most directlyusefulin explainingthisfact?
A- Force is equaltomass times acceleration.
B- Frictionexistsbetween any two bodies in contact
witheach other.
C- Conservationofmomentum
D- Conservationof energy
E- None of theseprinciplesapplies.
"For what men say is that,ifI am reallyjustand am not
alsothoughtjust,profitthereis none, but thepain and loss
on theotherhand are unmistakable. But if,thoughunjust,
I acquirethe reputationof justice,a heavenlylifeisprom­
isedtome. Sincethen appearance tyrannizesover truth
and islordof happiness,to appearance I must devotemy­
self. I willdescribearound me a pictureand shadow of
virtuetobe thevestibuleand exteriorofmy house;behind
I willtrailthe subtleand craftyfox.II
9. Which one of thefollowingbest expresses themain
topicof thisselection?
A- What is justice?
B- How to attaineternallife
C- How tobe successful
D- What isthenatureofvirtue?
E- What istruth?
10. Which of thefollowingmight be most inclinedtofollow
thepolicyrecommended inthe selection?
A- An absoluteruler
B- A politician
C - A philosopher
D- A statesman
E- A religiousleader
<<<PAGE=37>>>
58
11. Ifsome externalforce shouldshifttheearthnearer the
sun so thatthemean radiusof itsorbitwould be eighty
millionmiles, the anticipatedeffect.on the earthwouldcause the
A- seasons to be longer.
B- siderealday to be longer.
C- average yearly temperature to be lower.
D- year to be shorter.
E- None of these.
12. Which one of thefollowingactionswould probably be
least effectivein correctingtheundesirablefeatures
of group politicalpressures?
A- Overhaul thenationalpatentsystem.
B- Concentratethe economic power ofthenation.
C - Give thepublicmore informationaboutthe
originand extentofpoliticallobbying.
D- Use congressionalinvestigatingcommittees.
E- Encourage allgroups to subordinatetheir
intereststothenationalinterest.
13. ;:setthe followingpoem to music:
_______________ by _(Copy furnishedthestudent)
Write a simple melodic line.
Write a composition with a singletonalbase.
Write a composition using two tonallevels.
Write a specificwork in a largerform forany of theaccepted
mediums of expression such as a chamber group, orches­
tra, chorus, or piano. The compositionshouldbe atleast
tenminutes'durationand have receivedperformance. Sug­
gesteddesignsare as follows:a stringquartet,a trio,or a
sonataforviolinor violincelloand piano,or a work forfull
orchestra,or a dramatic work or a cantatafor solos,chorus,
and orchestraof atleastfifteenminutesr duration. (Thesis
requirement for master's degree in music.)
Objective
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Test
Exercise
1
2
3
4.
5 •
6•
7
8
9
10
11
12 •
13
59
Key to the Classification
of EducationalObjectives
Classification
1.12
1.21
2.00, and perhaps 2.20
1.24
1.22
2.10
1. 25
4.30or6.20
5.20
6.20
Key to the Classification
of Test Exercises
Classification
1.22
2.30
2.30
2.10
2.30
2.10
4.20
1.31
2.20
2.30
3.00
6.20
5.10
<<<PAGE=38>>>
en
....:1~
•....•p::~ riI~ f-!0 ~z ~0 CIP<: ZriI
~ ~
:::-
f-!
•....•
f-!riI
~
::r::
p::
f-!
f-!
enp....:1....:1
•....•
<<<PAGE=39>>>
1.00 KNOWLEDGE
Knowledge as defined here includes those behaviors and
test situationswhich emphasize the remembering, either by
recognition or recall, of ideas, material, or phenomena.
The behavior expected of a student in the recall situationis
very similar to the behavior he was expected to have during
the originallearning situation. In the learning situationthe
student is expected to store in his mind certain information,
and the behavior expected later is the remembering of this
information. Although some alterationsmay be expected in
the material to be remembered, this is a relativelyminor
part of the knowledge behavior or test. The process of re­
latingand judging is also involved to the extent that the stu­
dent is expected to answer questions or problems which are
posed in a differentform in the test situationthan in the
originallearning situation.
In the classificationof the knowledge objectives, the ar­
rangement is from the specific and relativelyconcrete types
of behaviors to the more complex and abstract ones. Thus,
the knowledge of specifics refers to types of information or
knowledge which can be isolated and remembered separately,
while the knowledge of universals and abstractions empha­
sizes the interrelationsand patterns in which information can
be organized and structured.
While itis recognized that knowledge is involved in the
more complex major categories of the taxonomy (2.00 to
6.00), the knowledge category differsfrom the others in that
remembering'is the major psychological process involved
here, while in the other categories the remembering is only
one part of a much more complex process of relating, judg­
ing, and reorganizing.
62
63
1.10 KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFICS
The recall of specificand isolablebits of information. -­
This refers primarily to what might be called the hard core
of facts or information in each fieldof knowledge. Such in­
formation represents the elements the specialistmust use in
communicating about his field,in understanding it, and in or­
ganizing itsystematically. These specifics are usually quite
serviceable to people working in the fieldin the very form
in which they are presented and need littleor no alteration
from one use or applicationto another. Such specifics also
become the basic elements the student or learner must know
ifhe is to be acquainted with the fieldor to solve any of the
problems in it. These specifics usually are symbols which
have some concrete referents and are, for the most part, at
a relativelylow level of abstraction. There is a tremendous
wealth of these specifics and there must always be some se­
lectionfor educational purposes, since itis almost inconceiv­
able that a student can learn allof the specifics relevant to a
particular field. As our knowledge in the social sciences,
the sciences, and the humanities increases, even the special­
isthas great difficultyin keeping up with allthe new specifics
found or developed in the field. For classificationpurposes,
the specifics may be distinguishedfrom the more complex
classes of knowledge by virtue of their very specificity,that
is, they can be isolatedas elements or bits which Rave some
meaning and value by themselves.
1.11 - Knowledge of terminology
Knowledge of the referents for specificverbal and non­
verbal symbols. -- This may include knowledge of the most
generally accepted symbol referent, knowledge of the variety
of symbols which may be used for a single referent, or knowl­
edge of the referent most appropriate to a given use of a sym­
bol.
Probably the most basic type of knowledge in a particular
<<<PAGE=40>>>
64
fieldis itsterminology. Each fieldcontains a large number
of symbols, either verbal or non-verbal, which have partic­
ular referents. These represent the basic language of the
field--theshorthand used by the workers in a fieldto express
what they know. In any attempt by workers to communicate
with others about phenomena within the field,they find itnec­
essary to make use of some of the special symbols and terms
they have devised. In many cases itis impossible for them
to discuss problems in their fieldwithout making use of some
of the essential ter.ms of that field Quite liter.ally,they are
unable to even think about many of the phenomena in the field
unless they make use of these terms and symbols. The learner
must become cognizant of these terms and symbols and must
learn the generally accepted definitionsor meanings to be at­
tached. Just as the specialistin the fieldmust communicate
by the use of these terms, so the learner or the individual
reader of the communication must have a knowledge of the
symbols and their referents before he can comprehend or
think about the phenomena of the field.
Here, to a larger extent than in any of the other classes
of knowledge objectives, there is a likelihoodthatthe spe­
cialist,findinghis own symbols useful and precise, will
attempt to impose upon the learner a larger number of the
symbols than the learner really needs, can learn, or will re­
tain. Especially is this true in many of the sciences which
attempt to use words and symbols with great precision and
where the specialist finds it difficultto express the same
ideas or discuss particular phenomena by the use of other
symbols or by the use of other terms much more common
to a lay population.
1.11 Knowledge of Terminology --IllustrativeEducational
Objectives
To define technicalterms by giving their attributes,properties, or relations.
The abilityto distinguishthe referents for words and to
establish the limits within which a biologicalterm mayhave meaning.
Familiarity with a large number of words in their com­
mon range of meanings.
65
Knowledge of the vocabulary of the fine arts sufficient
to be able to read and converse intelligently.
To acquire an understanding of the vocabulary used in
quantitativethinking.
Knowledge of the terms and concepts peculiar to work
in science.
Knowledge of important accounting terms.
Mastery of the terms peculiar to work in science.
To acquire an understanding of the terminology associ­
ated with geometric figures on a plane.
l.12 - Knowledge of Specific Facts
Knowledge of dates, events, persons, places, sources
of information, etc.-- This may include very precise and spe­
cificinformation, such as the exact date of an event or the
exact magnitude of a phenomenon. Itmay also include ap­
proximate information, such as a time period in which an
event occurred or the general order of magnitude of a phenom­
enon. Knowledge of specificfacts refers to those facts which
can be isolated as separate, discrete elements in contrast to
those which can only be known in a larger context.
In every fieldthere are a large number of dates, events,
persons, places, findings, etc., known by the specialist
which represent findings or knowledge about the field. These
can be distinguishedfrom the terminology in that the termi­
nology generally represents the conventions or agreements
within a field,while the facts are more likelyto represent
the findings which can be tested by other means than deter­
mining the unanimity of workers in the fieldor the agreements
they have made for purposes of communication. Such specific
facts also represent basic elements which the specialistmust
use in presenting communications about the fieldand in think­
ing about specificproblems or topics in the field. Itshould
also be recognized that this classificationincludes knowledge
about particular books, writing, and sources of information
on specific topics and problems. Thus, knowledge of a spe­
cificfact as well as knowledge of the source which deals with
the fact are both classifiableunder this heading.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
66
Again, thereisusuallya tremendous number of such
specificfactsand the teacheror curriculum specialistmust
make choicesas towhat isbasic and what is onlyof second­
ary importance or of importance primarilyto thespecialist.
The teacherisalsoconfrontedwith theproblem of levelof
precisionwithwhich differentinformationmust be known.
Thus, quitefrequentlyhe may be contentto have a student
learnonly theapproximate magnitude of thephenomenon
ratherthanitsprecisequantityor tolearn an approximate
time period ratherthantheprecisedateor time of a specific
event.The teacher also has a considerableproblem in
determiningwhether many of the specificfactsare such that
the studentcan learnthem whenever he reallyneeds them,
or whether thEVshouldbe learnedduringand as part of aneducationalunitor course.
1.12 Knowledge of SpecificFacts--lllustrativeEducational
Objectives
The recallofmajor factsaboutparticularcultures.
The possessionof a minimum knowledge abouttheor­
ganisms studiedin thelaboratory.
Knowledge ofbiologicalfactsimportanttoa systematic
understandingof biologicalprocesses.
Recalland recognitionoffactualinformationaboutcon­
temporary society.
Knowledge ofpracticalbiologicalfactsimportantto
health,citizenship,and otherhuman needs.
Acquiringinformationaboutmajor naturalresources.
Acquiringinformationaboutvariousimportantaspectsof nutrition.
Recalland recognitionofwhat is characteristicofpar­ticularperiods.
Knowledge ofphysicaland chemical propertiesofcommon
elements and theircompounds.
:I
,I
I
I
67
An acquaintancewiththemore significantnames,
places, and eventsinthe news.
A knowledge of thereputationof a givenauthorforpre­
sentingand interpretingfactson governmental prob­
lems.
Knowledge of reliablesources of informationfor
wise purchasing.
<<<PAGE=42>>>
68
1.20 KNOWLEDGE OF WAYS AND MEANS
OF DEALING WITH SPECIFICS
Knowledge of the ways of organizing, studying, judging,
and criticizingideas and phenomena. --This includes the
methods of inquiry, the chronological sequences, and the
standards of judgment within a fieldas well as the patterns
of organization through which the areas of the fieldsthem­
selves are determined and internallyorganized.
At a somewhat more abstract level than the specifics
are the methods of organizing and dealing with them. Each
subject fieldhas a body of techniques, criteria, classifica­
tions, and forms which are used to discover specifics as
well as to deal with them once they are discovered. These
differfrom the specifics in that they form the connecting
links between specifics, the operations necessary to estab­
lish or deal with specifics, and the criteriaby which specif­
ics are judged and evaluated. Itmust be made clear that
this class of behaviors is only a very limited one as used
here. Itdoes not involve actual use of the ways and means
so much as itdoes a knowledge of their existence and possi­
ble use. The actual skillsand abilitieswhich involve their
use are described in the 2.00 to 6.00 classes of the taxon­
omy.
Although itwill frequently be found difficultto distin­
guish knowledge of ways and means from knowledge of spe­
cificsfor purposes of classification,several characteristics
will be useful in making these distinctions. Ways and means
will refer to processes rather than products. They will in­
dicate operations rather than the results of operations. They
will include knowledge which is largely the result of agree­
ment and convenience rather than the knowledge which is
more directlya matter of observation, experimentation, and
discovery. They will more commonly be reflectionsof how
workers in the fieldthink and attack problems rather than
the results of such thought or problem solving.
Although this class does not differgreatly from 1.10 ­
Knowledge of Specifics, itappears likelythat students will
have greater difficultyin learning this knowledge because of
itsgreater abstractness. Added difficultymay occur be­
cause many of the ways and means may represent relatively
69
arbitrary and even artificialforms which are meaningful
only to the specialistwho recognizes their value as tools
and techniques in his work.
1.21 - Knowledge of Conventions
Knowledge of characteristic ways of treating and pre­
senting ideas and phenomena. - These are the usages,
styles, and practices which are employed in a fieldbecause
the workers find they suit their purposes or because they
appear to suit the phenomena with which they deal. This
may include such varied phenomena as conventional sym­
bols used in map making and dictionaries, rules of social
behavior, and rules, styles, or practices commonly em­
ployed in scholarly fields.
There are many conventions and rules which the work­
ers in a fieldfind extremely useful in dealing with the phe­
11.0menaof a field. Although many such conventions may be
retained because of habit and traditionrather than useful­
ness, at some point in time they were found to be especially
significantin giving some structure to the phenomena. Gen­
erally these conventions will have an arbitrary existence
since they were developed or retained because of general
agreement or concurrence of workers in the field. They are
usually true only as a matter of definitionand practice rath­
er than as a result of discovery or observation.
In some fieldsthese conventions make up the largest
proportion of the knowledge of the field. Itis likelythat
students are more willingto accept and learn this type of
knowledge in the early school years than in the later yearsof formal education.
1.21 Knowledge of Conventions--lliustrativeEducational
Objectives
Familiarity with the forms and conventions of th'emajor
types of works, e.g., verse, plays, scientificpapers,etc.
To make pupils conscious of correct form and usage in
speech and writing.
Knowledge of common rules of etiquette.
<<<PAGE=43>>>
70
To develop a knowledge of acceptable forms of language.
Knowledge of the ways in which symbols are used to in­
dicate the correct pronunciation of words,
Knowledge of the standard representational devices and
symbols in maps and charts.
A knowledge of the rules of punctuation.
1.22 - Knowledge of Trends and Sequences
Knowledge of the processes, directions, and mOvements
of phenomena with respect to time. --Itincludes trends as at­
tempts to point up the interrelationshipamong a numl::erof
specific events which are separated by time. Italso includes
representations of processes which may involve time as well
as causal interrelationsof a series of specific events. Out
of an almost infinitenumber of specificevents, particular
workers have selected those which they believe point to a
trend or sequence. In this respect trends and sequences are
those relationshipsand processes which have been selected
or emphasized by the workers in the field. Many of the
trends and sequences are difficultto communicate because
they involve highly dynamic actions, processes, and move­
ments which are not fully represented by static verbal,
graphic, or symbolic forms.
Students may have difficultyin learning trends and se­
quences unless they are also familiar with the specifics on
which such trends and sequences are based.
1.22 Knowledge of Trends and Sequences--lllustrative Edu­
cationalObjectives
Understanding of the continuityand development of
American culture as exemplified in American life.
Knowledge of the basic trends underlying the development
of public assistance programs with particular reference
to such programs as WPA, PWA, etc., developed duringthe depression.
Knowledge of trends in government in the United States
during the last fiftyyears.
II
!I
71
To develop a basic knowledge of the evolutionary devel­
opment of man.
To develop a knowledge of effectsof industrializationon
the culture and internationalrelations of a nation.
To know and describe the forces which determine and
shape public policies.
To understand the increasing impo:rtance of cvlministr8­
tive departments of the national government in formulat­
ing public policies.
To know how Greek civilizationhas affected the con­
temporary world.
To know how militarism and imperialism have been of
causal importance for the world wctrs.
To develop a knowledge of how hereditary and environ­
mental factors interrelateto influence the development
of the individual.
A knowledge of the forces, past and present, which have
made for the increasing interdependence of people all
over the world.
1.23 - Knowledge of Classificationsand Categories
Knowledge of the classes, sets, divisions, and arrarge­
ments which are regarded as fundamental or useful for a
given subject field,purpose, argumEnt, or problem. --As a
'subjectfield,problem, or topic becomes well developed,
individualsworking on it find it useful to develop classifi­
cations and categories which help to structure and systema­
tize the phenomena. These classificationsand categories
are likelyto have an arbitrary and artificialflavor to the stu­
dent, although the specialistfindsthem useful and even funda­
mental for his work. The individualstudent is expected to
know these classificationsand to know when they are appro­
priate. However, under the present heading is included only
knowledge of the classificationsand categories, while the ap­
plicationof these to new problems is dealt with in other parts
of the taxonomy.
<<<PAGE=44>>>
'I
L
72
1.23 Knowledge of Classificationand Categories--Illustra­
tive Educational Objectives
To recognize the area encompassed by various kinds of
problems or materials.
Becoming familiar with a range of types of literature.
Knowledge of the features of various forms of business
ownership.
1.24 - Knowledge of Criteria
Knowledge of the criteriaby which facts, principles,
opinions, and conduct are tested or judged. -- Here again is a
systematization which is found useful by workers attacking
the problems of a field. Students may be expected to make
use of the criteriaas well as to have a knowledge of them.
The utilizationof the criteriain actual problem situations
willbe found in 6.00 - Evaluation. The criteriawillvary
markedly from fieldto field. They are likelyto appear com­
plex and abstract to students and to acquire meaning only as
they are related to concrete situationsand problems.
,I
I
73
1.24 Knowledge of Criteria--lliustrativeEducational Ob­
jectives
Familiarity with criteriafor judgment appropriate to
the type of work and the purpose for which itis read.
Knowledge of criteriafor the evaluation of recreational
activities.
Knowledge uf the criteriaby which a valid source of
information in the social sciences can be recognized.
Knowledge of the criteriaby which the nutritivevalue
of a meal can be judged.
Knowledge of the basic elements (balance, unity, rhythm,
etc.) which can be used to judge a work of art.
Knowledge of the criteriaby which home economists
judge the relativeproportions of income distributed
for differentpurposes by a family.
1.25 - Knowledge of Methodology
Knowledge of the methods of inquiry, techniques, and
procedures employed in a particular subject fieldas well
as those employed in investigatingparticular problems and
phenomena. --Here, again, the emphasis is on the individ­
ual's knowledge of the methods rather than on his abilityto
use the methods in the ways defined by categories 3.00 to
6.00. However, the student is frequently required to know
about methods and techniques and to know the ways in which
they have been used. Such knowledge is most nearly of an
historicalor encyclopedic type. This knowledge, although
simpler and perhaps less functionalthan the abilityto actu­
ally employ the methods and techniques, is an important pre­
lude to such use. Thus before engaging in an inquiry the stu­
dent may be expected to know about the methods and tech­
niques which have been employed in similar inquiries. At a
later stage in his inquiry he may be expected to show rela­
tions between the methods he has employed and the methods
employed by others.
<<<PAGE=45>>>
74
1.25 Knowledge ofMethodology--IllustrativeEducational
Objectives
The studentshallknow themethods of attackrelevant
tothe kindsofproblems of concern to thesocialsci­
ences.
Knowledge of scientificmethods for evaluatinghealth
concepts.
Knowledge of thetechniquesand methods used by sci­
entistsin seekingtoanswer questionsabout theworld.
75
1.30 KNOWLEDGE OF THE UNIVERSALS
AND ABSTRACTIONS IN A FIELD
Knowledge of themajor ideas,schemes, and patterns
by which phenomena and ideasare organized.--These are
thelarge structures,theories,and generalizationswhich
dominate a subjectfieldor which are quitegenerallyused
in studyingphenomena or solvingproblems. These are at
the highestlevelsof abstractionand complexity.
These conceptsbring togethera largenumber of specific
facts and events, describe the processes and interrela­
tionsamong thesespecifics,and thus enabletheworker to
organizethe whole in a parsimonious form.
These tendtobe very broad ideasand plans which are
ratherdifficultfor studentsto comprehend. Quitefrequently
theyare so difficultbecause thestudentis not thoroughlyac­
quaintedwith thephenomena theuniversalsare intendedto
summarize and organize. Ifthe studentdoes getto know
them, however, he has a means ofrelatingand organizinga
great dealof subjectmatter and as a resultshouldhave more
insightintothefieldas well as greaterretentivenessfor it.
1.31 - Knowledge of Principlesand Generalizations
Knowledge ofparticularabstractionswhich summarize
observationsof phenomena. --These are theabstractions
which are of greatestvaluein explaining,describing,pre­
dicting,or in determiningthemost appropriateand relevant
actionor directiontobe taken. Here allthatis requiredis
thatthe studentknow theprincipleor generalization,thatis,
thathe be ableto recognizeor recallcorrectversionsof
them. The actualapplicationof theseabstractionsinproblem
situationsis includedin 3.00 - Application.However, the re­
callof theprincipleor generalizationas well as the recallof
the specificillustrationsof them utilizedin the instructional
materialmay be includedinthepresent category..
1.31 Knowledge of Principlesand Generalizations--Illustra­
tiveEducationalObjectives
Knowledge of the importantprinciplesby which our ex­
periencewithbiologicalphenomena is summarized.
<<<PAGE=46>>>
76
The recallofmajor generalizationsaboutparticularcul­tures.
Knowledge ofpropositions,offundamentallogicalprin­
ciples,ofpropositionalfunctionsand quantifiers,andof sets.
Knowledge of theprinciplesof chemistry which are rel­
evanttolife-processesand to health.
Knowledge of biologicallaws of reproductionand hered­
ity.
Understandingof some of theprincipalelements in the
heritageofWestern civilization.
Knowledge of themajor principlesof high schoolchem­
istry.
To know theimplicationsof our foreigntradepolicies
for the internationaleconomy and for internationalgoodwill.
To know themajor principlesinvolvedinlearning.
To become familiarwiththeplantillustrationsof the
principallaws ofheredityand evolution.
To developan understandingof such basicbiological
principlesas celltheory,osmosis, and photosynthesis.
To developa knowledge of theprinciplesoffederalism.
1.32 - Knowledge of Theories and Structures
Knowledge ofthebody ofprinciplesand generalizations
togetherwith theirinterrelationswhich presenta clear,round­
ed, and systematicview ofa complex phenomenon, problem,
or field.--These are themost abstractformulations. They
can be used to show the interrelationand organizationof a
greatrange of specifics.This categorydiffersfrom 1.31 in
thathere theemphasis is on a body ofprinciplesand general­
izationswhich are interrelatedtoform a theoryor structure,
while theprinciplesand generalizationsin 1.31 are treated
as particularswhich need notbe relatedto each other.
77
1.32 Knowledge of Theories and Structures--Illustrative
EducationalObjectives
The recallof major theoriesaboutparticularcultures.
Recalland recognitionof what is containedinparticular
cultures.
Knowledge of thephilosophicbases forparticularjudg­ments.
Understandingof the interrelationsof chemical princi­
ples and theories.
To understandthestructureand organizationof Congress.
To understandthebasic structuralorganizationof the
localcitygovernment.
Knowledge of a relativelycomplete formulationof the
theoryof evolution.
<<<PAGE=47>>>
79
4. feeler 5. gallop
.....(
3. prelude2. animal
Directions: In each group below, selectthe numbered word or phrase
which most nearly corresponds inmeaning to the word at the head of
thatgroup, and put itsnumber in the parentheses at the right.
3. antelope
1. fruit
2. Which one ofthefo11owingphrasesaboutwave motion definesperiod?
1. The maximum distancea particleis displacedfrom itspointof rest.
2. The lengthof time required for a particletomake a complete
vibration.
3. The number of complete vibrationsper second.
4. The time rate of change of distancein a given direction.
1.00 - KNOWLEDGE -- ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
1.10 Knowledge of Specifics
1.11 Knowledge of Terminology
1. A synapse can best be describedas
1. a mass or layer of protoplasm having many nucleibut lacking
distinctcellboundaries.
2. a lapse ofmemory caused by inadequatecirculationofblood
to thebrain.
3. the pairingof maternal with paternalchromosomes during
maturation of the germ cells.
4. the long cylindricalportionof an axon.
5. the pointat which the nervous impulse passes from one
neuron toanother.
78
Probably the art of te'stinghas been developed to the
greatest extent in the measurement of knowledge. This type
of behavior can be measured with great efficiencyand econ­
omy, and a relativelysmall sample of problems and questions
in this area can be used to test a very large universe of knowl­
edge. Some effortshave been made to explore the kinds of er­
rors students make in their reactions to knowledge questions.
The analysis of such errors may frequently be useful in plan­
ning alternativechoices for recognition questions, and the use
of scores or summaries of such errors may be useful in de­
termining the accuracy and precision of the student's knowl­
edge and the limits within which this knowledge may be said
to be known.
Testing for Knowledge, and illustrativetest items
The major behavior tested in knowledge is whether or
not the student can remember and either citeor recognize
accurate statements in response to particular questions. Al­
though somewhat more than rote memory is required for
knowledge, the form of the question and the level of precision
and exactness required should not be too differentfrom the
way in which the knowledge was originallylearned. This
means that the choices in the recognition form of question
must be at the level of discrimmation originallYintended by
the learning rather than at an entirely differentlevel.
5. Jean Valjean was firstsentenced'tothe galleysfor stealing
1. the Bishop's candlesticks.
2. a loafofbread.
3. a few sticksofwood.
4. a widow's cow.
5. the clothfrom offthe altar.
1.12 Knowledge of SpecificFacts
There is littlepoint in making a very elaborate analysis
of the testingprocedures which are appropriate here, since
most readers are quite familiar with adequate testingtech­
niques for thispurpose. For this reason, and for economy
of space, only a minimum number of test illustrationsare of­
fered with only occasiona.lcomments on specificfeatures of
these illustrations.
4. spaniel- type of
1. sword 2. dog 3. lace 4. horse 5. coin
..(
6. The Monroe Doctrine was announced about ten years afterthe
1. RevolutionaryWar.
2. War of 1812.
3. CivilWar.
4. Spanish-American War.
7. About what proportionof the populationof the United Statesis livingon farms?
1. 10"/. 2. 20% 3. 35% 4. 50% 5. 60%
<<<PAGE=48>>>
80
1,12 Knowledge of Specific Facts
Directions: The following paired statements refer to structures, func­
tions, or factors which are to be compared in the quantitative sense.
Blacken answer space
A- if the thing described on the left is greater than that on the
right;
B- if the thing described on the left is less than that on the right;
C- if the leftand the right are essentiaTIYthe same.
8. Number of rabbits in(A) is gr. thannumber of foxes in thea food web
(B) is Is. thansame food web.
(C) is sa. as
9.
Maximum size of food (A) is gr. thanmaximum size of food
particle that can be
(B) is Is. thanparticle that can be eaten
eaten by a sponge
(C) is sa. asby a coelenterate.
10.
Number of annual (A) is gr. thannumber of annual rings at
rings at base ~ the
(B) is Is. thanpoint half-way ~ the trunktrunk of an old tree
(C) is sa. asof the same tree.
t,
II
81 ,I
1.20 Knowledge of Ways and Means of Dealing with Specifics
1.21 Knowledge of Conventions
Directions: Read each of the following groups of sentences carefully;
then decide which sentence in each group is better than the other sen­
tences in that group.
17. 1. He was energetic and ambitious, his brother being lazy and
indifferent.
2. He was energetic and ambitious, but his brother was lazy and
indifferent.
3. He was energetic and ambitious, as his brother was lazy and
indifferent.
4. He was energetic and ambitious, and his brother was lazy and
indifferent.
Directions: Select from the several choices given in each of the follow­
ing items the one which you consider best.
18. I believe he (1),done, (2) did the best that he could.
11. A sodium ion differs from a sodium atom in that
A- itis an isotope of sodium.
B- itis more reactive.
C- ithas a positive charge on its nucleus.
D- itexists only in solution.
E- ithas fewer electrons.
Directions: Blacken the answer space corresponding to the work of artwhich is earliest in date.
12. A- Browning's Fra Lippo Lippi
B- Whitman's When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard BloomedC- Tristan and Isolde
D- Shelley's Ode to the West Wind
E- Seurat's Sunday Afternoon on the Grande Jatte
Directions: For each of the following items, blacken answer space
A- ifitwas in the Articles of Confederation;
B- if itwas in the Constitution of 1787;
C- ifitwas in the Bill of Rights (Amendments I-X);
D- ifitwas in Amendments XI-XXI;
E- ifitwas in two or more of the above.
13. Protected life, liberty and property against governmental action
without due process of law
14. Provided for popular election of United States Senators
15. Provided for a unicameral legislature
16. Gave the treaty-making power to Congress
I
I
I
I
!I
I:
:1
Ii
19. Magnetic poles are usually named
1. plus and minus.
2. red and blue.
3. east and west.
4. north and south.
5. ano-de and cathode.
20. For computation purposes, forces are frequently represented by
1. straight lines.
2. circles.
3. arcs of a circle.
4. angles.
5. objects of three dimensions.
21. Which one of the following should not be classified as payment for
the services of labor?
1. The commissions earned by a real estate salesman
2. The fee paid a justice of the peace for performing a marriage
3. The dividend paid the owner of preferred stock
4. The salary of a United States senator
Directions: Indicate whether each of the following statements is (1)a
fact (2) an opinion or judgment (3)neither a fact nor an opinion.
22. A man who works forty hours per week, fiftyweeks per year, at
one dollar per hour, earns an annual wage of $2000.
23. Many workers do not earn $2000 per year.
24. Unemployment insurance would provide some income for the fami­
lies of unemployed workers. i
'I
I
<<<PAGE=49>>>
82 83
25. The firstmovement of a sonata is commonly distinguishedfrom
the othersby itsgreater
1. rapidityand gayety.
2.lengthand complexity.
3. emotionalabandon.
4. sweetness and charm.
5. structuralinformality.
32. The stages in the lifehistoryof the houseflyare, in order,
1. larva - egg - pupa - adult.
2. pupa - larva - egg - adult.
3. pupa - egg - larva - adult.
4. egg - larva - adult- pupa.
5. egg - larva - pupa - adult.
Directions: Blacken one answer space for each item according to thefollowing:
A- ifthe statementappliesto the symphonic poem;
B- ifthe statementappliesto the fugue;
C- ifthe statementappliesto themotet;
D- ifthe statementappliesto the suite;
E- ifthe statement appliesto the sonata.
33. Which of the followingbest describes t~e policyof the government
toward railroadsin the twenty years followingthe CivilWar?
1. Purchase of railroadsby the government afterthey had been
privatelyfinancedand constructed
2. Sale of publiclyconstructedrailroadstoprivatecompanies
3. Granting of government subsidiesto privatelyowned
and constructedroads
4. Littleeffortto encourage railroadconstruction
26. Mozart's Symphony in G Minor, though composed for orchestra,is
representativeof thistype inthe number, order, and form of itsvarious movements.
27. The minuet is the only dance movement commonly includedin thismusical type.
28. Instrumentalworks representativeof thistype are usuallybased
upon extra-musicalideas, eitherpoeticor descriptive.
34. The latterpart of the nineteenthcentury was notablefor
1. the consolidationof small businesses intolarger organiza­
tions.
2. the appearance of the "partnership"type ofbusiness organi­zation.
3. government restrictionon unduly large profits.
4. the decreased importance of the middleman between pro­
ducer and consumer.
29. A work of thistypemay includeamong itsdifferentmovements an
overture or prelude, an air, and a gigue. 1.23 Knowledge of Classificationand Categories
In allfaidy complex animals the skeletonand the muscles are
developed from the primary germ layer known as the
1. ectoderm. 4. endoderm.
2. neurocoele. 5. mesoderm.
3. epithelium.
Itisfound thata specializedcellconducts impulses, but performs
no other functionwell. Such a cellwould best be classifiedas a(n)
1. muscle cell. 4. cartilagecell.
2. gland cell. 5. nerve cell.
3. epithelialcell.
Which of the followingisa chemical change?
1. Evaporationof alcohol 4. Melting of wax
2. Freezing of water 5. Mixing of sand and sugar
3. Burning of oil
The branch ofbiologicalscience which dealswith the structureof
livingorganisms is called
1. physiology. 3. ecology. 5. embryology.
2. pathology. 4. anatomy.
houses is called
4. a draftsman.
5. a mechanical engineer.
An engineer who designs
1. a carpenter.
2. a civilengineer.
3. an architect.
36.
38.
35.
37.
39.
1.22 Knowledge of Trends and Sequences
30. During theprocess ofbreathing
1. the air pressure outsideis greater than thatwithinthe lungsat the end ofan inhalation.
2. thepressure withinthe lungs isgreater than thatoutsideatthe end of an inhalation.
3. the chest cavityhas the smallestvolume at the end ofaninhalation.
4. the air pressure withinthe lungs is greater than thatoutsideat the end of an exhalation.
5. thepressure insideand outsidethe lungs is equalat the endofan inhalation.
31. Which of the above curves represents the change of solubilityof
potassium nitratewith an increase in temperature? (Curves not
1. AB shown here)
2. CD
3. EF
4. GH
5. IJ
<<<PAGE=50>>>
84
1.24 Knowledge of Criteria-- IllustrativeTest Items
Directions: In the following,selectthe one best completion.
In the preface to the second editionof the Critiqueof Pure Reason, Kant
discusses theproblem of placingmetaphysics uponthe secure path of ascience.
40. By science in thiscontexthe means
A- a body of generalizationswhose truthis guaranteedby ob­servationof facts.
B- demonstrationsof conclusionsfrom assumptions which must
always retaina hypotheticalcharacter.
C- dialecticinthe Platonicsense.
D- a body of knowledge corresponding closelyto the intellectual
virtuecalled"scientificknowledge" by Aristotle.
41. In the view of John Ruskin, the greatestpicture is
A- that which imitatesbest.
B- that which teaches us most.
C- that which exhibitsthe greatest power.
D- thatwhich conveys the greatestnumber of the greatestideas.
42. The criterionDarwin uses to distinguishthemore variablespecies
from theless variablespecies in Chapter IIis
A- number of individualsin the species.
B- frequency of individualdifferencesin the species.
C- number of varietiesin the species.
D- number of closely related species.
E- number of differentclimatic conditionstoleratedby thespecies.
85
1.25 Knowledge of Methodology
43. A scientistdiscovers new factsby
1. consultingthe writingsof Aristotle.
2. thinkingabout the probabilities.
3. making carefulobservationsand conductingexperiments.
4 debatingquestionswith his friends.
5. referringto the works ofDarwin.
44. We wish to know whether overeatingaffectsthe probable lengthof
life. A scientificapproach to thisproblem would be to
1. see what the ancientGreek philosophersthoughtabout the
matter.
2. perform a laboratoryexperiment with two groups of white
rats, one group consistentlyoverfed and the other group
kept on a normal diet.
3. ask fiftypeople selectedat random and determine their
average opinion.
4. studyfood advertisements thatrelateto the problem.
5. ask ten old people what they ate.
45. One use of the Periodic Table has been to
1. determine the solubilityof gases.
2. findthe degree of ionizationof many compounds.
3. predictundiscovered elements.
4. determine molecular weights of compounds accurately.
46. When the scientistis confrontedwith a problem, his firststep
toward solvingitshould usuallybe to
1. constructor purchase equipment.
2. perform an experiment.
3. draw conclusions.
4. urge other scientiststo cooperate with him in working itout.
5. gatherallavailableinformationon the subject.
47. Of the following,which represents the most important differences
between the scientificmethod as used in the socialsciences and as
used in the naturalsciences?
1. Employment of the deductiverather than the inductivemethod
of reasoning.
2. Study of the developmentalaspects ofvarious problems.
3. Necessity of regarding hypotheses as tentativein nature.
4. Importance of understandingthe problem of causation.
5. Necessity of recognizingthe value judgments of the inves­
tigator.
48. Stars are composed of the same elements as are found on the earth
Which of the followingsources yieldsinformationsupportingthis
statement?
1. Observations of absorptionspectra of dark interstellar
matter.
2. Observations of spectra of stars.
3. Observations ofbrightnessof stars.
4. Observations of densityof stars.
5. Observations of the wave lengthofmaximum radiationfrom
stars.
<<<PAGE=51>>>
86
49. Fossils inrocks constitutevaluableclues to the past. Some of
these fossilsare identicalwith animals existingtoday. How does
thisaffectthe investigationof geologicalhistory?
1. Such fossilsmake the work much simpler since they can be
easilytraced.
2. These fossilsare rare and thereforedo not weaken the over­
allresultsvery much.
3. These fossilsare extremely valuablesince observationof
theirlivingcounterpartsyieldsmuch informationas to
climatesand physicalconditionsof the geologicpast.
4. The existenceoflivingcounterpartsoffossilsis immaterial
s1nee onlythe fossiJitselfis important.
50. Which of the followingprovides the best method for determiningthe radius ofa star?
1. Measure the distanceto the star and the diameter of the
image of the star in a telescopeof known length;the radius
can be then obtainedgeometrically.
2. Measure the distance,apparent brightness,and surface
temperature. From the calculatedbrightnessof a square
centimeterof surface at thattemperature and the absolute
brightness,the area of the disk, and hence the radius is
determined.
3. The speed of rotationof the edge of disk ofa rotatingstar
can be measured from the Doppler shift. From thisand the
period of rotationthe radius can be derived.
4. In double stars the gravitationalattractiondl'pendson the
densityand the volume, hence the radius can be determined.
1.30 Knowledge of the Universals and Abstractionsina Field
1.31 Knowledge of Principlesand Generalizations
87
52. Which one of the followingis thebest summary of Calhoun's views
about thenature of the union?
1. Itis a compact formed between sovereign states,each of
which retainsthe rightto interposeitsauthority.
2. Itis a compact formed between sovereign states,but the
stateshave no rightto interpose.
3. Itis an instrumentadopted by the American people, as one
aggregate community.
53. Ifthe volume of a givenmass of gas iskept constant,the pressure
may be diminishedby
I. redue.ingthe temperature. 4. decreasing the density.
2. raisingthe temperature. 5. increasingthe density.
3. adding heat.
54. Some generalizationsconcerning the common metals are that
1. most of the metals form only one insolublesalt.
2. allthe simple saltsof the alkalimetals are soluble.
3. the metals of the alkalineearth group are precipitatedas
carbonates.
4. the alkalicarbonatesare insolubleinwater.
5. many of the heavy metal sulfidesare insolublein neutralor
slightlyacid solution.
55. Which of the followingstatementsof the relationshipbetween mar­
ket price and normal price is true?
1. Over a shortperiod of time, market price varies directly
with changes innormal price.
2. Over a long period of time, Market price tends to equal
normal price.
3. Market price is usuallylower than normal price.
4. Over a long period of time, ,market price determines
normal price.
Directions: For items 56-59 selectfrom the fiveprinciplesat the right
the most closelyrelatedprincipleand mark the correspondinganswer
space.51. Which of the followingis the best descriptionof the patternof
societyinthe 18thcentury colonies?
1. A system of fixedcastes ranging from the slave at thebottom
through the indenturedservant, the free workman, the small
farmer, to the nobilityat the top.
2. A system ofvoluntarycontractsamong substantiallyequal
individualsdifferentiatedonlyby the amount of wealth theypossessed.
3. A hierarchy of socialclasses ranging from the nobilityat the
top,who controlledthe society,to the indenturedservant
and slaveat thebottom, who did the heavy work.
4. A hierarchy of socialclasses inwhich individualsmoved up
and down with comparative ease and speed, excepttheblack
slaves,and inwhich a very large number objectedto the
continuanceof well-definedclasses.
56.
57.
58.
59.
Statements
Fossils ofprimates firstappear
in the Cenozoic rock strata,
while trilobiteremains are
found in the Protorozoic rocks.
The Arctic and Antarcticregions
are sparselypopulated.
Plantshave no nervous system.
Large coalbeds existin
Alaska.
Principles
1. There have been profound
changes inthe climate on
the earth.
2. Coordinationand integration
of actionis generallyslower
inplantstharlinanimals.
3. There isan increasingcom­
plexityof structureand
functionfrom lower tohigh­
er forms oflife.
4. All lifecomes from lifeand
produces itsown kind of liv­
ing organisms.
5. Light is a limitingfactorto
life.
<<<PAGE=52>>>
1'-
••••
88
1.32 Knowledge of Theories and Structures
Directions: Items 60-62 are concerned with possibleevidences in sup­
port of the theoryofbiologicalevolution. Selectfrom thekey listthe
category to which the evidence mentioned in the item belongs.
1. Comparative anatomy
2. Comparative physiology3. Classification
4. Embryology
5. Paleontology
60 Intergradingforms ofplantsand animals differingfrom 8arlier
species indicatethatevolutionarychange isprobably takingplacetoday in alllivingorganisms.
61. Hematin crystalsfrom the hemoglobin of various vertebrateshave
the same chemical composition.
62. The human heart has two chambers at a very earlydevelopmentalstage.
II
II
2.00 - COMPREHENSION
Probably thelargestgeneral classof intellectualabili­
tiesand skillsemphasized inschoolsand collegesare those
which involvecomprehension. That is,when studentsare
confrontedwith a communication, theyare expectedtoknow
what isbeing communicated and tobe able to make some
use of thematerialor ideascontainedinit. The communi­
cationmay be in oralor writtenform, inverbalor symbolic
form, or, ifwe allow a relativelybroad use of the term
"communication,"itmay refertomaterial inconcreteform
as wellas tomaterialembodied on paper. For instance,we
commonly expectcomprehension of a physicsdemonstration,
a geologicformationviewed on a fieldtrip,a buildingillus­
tratinga particulararchitectualfeature,a musical work
playedby an orchestra. And, of course, we speak of com­
prehensionof theabove phenomena when presented inverbal,
pictorial,or symbolic form,on paper.
Althoughtheterm "comprehension" has been frequently
associatedwith reading,e.g., readingcomprehension, the
use towhich itisbeingput here isa somewhat broader one
in thatitis relatedto a greater varietyof communications
thanthatencompassed by writtenverbalmaterials. In an­
other sense, theuse of the term here is somewhat more
limitedthanusual,sincecomprehension is notmade synony­
mous with complete understandingor even with thefullest
grasp ofa me(3sage. Here we are usingthe term "compre­
hension"toincludethoseobjectives,behaviors,or responses
which representan understandingoftheliteralmessage con­
tainedina communication. In reachingsuch understanding,
the studentmay change thecommunication inhis mind or in
his overtresponses to some parallelform more meaningful
tohim. There may alsobe responses which representsim­
ple extensionsbeyond what is given in the communicationitself.
Three typesof comprehension behavior are considered
here. The firstis translationwhich means thatan individual-_.~.,'-..,.-.-
can puta communication intootherlanguage,intootherterms,
or intoanother form of communication. Itwillusuallyin­
volvethe givingofmeaning to thevariousparts ofa commu­
nication,takenin isolation,althoughsuch meanings may in
partbe determined by thecontextinwhich theideasappear.
89
<<<PAGE=53>>>
90
The second type of behavior is interpretation which in­
volves dealing with a communication as a configuration of
ideas whose comprehension may require a reordering of the
ideas intoa new configuration in the mind of the individual.
This also includes thinking about the relative importance of
the ideas, their interrelationships,and their relevance to
generalizations implie d or described in the originalcommu­
nication. Evidence of interpretationbehavior may be found
in the inferences, generalizations, or summarizations pro­
duced by the individual. Interpretationas here defined dif­
fers from analysis. In the latterthe emphasis is on the
form, the organization, the effectiveness, and the logic of
the communication. Itdiffersfrom applicationin that ap­
plicationis more definitelyconcerned with the meanings a
communication has for other generalizations, situations,
and phenomena, or the meanings that generalizations known
by the student have for the communication. Itdiffers from
evaluation in that evaluation is characterized by the formu­
latingof judgments explicitlybased on criteria.
The third type of behavior to be considered under com­
prehension is extrapolation. Itincludes the making of esti­
mates or predictions based on understanding of the trends,
tendencies, or conditions described in the communication.
Itmay also involve the making of inferences with respect to
implications, consequences, corollaries and effects which
are in accordance with the conditions described in the com­
munication. It differs from application,however, in that
the thinking is based on what is given rather than on some
abstraction brought from the other experiences to the situ­
ation,such as a general principle or rule of procedure. Ex­
trapolationmay include judgments with respect toa universe
where the communication characterizes a sample, or con­
versely with respect to a sample where the communication
describes a universe. For the purpose of classification,
interpolationmay be regarded as a type of extrapolationin
that judgments with respect to intervalswithin a sequence
of data presented in a communication are similar to judg­
ments going beyond the data in the usual sense of extrapola­tion.
Each of these types of educational objectives or behavior
is further treated in the following.
91
2.10 Translation
Translation behavior occupies a transitionalposition be­
tween the behaviors classifiedunder the category of knowl­
edge and types of behavior described under the headings of
interpretation,extrapolation,analysis, synthesis, applica­
tion, and evaluation. Itwill usually be found that individual
competence in translationis dependent on the possession of
the requisiteor relevant knowledge. Itis also true that un­
less an individualcan give the denoted meaning toeach of the
various parts of a communication and/or in terms of immedi­
ate or adjacent context, he will be unable to engage in more
complex thinkingabout the communication. For such think­
ing,a given term ina communication must symbolize for the
individuala general concept or even an aggregate of relevant
ideas. An abstract idea may need to be transformed to con­
crete or everyday terms to be useful in further thinking
about some problem presented by the communication. Some­
times an extended part of a communication may need to be
translated into briefer, or even more abstract, terms or
symbols, to facilitatethinking. This type of translationmay
carryover intomore complex behavior, such as analysis,
synthesis or application,when previous instructionhas not
made such translation explicit. On the other hand, when
instruction has emphasized the partiCUlar points involved,
the translationmay be more akin tosimple recall of knowl­
edge.
<<<PAGE=54>>>
92
2.10 Translation-- IllustrativeEducationalObjectives
Translationfrom one levelofabstractionto another
The abilityto translatea problem givenin technical
or abstractphraseologyintoconcreteor less abstract
phraseology--"statetheproblem inyour own words. "
The abilityto translatea lengthypartof a communi­
cationintobrieferor more abstractterms.
The abilityto translatean abstraction,such as some
generalprinciple,by givingan illustrationor sample .
Translationfrom symbolic form toanotherform, or viceversa
The abilityto translaterelationshipsexpressed in
symbolic form, includingillustrations,maps, tables,
diagrams, graphs, and mathematical and otherformu­
las, toverbalform and viceversa.
Given geometric conceptsin verbalterms, theability
totranslateintovisualor spatialterms.
The abilitytoprepare graphicalrepresentationsof
physicalphenomena or of observed or recorded data.
The abilityto read musical scores.
The abilityto read an architecturalplan.
Translationfrom one verbalform toanother
The abilityto translatenon-literalstatements
(metaphor, symbolism, irony,exaggeration)to
ordinaryEnglish.
93
The abilityto comprehend the significanceof the
particularwords of a poem in thelightof their
context.
The abilityto translate(withorwithouta dictionary)
foreignlanguageprose or poetry intogood English.
2.20 Interpretation
In order to interpreta communication, the reader must
firstof allbe ableto translateeach of the major parts of
it--thisincludesnot only thewords and phrases, but also
thevariousrepresentationaldevicesused. He must thenbe
able to go beyond thispart-for-partrenderingof the com­
munication to comprehend the relationshipsbetween its
variousparts,to reorder,or to rearrange itinhis mind so
as to secure some totalview ofwhat the communication con­
tainsand to relateitto his own fund of experiences and
ideas. Interpretationalso includescompetence inrecogniz­
ing the essentialsand differentiatingthem from the less
essentialportionsor from the relativelyirrelevantaspects
of the communication. This requiressome facilityinab­
stractinggeneralizationsfrom a set ofparticularsas well
as in weighing and assessing the relativeemphasis to be
giventhedifferentelements in the communication. In these
respects,interpretationbecomes synonymous withanalysis
and has characteristicsin common with evaluation.
The essentialbehavior in interpretationis thatwhen
givena communication thestudentcan identifyand compre­
hend the major ideas which are includedin itas wellas
understand theirinterrelationships.This requiresa nice
sense of judgment and cautionto avoid readingintothe docu­
ment one's own ideasand interpretations.Italso requires
some abilityto go beyond mere repetitionand rephrasingof
parts of thedocument to determine thelargerand more gen­
eralideascontainedin it. The interpretermust also recog­
nizethelimitswithinwhich interpretationscan be drawn.
<<<PAGE=55>>>
94
2.20 Interpretation~-nlustrativeeducationalobjectives
The abilityto grasp the thoughtof a work as
a whole at any desired levelof generality.
The abilityto comprehend and interpretwith
increasingdepth and clarityvarious typesof
reading material.
The abilityto distinguishamong warranted,
unwarranted, or contradictedconclusionsdrawn
from a body of data.
The abilityto interpretvarious types ofsocialdata.
Abilityin making proper qualificationswhen
interpretingdata.
;11
I
I
ili
I
95
2.30 Extrapolation
In preparing a communication, the writer attempts not
only to statewhat he believesthetruthof the matter tobe,
but also some of theconsequences of it.While occasionally
thewriteris exhaustive,has detailedallof the conclusions
to be drawn, and has indicatedall of the possibleconse­
quences or implicationsof his ideas or material, thisis
rarelythe case. Usually,thewriter isunaware of or makes
no effortto determine or stateallof the conclusionsto be
drawn. The writer is limitedin determining implications
and consequences fornew situationsby his subjectmatter,
which may be so generaland widelyapplicableas to make
impossibleany attemptto explainall itsramifications,by
his own lack of knowledge of allthe possiblesituationsin
which itmay be applied,and, finally,by the factthat he
must insome ways limithisproblem or presentationsifhe
is to do an effectivejob.
The reader must, ifhe is tomake fulluse ofa commu­
nication,be able to extend itbeyond thelimitssetby the
writeras wellas to apply some of the ideasof thecommu­
nicationto situationsand problems not includedexplicitly
in the communication. Mention was made earlierofextra­
polationin the sense of thinkingin terms of the relations
between a sample and a universe and vice versa, and also
of interpolationas akin to extrapolationwhere there are
gaps ina sequence.
Accurate extrapolationrequiresthatthereader be able
to translateas wellas interpretthe document, and in addi­
tion,he must be able to extend the trends or tendencies
beyond the givendataand findingsof the document to deter­
mine implications,consequences,corollaries,effects,etc.,
which are in accordance with the conditionsas literally
described in the originalcommunication. Extrapolation
requiresthatthe reader be well aware of thelimitswithin
which the communication is posed as wellas the possible
limitswithinwhich it can be extended. Inpracticallyall
cases, thereader must recognizethatan extrapolationcan
onlybe an inferencewhich has some degree ofprobability-­
certaintywith respect to extrapolationsis rare.
<<<PAGE=56>>>
I
96
Extrapolation as here defined is to be distinguished
from applicationin that the thinking is characterized by the
extension of thatwhich is given to intermediate, past, future,
or other conditions or situations. The thinking is usually
less abstract than in the case of application where use is
made of generalizations, rules of procedure, and the like.
2.30 Extrapolation--Illustrativeeducational objectives
The abilityto deal with the conclusions of a work
in terms of the immediate inferences made from
the explicitstatements.
The abilityto draw conclusions and state them ef­
fectively. (Recognizing the limitationsof the data,
formulating accurate inferences and tenable hy­
potheses. )
Skill in predicting continuation of trends.
Skillin interpolationwhere there are gaps in data.
The abilityto estimate or predict consequences of
courses of action described in a communication.
The abilityto be sensitive to factors which may
render predictions inaccurate.
The abilityto distinguishconsequences which are
only relatively probable fr'om those for which
there is a high degree of probability.
The abilityto differentiatevalue judgments from
predictions of consequences.
I
!
97
TESTING FOR COMPREHENSION, AND
ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
Testing for translationobjectives
In appraising student abilitytotranslate technical terms,
physics principles expressed inalgebraic symbols, diagrams,
or graphs by means of recall or recognition types of exer­
cises, there may be clear-cut relationshipsbetween what is
given and the response written or identifiedby the student.
For example, terms may be listedand their definitionsre­
quested, or the definitionsmay be given and the student
merely asked to recall or recognize the appropriate terms.
In this situation the behaviors evaluated are equivalent to
those listed under the category of knowledge, and this is
particularly true where instructionhas made explicit such
formal associations. But these identical exercises may
evaluate translationobjectives which involvemore than mere
recall or recognition ifinstructionhas been less formal and
the thought processes of the student involve making new
associations. For example, the answer to be selected as the
definitionof a term may be a definitionwhich differs in
phraseology from the formal one he has learned, and hence
constitutesa novel situation.
Student abilityto translate formal definitionsor state­
ments of principles may also be evaluated by exercises re­
quiring him to recall or recognize correct illustrationsor
examples. But exercises requiring the selection of the
"best" definitionof a term may require more than the asso­
ciationof definitionwith term, ifthe student must judge the
adequacy of the various definitionsgiven. In stillother
types of exercises, more may be given than the terms or
symbols and the student may have the advantage of contextual
clues. Here again the nature of the previous instruction
isthe deciding factor rather than the appearance of the item.
Ifthe evaluation is to be of a behavior transcending knowl­
edge, the contextinwhich the terms or symbols appear must
be to some extent novel context.
Additional complexity atthe translationlevel of behavior
occurs in certain types of exercises where more than one
new term or symbol occurs and the student, while success­
ively translatingthe terms or symbols, willneed toconsider
their interrelationships.Item 18 on page 104 is an example
of this sort of evaluation.
<<<PAGE=57>>>
98
Evaluationof objectivesat higherlevelsin thetaxonomy
isoftenimpaired becauseofthe student'sinabilitytoperform
the initialstepin problem solution:the translationof the
problem intoknown terms. For example, theeffectiveness
ofexercisesused toevaluateapplicationof generalprinciples
may be reduced because numerous studentsare unable to
translatesuch terms as "Avogadro'sprinciple," "Doppler
effect," and "Gresham's law." For effectivemeasurement
where knowledgeof such terms isnotuniversal,theconcepts
they represent must be givenin simpler or less abstract
phraseology.
But even thesimplestof demands givenin eitheressay
or objectiveexercises requires some translationfor
certainstudents. Experimentation has shown thatsome
studentsare ableto reduce or simplifythe statement of
theproblem or to change ittolanguagemore characteristic
of theirown thinkingwithoutessentiallychangingtheprob­
lem. But many studentsare unableto do such translation
and may so distorttheproblem thattheyno longerare at­
temptingto solvethe same problem.1 Evidence with re­
spectto translationdifficultiesof thekinds describedabove
may be obtainedthroughuse of appropriatelyworded essay
exercisesrequiringthestudentto record thevarious steps
inhis thinkingor itmay be more effectivelyobtainedthrough
use of "thinkingaloud"techniquesfor studyingmental pro­
cesses.
1 Bloom, B. S., and Broder, Lois, Problem-solving
processes of collegestudents (A Supplementary Educa­
tionalMonograph), Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press,
Summer, 1950.
III
99
2.00 - COMPREHENSION -- ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
2.10 Translationfrom one levelof abstractionto another.
1. A group of examiners is engaged in the production of a taxonomy of
educationalobjectives.In ordinary English,what are these persons
doing?
A- Evaluatingthe progress of education
B- Classifyingteachinggoals
C- Preparing a curriculum
D- Constructinglearningexercises
This exercise involves translationof "taxonomy" to "classification,"
a less abstract term. There is no context clue.
2. "The idea systems of primitivegroups of peopleare highlyrestricted
and traditionalin content and, in addition,have been transmuted
intocustomary ways of doing things." This best illustrates
A- the stabilityof the primitivesocialorganization.
B- how primitivepeople evaluatethe worth of ideas.
C- the change of ideas to action.
D- the repetitionof customary ways of doing things.
E- the slow progress ofprimitivepeoples.
This requires translationof the term "transmuted" to the less ab­
stract word "change" and here translationisaided by context clues.
3. When a current is inducedby the relativemotion of a conductor and
a magnetic field,the directionof the induced current is such as to
establisha magnetic fieldthatopposes the motion. This principle
is illustratedby
A- a magnet attractinga nail.
B- an electricgenerator or dynamo.
C- themotion of a compass needle.
D- an electricdoorbell.
This involves translationof a formal and abstract definitionby re­
quiring the student to i!'lentifya concrete example.
4. While listeningtolecturesinphysicalscience you have heard the
followingterms frequentlyused: "hypotheses," "theories," "sci­
entificlaws," "scientificmethod, " and "scientificattitude."In a
series of paragraphs, indicateinyour own words and in terms of
everyday experiences what these terms mean toyou.
This exercise, an essay question,also involves the glvmg of con­
crete examples and also thebehavior of "giving in your own words. "
Whether more than knowledge is required for the thirdand fourthex­
ercises depends on previous instruction.
<<<PAGE=58>>>
~
100
5. Which of the followingrepresents the best definitionof the term
"protoplasm"?
A- A complex colloidalsystem made up ofwater, proteins,andfats.
B- Anything capable of growth by a regularprogressive series of
changes intoa more complex unit.
C- A complex mixture of proteins,fats,and carbohydrates,ca­
pable of respondingto changes in itsenvironment.
D- A complex colloidalsystem ofproteins,fats,carbohydrates,
inorganicsalts,and enzymes which manifests life.
This exercise requires judgment of the best definitionof the term
"protoplasm." The defmitlOnsgIven vary in correctness and com­
pleteness.
6. "Allideas are products of experience, or of reflectionon experi­
ence. Sensationswhen givenmeaning are perceptions. Association
ofperceptions,or of simple ideas,leads to complex or abstract
conceptionswhose originalsource is stillexperience." This quo­
tationbest representsthepointof view of
A- positivism.
B- rationalism.
C - idealism.
D- empiricism.
E- pragmatism.
This requires the student to translatea concrete descriptionof a
type of philosophy to the abstract technicalterm standing for the
type. This could involvemere recall,but may require more than
recall if instructionhas been characterizedby no such brief sum­
marization of the nature of empiricism.
7. When a beggar justifieshis begging by the claim thatthe world owes
him a living,he is
A- behaving likea psychoticperson.
B- showing a paranoid symptom.
C- having an hallucination.
D- making a typicalinfantilereaction.
E- rationalizing.
In this exercise a concrete example is given and the student required
to identifythe correct abstract term. More than knowledge is re­quired if the example is new to the students.
F
101
2.10 Translationfrom symbolic form to another form, or vice versa
8. This cartoon best illustrates:
A- Socialproblems are relativeto time, place, and culture.
B- The process of inventionsis cumulative.
C - Social problems are more prevalent in a dynamic society.
D- There are differencesin the rates of change between differ-
ent phases of a culture.
9. The concept illustratedby the cartoon is
A- techno.logicalprogress.
B- culturallag.
C - culturaldiffusion.
D- institutionalmaladjustment.
<<<PAGE=59>>>
~
102
!:l
103
The exercise presented above illustratestranslationfrom algebraic
to geometric or graphic form. The exercises which followinvolve
translationfrom graphic to verbal form.
E.
H 0
H-C-C-7I "H OH
D.
HH HH
H-C-C=C-C-HI
H
C.
HHH
H-C-C-C-H
HIB:
H-y-HH
B.
~~~ll~~D
~~ ~ ~
uantityD Qua~lty uantity
HH
H-C-C-OH• IHH
A.
Which of the above graphs best represents the demand schedule of
a commodity for which there is a perfectlyinelasticdemand?
Which of the followinggraphs best represents the demand schedule
of a typicalcommodity under competitiveconditions?
A. B. C. D.
Which of the followinggraphs best represents the supply schedule
of a commodity under conditionsof perfectcompetition?
ale
<..>
.;:;D D
~ ~ ,ty
.I~ ·I\B·LLC'S<lJ1/D. St_~~~~s ~L
Quantity Quantity Quantity Quantity
'l'hefollowingfiveformulas represent the structureof fivedifferentor­
ganic compounds. After the item number on the answer sheet,blacken
the one letteredspace which designatesthe compound to which each item
correctlyrefers.
HHHH-r I • ,
H-C-C-C-C-HI I t I
HHHH
15. The compound which can neutralizebases and forms salts.
16. The hydrocarbon which has the leasttendency to "knock" among
thoselistedabove.
12.
14. Which of the above graphs best represents the supply situation
where a monopolist maintains a uniform price regardless of the
amounts which people buy?
11.
13.
d
d
Fj / F~A.~ B.~d
c~L ,~~d
Newton's Law of Gravitationis expressed algebraicallyF= G~~.
F represents force, M and m two masses, G is a constant,and d
representsthe distancebetween themasses. Assuming thatM
and m, as well as G, remain the same, or constant,which of the
followinggraphs shows how the force changes as the distancebe­tween themasses varies?
10.
17. The compound which decolorizesbromine and potassium perman­
ganate solution.
Note: While each of the formulas pertains to a specificorganic com­
pound, each of the compounds is representativeof a type or class
<<<PAGE=60>>>
A- F= Q B-F = QQ' C-F= QQ'
Dd2 D2dDd2
21.
2 D- D = .J:L E-d = QQ'
Fd DF
104
of compounds. The compound labeled B is but one of numerous alco­
hols. Hence each formula serves to symbolize a type. A student
may say to himself with respect to D, "The double bond between two
adjacent carbon atoms shows that this is an unsaturated compound.
All such compounds react with bromine or,potassium permanganate
decolorizingthem. Hence, the answer toli7 is D." Giving meaning
to the double bond -C=C- is to translatethe symbol for such ao
union of carbon atoms. Similarly, _C.v signifiesan organic acid'OH
and leads to the conclusionthat such a compound will neutralizeabase and form a salt.
18. Coulomb's Law of ElectrostaticAttractionstates: "The force of
attractionor repulsionbetween two charged bodies is directlypro­
portionalto theproduct of the charges, and inverselyproportional
to the square of the distancebetween them." If F isforce, Q and
Q' are charges, D is the dielectricconstantand d is distance, amathematical statement of the law is
Note: If the student has memorized the equation given as answer C,
;;;:;ererecall is sufficientin selectingthe correct answer. The cor­
rect answer can be obtained,however, through translationof the
verbal statement to mathematical symbols.
2.10 Translationfrom one verbal form intoanother verbal form
19. "Milton! thou shouldstbe livingat thishour: England hath need of
thee;she isa fen of stagnantwaters" --Wordsworth.
The metaphor, "she is a fen of stagnantwaters," indicatesthat
Wordsworth feltthatEngland was
A- largelyswampy land.
B- ina stateof turmoiland unrest.
C- making no progress.
D- ina generallycorrupt condition.
r"
I
I
III
105
1 When I consider everythingthatgrows
2 Holds inperfectionbut a littlemoment,
3 That thishuge stagepresentethnoughtbut shows
4 Whereon the stars in secret influencecomment;
5 When I perceive thatmen as plantsincrease,
6 Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky;
7 Vaunt in theiryouthfulsap, at heightdecrease,
8 And wear theirbrave stateout of memory;
9 Then the conceitof thisinconstantstay
10 Setsyou most rich inyouthbefore my sight,
11 Where wastefulTime debatethwith Decay,
12 To change your day ofyouth to sulliednight;
And allinwar with Time for love of you,
As he takes from you, I engraftyou new.
(Shakespeare, Sonnet XV)
20. In the firsttwo linesShakespeare says that
A- alllivingthingsare examples of the perfectionof nature.
B- every livingthingretainsperfectiononly for a very brieftime.
C- man, part of alllivingthings,isbasicallynot perfect.
D- alllivingthingsshow the characteristicsof evolution.
In lines3 and 4, the poet says that
A- life,which is subjectto the laws of nature, is ephemeral and
transitory,likea play.
B- allthe world's a stage,whose lightingis givenby the stars.
C- man, a character in a great drama, is controlledby the
"stars,"thatis, destiny.
D- the stage of the universe is controlledby the laws of nature.
Note: The originalseries included three more exercises relevantto
other lines in the sonnet. Here the student is expected to make use
of the context in order to determine the appropriate translation.
22. Das Gut gehort immer noch dem Grossvater:
A- Grandfather stillhears well.
B- Grandfather always hears good things.
C- The estatestillbelongs to grandfather.
D- The good people always listento grandfather.
E- The goods stillbelong to grandfather.
Note: The student is expected to select the English sentence which
represents the best translationof the German sentence. Similar ex­
ercises may be written with an English sentence as the item stem
and German sentences as the answers. The same type of exercise
could be extended to the use of brief paragraphs as item stems and
as answers. In every case, as is true of answer C of exercise 22,
the best answer should be more than a literaltranslation.
<<<PAGE=61>>>
106
, III'
107
Testingfor interpretationobjectives,and illustrativetestitems
In evaluatingthe abilityto interpret,the individualis
presented with a communication and is asked to supply or
recognize inferenceswhich may be drawn from the commu­
nication.The inferencesmay be at a more general level
thanthe communication itselfand should,where possible,be
based on more thanone element inthe communication. Some­
times, the inferencesmay r"epresentgeneralizationsbased
on particularsgiven in the communication, or may pertain
to particularsto which generalizationsgivenin thecommu­
nicationapply.
Essay exercises can be used in the evaluationof student
abilityto interpret.The essay exercise shouldaccompany
the communication tobe interpretedand thiscommunication
may be one or more quotedparagraphs, a cartoon,a graph,
or a tableofnumerical data. For example, a studentmay
be asked to compare or contrastthepointsof view of Hamil­
ton and Jeffersonwithrespectto thepowers of the National
Government givenquotationsfrom The Federalistand from
the Second Inaugural. The interpretationofa lengthyquota­
tionmay be thatofpreparinga summary or outline.One or
more cartoons may be the basisfor an essay exercise re­
quiringthe studentto interpretthe cartoonswith respectto
some contemporary socialproblem or issue. Similarly,
graphs or tableswithappropriatelyworded essay questions
may requirethestudentto interpretthe datathuspresented
and to draw inferencesfrom them respectingtheirinterrela­
tionshipor meaning as a whole.
Objectiveexercisescan alsobe used in theevaluationof
interpretationability.Thus, the exerciseswhich followthe
quoted paragraphs, cartoons,tables,or graphs may either
be any of the more usualobjectivetypes,for example, the
multiplechoice,or studentsmay be asked to classifyitems
relevantto the quoted material according to certaincate­
gories. As an example of thelatter,if two selectionsare
given,the studentmay be asked toclassifyitems as "trueof
thefirstselection," "trueof thesecond selection," "true of
both selections,"and "trueof neitherselection."The items
II
['
ill
may be inferenceswhich correctlypertainto interrelation­
ships in eitheror both of the selectionsor theymay be in­
correct inferencesor generalizations.A second example
employs a very usefultypeof direction,particularlywhere
the quotedmaterialinparagraph form presentsscientific
data,or such dataare presentedin tabularor graphicform.
Itrequeststhestudentto classifyitems accordingtowhether
or notthe dataare sufficienttoprove the truthor falsityof
theitems or are insufficientforsuch judgments. Frequently,
the categories ask the students to judge each item with
respectto whether the givendatadefinitelysupportitstruth,
indicatethatthe item isprobablytrue,definitelyrevealthat
itisfalse,indicatethatitisprobablyfalse,or whether the
data are insufficientforany judgment with respect to the
truthor falsityof theitem. These categoriesmay be ordered
in the form of a scale: (1) definitelytrue, (2) probably
true, (3)insufficientevidence,(4)probablyfalse,(5)defi­
nitelyfalse.2
Test scores differentiatingbetween "crude errors," "go_
ingbeyond thedata,"and "over-caution"are especially'use­
ful in evaluatingstudentskillin interpretationsince such
scores may be relativelyindependentof knowledge of content
and may be validmeasures ofmodes of operationand gener­
alizedtechniquesfor dealingwithmaterialsand problems.
Ifthe categoriesare inthe order suggested at the close of
the preceding paragraph, "going beyond the data,"or the
tendency to over-generalizemay be evaluatedby counting
incorrectanswers which are in the directionof theextremes
of the scale.Over-cautionis evaluatedby countingincorrect
answers which are in the directionof thecenterof the scale.
The tendency to make "crude errors" isevaluatedby count­
ing incorrectanswers which traversethe centerof the scale.
2Use of thistype ofitem, however, shouldbe limited
to instancesin which the studentis given some pre-test
trainingin theproper use of theseterms. Otherwise, the
tendencyto use "probablytrue" or "probablyfalse"to ex­
press the student'sdoubtabouthis own answer,as opposed
to doubt about the data1scompleteness, tends to obscure
proper interpretationof the results.
I~I'.i
i:1
I.
'I
Iii,
<<<PAGE=62>>>
109
2.20 Interpretation
---rl------I
il II
108
r
(Seethenoteswhich followthefirstof theillustrativeseries
of the exercisesof thistype.)Exercises of the typejustde­
scribedusuallyask the studenttomake hisjudgments or in­
terpretationsonly on thebasisof thedatagiven. Occasion­
ally,the studentis asked to evaluatethetruthor falsityof
items in terms of both the givendataand in terms of what­
ever otherknowledge he possesses. Items 49-58 of theil­
lustrativeexercisesgivenon thefollowingpages permit
the use ofotherknowledge inthe interpretationof thedata
given.
Consumers' Price Index,
(1935 - 39:=100)
Per Cent
180
160
140
120
100
1918-49
Per Cent
180
,l40
20
1100
80
Source: U.S. Dept. of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics
II
Making your judgments only in terms of the informationgiven in the
graph, classifyeach of the followingitems by blackeningspace
A - ifthe item is definitelytrue;
B- ifthe item isprobably true;
C- ifthe informationgiven isnot sufficientto indicateany
degree of truthor falsityin the item;
D- ifthe item isprobably false;
E- ifthe item is definitelyfalse.
23.
24.25.26.
il
27.
28.
29.
People were betteroffin1932 than in1949.
Since 1918to the present, the dollarwas most valuablein1933.
More prices went up thanwent down between 1932 and 1940.
Men in the age group of 30-40 made the most income gains in the
past decade.
In 1940-46 some loss in real income was most probably incurred
by people livingon interestfrom bonds.
More prices went down than went up between 1926 and 1929.·
Anyone livingon a fixedincome was much worse offin 1949 thanin1940.
Note: "Going beyond the data" requires a count of B items marked
A, C items marked A, B, D, or E, and D items marked E. "Over­
caution" requires a count of A items marked B, Band D items
marked C, and E items marked D. Evaluation of "crude errors" re­
quires a count of A and B items marked D or E and D or E items
marked A oY'o·B.
ill....._..__.
<<<PAGE=63>>>
I'
110 111
DIRECTIONS: Below are some statisticsrelatingto educationand oc­
cupations. You are to judge what conclusionsmay be drawn from them.
Executives,minor officials, 23.59.1
partners, proprietors
Professionalworkers
51.34.7
Salesmen
6.0Less than1%
Skilledworkers
7.133.8
Clericalworkers
8.713.4
Unskilledworkers
1.726.1
Farmers
1.713.0
100.0
100.0
PERCENTAGESOCCUPATIONS
Occupationaldistri­
bution found in a
sample of male
collegegraduates*
Distributionof occupa­
tionsin the population
as a whole, 1950
DIRECTIONS: The followinggeneralizationsare sometimes inferred
from the foregoingstatisticson occupationsand education.You are to
judgewhether or not the generalizationsmade below can be made on
the basis of these data alone or ifcertainadditionaldata are needed.
For the followingitems, blacken answer space
A- ifthe generalizationcan be made on the basis of the foregoing
statistics,withoutany additionalinformation.
B- ifinadditionto or insteadof the foregoingstatisticsyou would
need toknow the percentage ofpeople in each occupationwho
were unable toattendcollege.
C- ifinadditionto or insteadof the foregoingstatisticsyou would
need toknow thepercentage of male collegegraduates in each
occupationwhose fatherswere collegegraduatesand were in
the same occupation.
D- ifthe generalizationcannotproperly be made even ifthe addi­
tionalinformationdescribed in Band C were available.
35, Unskilled,skilledand clericalworkers do not value collegeedu­
cationas much as do businessmen.
36. The low percentage of collegegraduates in the skilled,clerical,
and unskilledworker class reveals a lack of socialmobilityin
America.
, A-
~ B-
~,
"You may assume thatthe sample selectedis representativeof
allmale collegegraduates inthe United States.
Below are a series of statements relatingto occupationsand education.
Blacken answer space
A- ifthe foregoingstatisticsalone are sufficientto prove the
statement true;
B- ifthe foregoingstatisticsalone are sufficientto indicatethat
the statement isprobably true;
C- ifthe foregoingstatisticsalone are not sufficientto indicate
whether there is any degree of truthor falsityinthe statement;
D- ifthe foregoingstatisticsalone are sufficientto indicatethat
the statement isprobably false;
E- ifthe foregoingstatisticsalone are sufficientto prove thestatementfalse.
30. Typicallyfarmers are completelyuneducated.
31. The professionsabsorb a larger percentage of male collegegradu­
ates thanany othergroup in the country.
32. Sons of unskilledworkers and sons of farmers have an approxi­
mately equal chance to go to college.
33. Educationalopportunityfor the lower classes is increasing.
34. The same proportionsoffarmers and of unskilledworkers are
collegegraduates.
III
37. Higher educationprovides a medium in thiscountry whereby
some youth improve theirstatus.
38. Children ofbusiness and professionalmen have a greater oppor­
tunityto enter well-paidoccupations.
39. Socialmobilityin the United Statesis increasing.
A scientistcultivateda large colony of disease-producingbacteria.
From them, he extracteda bacteria-freematerial referred toas sub­
stance X. A large dose of,substanceX was then injectedintoeach of a
group of animals (groupA). These animals promptly developed some
of the symptoms normally produced in infectionby thebacteriain ques­
ti.on.Then, intoeach of a number of other animals (groupB), the sci­
entistmade a seriesof injectionsof small doses of substance X. Three
weeks afterthisseries of injections,and continuingfor two years there­
after,thisgroup of animals (group B) couldbe made to develop the dis­
ease by injectingthem with several thousand times the number of bac­
teriawhich was fatalto untreatedanimals.
After the,item number on the answer sheet,blacken space
ifthe data given above definitelyshow thatthe item correctly
completes the introductorystatement.
ifthe data givenabove do not definitelyshow thatthe item
correctlycompletes the introductorystatement.
(Be carefultomake your judgments interms of the
data given in the descriptionof the experiment.)
<<<PAGE=64>>>
•••
112
Substance X acted upon the animals of group A as ifitwere a
40. poison.
41. destroyer ofpoisons.
42. stimulatorcausinganimals of group A to produce destroyersof
thebacterialpoison.
With reference to itseffectupon the animals of group B, substance X
appeared toact as
43. a means of counteractingthe effectsof the disease-producingbacteria.
44. ifitwere a destroyer of the bacteriaor of theirpoisonous
products.
45. ifitwere a poisonousproduct of the bacteria.
Ten months afterthe seriesof injectionsdescribed above, the scientist
prepared serum from the blood of the animals of group B. He injected
thisserum intoeach of a large group (groupC) of animals infectedwith
the disease. A controlgroup, also infectedwith the disease, was given
no serum. There was a higher percentage ofprompt recoveriesin
group C than in the controlgroup.
Serum from the animals of group B acted in the animals of group C to
46. stimulatethe animals of group C toproduce a destroyer of the
disease-producingbacteriaor theirpoisonous products.
47. destroy the diseasecproducingbacteriaor theirpoisonous prod­ucts.
48. hasten the deleteriouseffectsof the disease-producingbacteria
upon animals of group C.
i
Iill
113
"Supplyand demand are determined inlarge part by the marginal
consumers and marginal producers. If a tax is leviedonly on nonmar­
ginal producers itdoes not materiallyincrease the costs of production
of the marginal producers, and does not, therefore,greatly influence
the price to the public. In other words, the tax in such a case cannot
readily be shifted. A tax on net income is such a tax. Those who have
no net income are not taxedand their costs of production are not in­
creased. They continuetoproduce at no increase in costs. It is their
costs thatdetermine primarily the price of the product. Those who pay
the tax on net income, being nonmarginal producers, finditimpossible
or exceedinglydifficultto pass the tax on to the consumers in the form
of higher prices.
"A sales tax, on the other hand, does raise the costs ofproduction
of the marginal producers, causing them to withdraw from production
unless the tax can be shiftedin the form of higher prices to the con­
sumer. If some withdraw from production,the supply will decrease
and the price willincrease sufficientlyto absorb the sales tax."
--Quoted from Introductionto SocialScience
by Atteberry, Auble, Hunt, and others.
After the item number on the answer sheet,blacken space
A- ifthe item is true and itstruthis supported by information
given in the paragraph.
B- ifthe item is true,but itstruthisnot supportedby information
given in the paragraph.
C- ifthe item isfalseand itsfalsityis supportedby information
given inthe paragraph.
D- ifthe item isfalse,but itsfalsityis not supportedby informa­
tiongiven in the paragraph.
49. Marginal producers are less affectedby a sales tax than by an
income tax.
50. Nonmarginal producers finditdifficultto pass a tax on net income
on to the consumer in the form ofhigher prices, because consum­
ers willthenbuy largelyfrom marginal producers.
51. An income tax has less effecton prices than a sales tax.
52. Taxes on luxuriescan be more readilyshiftedto the consumer
than taxes on necessities.
53. The two paragraphs assume conditionsof free competition.
54. Marginal producers pay no tax on net income.
55. Nonmarginal producers can pass a sales tax to consumers in the
form of higher prices, because the marginal producers must also
raiseprices or withdraw from competition.
56. A decrease inprice has the same effecton marginal consumers
thatithas on marginal producers.
<<<PAGE=65>>>
[I
'--
114
An anthropologistwishes to discover whether there are intelligencedif­
ferences between whitepeople and Negroes. He administers a standard
group intelligencetest to allof the studentsin alternategrades of a
small town school system which includesa publicjuniorcollege. His
resultsare presented in the followingtable:
White students Negro students
Grade
No. takingtestAve.!. Q.No. takingtestAve.!. Q.
1
30010375853 275996090
5
260101351057
24010820115
H. S. Soph.
21511510125
H. S. Senior 200120 8135
J.C. 2nd yr.
100125 3145
On thebasis of the data in thistable,the anthropologistformulates a
number of conclusions.Some of these are given below, togetherwith
possiblecomments which might have been made by consultingscientists
calledinto evaluatehis work. For each of these numbered conclusions,
blacken the answer space correspondingtotheone comment which might
appropriatelybe made in such an evaluation.
57. Some Negroes are more intelligentthanmost people.
A- This conclusionisvalid.
B- This is probably true, but one cannotbe sure, because the
Negroes includedin the study are a sel~ctedgroup.
C- This isprobably true,but one cannotbe sure, because both
Negroes and whites includedin the study are a selectedgroup.
D- This isprobably untrue, since the average 1.Q. for 1stgrade
Negroes is18 pointslower than for 1st grade whites.
E- The comparison isvalidonly ifthere are no real qualitative
differencesbetween the whiteand Negro mind.
58. Before beginningschooling,Negro childrenin thiscommunity are
less intelligentthan white children.
A- This conclusionisvalid.
B- This conclusionisvalid,provided the childrenwho enter first
grade are typicalof the childrenof each race.
C- This conclusionisvalidprovided the children who enter first
grade are typicalof the childrenof each race, and provided
the items on the testdo not reallymeasure skillswhich white
childrenhave a betterchance to learn.
D- This conclusionis valid,provided the childrenwho enter first
grade are typicalof the childrenof each race, and provided
some Negroes were includedin the group originallyused in
standardizingthe test.
Note: The originalseries includedseven more exercises relevanttothe
data given above.
[I
,I;
II
iI
115
59.
The firstparagraph below is quotedfrom an inauguraladdress by
Thomas Jefferson;the second paragraph is taken from one ofthe essays
in The Federalist,writtenby Alexander Hamilton. Read these quota­
tionS"forthe purpose of identifyingthemajor controversialissue inhe!'­
ent in them. Then write a briefessay in which you indicatethe current
importance and implicationsof thisissue.
"About to enter, fellow-citizens,on the exercise of dutieswhich com­
prehend everything dear and valuable to you, it is proper you should
understand what I deem the essentialprinciplesof our Government, and
consequentlythosewhich ought to shape itsAdministration.I willcom­
press them withinthe narrowest compass they willbear, statingthe
general principle,but not all its limitations.Equal and exact justice
to all men, of whatever state or persuasion, religiousor political;
peace, commerce, and honest friendshipwith all nations,entangling
allianceswith none; the supportof the Stategovernments in all their
rights, as the most competent administrationsfor our domestic con­
cerns and the surest bulwarks againstanti-republicantendencies;the
preservation of the General Government in its whole constitutional
vigor, as the sheetanchor ofour peace at home and safetyabroad; a
jealouscare of the rightof electionby the people--amild and safe cor­
rective of abuses which are lopped by the sword of revolutionwhere
peaceable remedies are unprovided;absoluteacquiescence in the deci­
sions of themajority, the vitalprincipleof republics,from which isno
appealbut toforce, thevitalprincipleand immediate parent of despot­
ism; a well-disciplinedmilitia,our best relianceinpeace and for the
firstmoments of war, tillregularsmay relievethem; the supremacy
of the civilover themilitaryauthority;economy in the public expense,
thatlabor may be lightlyburthened;the honest payment of our debts
and sacred preservationof the publicfaith;encouragement ofagricul­
ture, and of commerce as itshandmaid; the diffusionof information
and arraignment of allabuses at the bar of the publicreason; freedom
of the press; the freedom ofperson under the protectionof the habeas
corpus, and trialby juries impartiallyselected. These principles
form the bright constellationwhich has gone before us and guided our
steps through an age of revolutionand reformation."
II
"The resultof these observationstoan intelligentmind must be clearly
this,thatifitbe possibleat any rate to constructa federalgovernment
capable of regulatingthe common concerns, and preserving the general
tranquillity,itmust be founded,as to the objectscommitted to itscare,
upon the reverse of the principlecontended for by the opponents of the
proposed constitution.It must carry itsagency to the persons of the
citizens.Itmust stand inneed of no intermediatelegislations;but must
itselfbe empowered to employ the arm of the ordinary magistrate to
execute itsown resolutions.The majesty of the nationalauthoritymust
be manifested through the medium of the courts ofjustice.The govern­
ment of theunion,likethatof each state,must be able to address itself
immediately to the hopes and fears of individuals;and to attractto its
<<<PAGE=66>>>
i: II '
I 117 I[!Testing for extrapolationobjectives,and illustrativetestitems
Topic or domain--ifthe communication dealswith
one topicor subject,the extrapolationmay repre­
sentan attempttoextendthe ideasto anothertopic
or situationwhich isrelevant. This ismore than
alteringthe form of the communication, since it
involves extendingthe ideas beyond the original
topicor subject.
Sample or universe--ifthe data dealwitha sample,
the extrapolationmay pertainto the universefrom
which the sample is drawn. Conversely, if the
datapertainto a universe,the extrapolationmay
pertaintoa sample. For example, data may be
givenwith respectto the trends inproductionof
automobilesover a periodofyears, whilethe ex­
trapolationmay pertainto theproductionof Ford
cars.
C.
B.
A.
Itisofteneffectiveto testfor extrapolationwhiletesting
abilityto interpretthrl;lUghuse of essay or objectiveexer­
cisesof thetypeearlierdescribedand illustrated.The ex­
erciseson extrapolationthen attemptto determine whether
or not the studentcan go beyond thelimitsof the dataor in­
formation given and make correct applicationsand exten­
siunsuf Die data01' inforn:.atioa.Itis tobe 2xpcc~cd~hat
the extrapolationswilldifferfrom the originalinsome of
the followingrespects:
Time dimension--ifthe datagivencontaintrends
and tendencieswithina giventime range, theex-
trapolationwillrepresentan attemptto extend the
trendsand tendenciesto othertime periods (includ­
ingtime periodswithina sequence).
I
60.
The followingselectionfrom the writingsof Descartes contains his
explanationsof certainphenomena. Statewhich ofhis explanationsare
stillaccepted as valid,and indicatewhich of his explanationsare no
longer accepted,pointingout brieflyhow they have been modified.
support those passions which have the strongestinfluenceupon the
human heart. Itmust, in short,possess all the means, and have a
right to resort to allthemethods, of executingthepowers with which
it is entrusted,thatare possessed and exercisedby the governments
of theparticularstates."
116
"Those who have acquired even theminimum of medical knowledge
know how the heart is composed, and how allthe blood inthe veins can
easilyflow from the vena cava intoitsrightside and from thence into
the lung by thevessel we term the arterialvein, and then returnfrom
the lung intotheleftside of the heart, by the vessel calledthe venous
artery,and finallypass from thereintothegreat artery,whose branches
spread throughout all the body .... We know that all movements of
the muscles, as also all the senses, depend on the nerves, which re­
semble small filaments,or littletubes,which all proceed from the
brain, and thus containlike ita certainvery subtleair or wind which
is called the animal spirits....So longas we livethere isa continual
heat in our heart,which isa species offirewhich 'theblood of the veins
theremaintains,and thisfireis the corporealprincipleof allthe move­
ments of our members ..,.Itsfirsteffectis to dilate(expand)the blood
with which the cavitiesof the heart are filled;thatcauses thisblood,
which requiresa greater space for itsoccupation,topass intothe great
artery;then when this dilation(expansion)ceases, new blood immedi­
atelyentersfrom the vena cava intothe rightcavityof the heart, and
from the venous artery intothe leftcavity,.,.The new blood which has
entered intothe heart is then immecliatelyafterward rarefied(expanded)
in the same manner as thatwhich preceded it;and itis justthis which
causes thepulse,or beatingof the heart and arteries;so thatthisbeat­
ing repeats itselfas oftenas the new blood enters the heart. Itis also
just this which gives its motion to theblood, and causes it to flow
ceaselesslyand very quickly in all the arteries and veins, whereby
itcarriesthe heat which itacquires in the heart toallparts of the
body, and suppliesthem with nourishment."
61.
The cartoon strip reproduced below portrays an episode in the lifeof
Andy Gump. Write a paragraph in which you tellhow you as a physi­
ologistwould explainAndy's reactionto the presence ofthebear.
1.•...
<<<PAGE=67>>>
118 119
75. The ratiosof employed persons tounemployed are given for each
year over an intervalofseveral years. Why is such data inade­
quatein revealingthe employment statusofauto-workers, lumber­
men, harvest hands, and calendar salesmen?
74. Contrast the kinds of interpretationone can make from frequency
polygons or histograms and smoothed curves drawn from the same
distributionof testscores obtainedfrom a sample of eighthgradepupils.
This is an example in which translation,interpretation,and extrapola­
tionare allincluded. Items 62, 64, 65, 69, and 71 are examples of
extrapolation.Item 71 is an example of extrapolatingfrom universe to
sample.
67. Less money was spentby theStatein 1930 thanin 1929 almost
wholly because of retrenchment with respect to highway expen­
ditures.
68. Less money was spent for highways in 1931 than in1932.
69. Unemployment increased in the Statebetween 1937 and 1939.
70. Increase in expendituresfrom 1929 to 1940 has been the leastin
those classifiedunder interestand retirement of Statedebt.
71. The per capitaexpendituresof Illinoiscitiesfor welfare and for
educationparallelthe Stateexpendituresfor these two purposes.
72. The totalexpendituresof the Statein 1940 exceeded one-half
billiondollars.
73. The Statedebt increased littlebetween 1933 and 1940 as compared
to expendituresfor education.
----
) /
)
TotalExpendituresWelfa7
)~
I-Stateof Illinois
1/
)
/./") /Educat~--- )
/ /Il""
----/
--
vnig~1"'-
---
I~
/'......•...•~l-
I./
In~{Srlt~nsebltirement
I
1-
All other purposes
100
120
140
Ul
H
."1
...,
o
Q
~o...•
8 80
;;;
200
40
160:
180
60
220
20
In the chartgiven below, amounts spent for any given statefunctionall
read from the base line. For example, interestand retirement of the
statedebt required the expenditureof 40 milliondollarsin 1938, rather
than 40 millionminus 21.
o
29 30 31 32 33 34 35 37 37 38 39 40
Fiscal Years ending June 30
2.30 Extrapolation
After the number on the answer sheet correspondingto thatof each
statement,blacken space
A ifthe informationgiven in the chart is sufficientfor a
judgment thatthe statement is definitelytrue.
B ifthe informationgiven in the chart is sufficientonly to
indicatethatthe statement isprobably true.
C ifthe informationgiven in the chart isnot sufficientto
indicateany degree of truthor falsityin the statement.
D ifthe informationgiven in the chart is sufficientfor a
judgment thatthe statement isprobably false.
E ifthe informationgiven in the chart is sufficientfor a
judgment thatthe statement is definitelyfalse.
76. Immigrants tend to settlein the slum areas closestto the central
business districtsofour large cities. Where are theirdescend­
ants most likelyto be found?
62. Less money was spent in1930 than before 1929 for.welfare and
education.
63. In 1931 and 1932 the expenditureof money for highway purposes was
evidentlyconsidereda means of combatting the depression.
64. Had our country not entered the war in1941, expendituresfor wel­
fare in1942 would have been greater than in1940.
65. In 1940 a much greaterproportionof the totalexpenditureswere
for welfare than in 1942.
66. The increasingamount of money spentby the Statefor allpurposes
between 1929 and 1940 must have come from sources other than
borrowing.
11IM.
<<<PAGE=68>>>
Use of abstractionto
solyeproblem
121
Some restructuringby
studenttomake resem­
blance to familiarmod-
elmore complete
Selectionof abstrac­
tion(theory,princi­
ple, idea, method)
suitableto problem
type
Classificationof
problem as familiar
in type
Studentuses familiar
elements to restruc­
tureproblem in a fa-
miliar context
Step 5
Step 4
Step 3
Step 2
Step 1
One way oflookingat thedistinctionis this.A prob­
lem inthe comprehension category requiresthe studentto
know an abstractionwellenough thathe can correctlydem­
onstrateitsuse when specificallyasked to do so. "Appli­
cation,"however, requires a step beyond this. Given a
problem new to the student,he willapply the appropriate
abstractionwithouthavingtobe prompted as to which ab­
stractionis correct or withouthaving tobe shown how to
use itin thatsituation. A demonstrationof "Comprehen­
sion" shows thatthe studentcan use the abstractionwhen
itsuse is specified. A demonstration of "Application"
shows thathe willuse itcorrectly,given an appropriate
situationin which no mode of solutionis specified.
The whole cognitivedomain of the taxonomy is ar­
ranged in a hierarchy,thatis, each classificationwithin
it demands the skillsand abilitieswhich are lower in the
cla.ssificationorder. The appHcationcategoryfollowsthi.s
rule in thatto applysomething requires"Comprehension"
of the method, theory, principle,or abstractionapplied.
Teachers frequentlysay, "Ifa studentreallycomprehends
something, thenhe can applyit." To make the distinction
betweenthe "Comprehension" and "Application"categories
clear,we have describeditin two ways.
3.00 APPLICATION
A second way of looking atthisis demonstrated in
Figure 1. It shows in diagrammatic form the problem­
solvingprocess of answering questionsclassifiedin the
"Application"category. Inthe complete solutionof an "Ap­
plication"problem, all 6 stepsare involved. Whether the
pr-ocessmore closelyresembles theleftor rightsideof the
chainat steps1 and 2 would depend upon thestudent1sfami­
liaritywith theproblem. Steps1 through4 are part of "Ap­
plication"but notof "Comprehension.II Comprehension is
best represented by a problem which startswith step 5,
steps 1-4 being unnecessary because of the structuringofthe problem situation.
Step 6 Solutiontoproblem
Figure I
120
Il...
<<<PAGE=69>>>
~.
122
The EducationalImplicationsof Objectivesin the Appli­
tionCategory
The factthatmost of what we learnis intendedfor ap­
licationto problem situationsin real lifeis indicativeof
the importance of applicationobjectivesin the generalcur­
riculum. The effectivenessof a largepart of the school
program is thereforedependentupon how wellthe students
carryover intosituationsapplicationswhich the students
never facedin thelearningprocess. Those of you familiar
with educationalpsychology will quicklyrecognize thisas
the age-old problem of transferof training. Research
studieshave shown thatcomprehending an abstractiondoes
not certifythattheindividualwillbe able to apply itcor­
rectly. Studentsapparentlyalsoneed practicein restruc­
turingand classifyingsituationsso thatthecorrectabstrac­
tionapplies(steps 1-4 of Figure 1).
For instance,Horrocks and Troyer constructeda test
which measured knowledge offactand principleabout ado­
lescentdevelopment and threecase studytestswhich mea­
sured the abilitytoapplythefactsand principlesof adoles­
cent development. The correlationsbetween the testsof
knowledge and application(over 100 students)ranged from
.31 to .54 aftertheywere correctedfor attenuation,that
is, corrected for the chance errors which affectedthe re­
liabilityof testsused. Obviously,in thisinstanceatleast,
possession of knowledge and theabilityto applyit are not
synonymous. 1
Many otherstudiesin thisarea can be found. The gen­
eral consensus seems to be thattrainingwilltransferto
new areas most readilyiftheperson is taughtin such a way
thathe learns good methods of attackingproblems, ifhe
.learnsconceptsand generalizations(ratherthanhow touse
certainfactsin specificinstances),ifhelearnsproper at­
titudestoward work, and ifhe developsproper attitudesof
self-confidenceandcontrol.Itisobviousthattheobjectivesin
IJohn E. Horrocks, "The Relationshipbetween Knowledge
of Human Development and the Use of Such Knowledge,"
Journal.£!Applied Psychology, 30, (1946),501-507.
ill.. ill
123
the applicationcategory,as they embody the meaning of
transferof training,are extremely importantaspectsof the
curriculum. Further, the evaluationof the extentto which
the applicationoutcomes are being achievedbecomes one of
the most importantaspectsof the entireevaluationprocess.
For, to the extent that the evaluationprocess gives the
schools informationconcerning success or failurein this
aspect of the curriculum, evaluationprovides a feedback
for futurecurricularrevislOn. Such feedback is of the ut­
most im.portanccas a basis for appropriaterevisionof the
educationalprocess.
<<<PAGE=70>>>
124
3.00 Application-- IllustrativeEducationalObjectives
Looking over collectionsof teachersI objectivesleads
to the generalizationthatobjectivesin theapplicationarea
sound very much alike, regardless of the subjectmatter
involved. For thisreason only a few examples are given
below. No examples are givenfrom the humanities field
sincetheonlyexamples thatcouldbe foundused application
of a principleas only a part (oftenminor) of a process,
e.g., as in creatinga piece of artwork (synthesis)or judg­inga piece of artwork (evaluation).
Applicationto thephenomena discussedby a paper, of
thescientificterms and conceptsused in otherpapers.
The abilityto applysocialsciencegeneralizationsand
conclusionstoactualsocialproblems.
The abilitytopredicttheprobableeffectofa change in
a factoron a biologicalsituationpreviouslyat equili­brium.
The abilitytoapply scienceprinciples,postulates,
theorems, or otherabstractionstonew situations.
Employing experimentalprocedures infindingthe
solutionstoproblems and theanswers to questionsinmaking home repairs.
Apply principlesofpsychologyinidentifyingthechar­acteristicsofa new socialsituation.
The abilitytorelateprinciplesof civillibertiesand
civilrightsto currentevents.
Skillinapplyingprinciplesof democratic group actiontoparticipationingroup and socialsituations.
The abilitytoapply thelaws oftrigonometrytopracticalsituations.
To developsome skillin applyingMendel's laws of
inheritanceto experimentalfindingson plantgeneticproblems.
125
TestingforApplication,and illustrativetestitems
Experience in testingfor applicationbehavior has
shown thatseveral factorsmust be routinelytaken into
consideration.Some of them are as follows:
Need fornew yet real items
If the situationsdescribed by theobjectiveor by the
testingsituationare to involveapplicationas we are defin­
ing ithere, then they must eitherbe situationsnew to the
studentor situationscontainingnew elements as compared
to the situationin which the abstractionwas learned. If
the situationspresented the studentto test "application"
are old ones in which he originallylearnedthemeaning of
the abstraction,the studentdoes not have to "apply" the
abstraction.Rather,he needs merely to recalltheoriginal
situationin which he learned the abstraction,a behavior
hereinclassifiedas knowledge or a levelincomprehension.
This islikelytomean thatthe problem must either(a)be
posed in a situationwhich is fictional,(b)be one which is
drawn from materialwithwhich the studentis not likelyto
have yet had contact,or (c)be on a problem known to the
studentbuta new slantthathe is unlikelyto have thoughtof
previously. Ideallywe are seekinga problem which will
testthe extentto which the individualhas learned to apply
the abstractionin a practicalway. This means thatthe
problems should have some relationto the situationsin
which he may ultimatelybe expectedtoapplythe abstrac­
tions. The kinds of problems thatcome from the three
above sources do not always meet this criterion. To the
extentthatfictionalproblem situations--(a)above--are un­
real,contraryto fact,or bizarrethey do not seem as likelytoelicitvalidbehavioras situationsof a more common and
realisticnature. Situationsdrawn from materialwithwhich
the studentisnotyet likelytohave had contact--(b)above-­
are usuallydrawn from advanced material and simplified
for use inan earliergrade. Itisfrequentlydifficultto suf­
ficientlysimplifythe situationsand yet retaintheirreality.Further, the bright student oftenblocks this source of
new situationsby havingread ahead or done outsidereading,
and so familiarized himself and sometimes his playmates
withthem. The new slanton common situations--(c)above-­
probably represents our most suitablesource ofnew, yet
realisticitems. They are, however, extremely hard to
<<<PAGE=71>>>
r
I
ll.....
126
devise. The PEA Applicationof PrinciplesTest used this
source of items.
General problem -solvingabilityvs. applicationof specific
principles
If one is teachinga particularbody of principlesand
wishes toevaluatethe effectof thisinstruction,one is inter­
ested not so much inthe extenttowhich the studentsolves
theproblem by common sense or theuse of commonly known
information,but ratherin the extentto which thestudenthas
directlybenefitedfrom thespecificlearningsituationsused.
Problems which withinthemselves containclues as tohow
they should be solved (such clues being interpretableby
someone withlittleor no specializedknowledge)would not
testapplicationof theprinciplesone has taught. One can
determine the extentto which the testis not evaluatingas
desired by administeringthe items to persons who have
not undergone the instructionin the area taughtbut who,
nevertheless,are persons equal ingeneralabilityto those
for whom theapplicationitems are designed.
Diagnosingfailureon applicationproblems
As is true ofany testresult,the indicationthata stu­
dent is unable to solve applicationproblems may result
from a number of causes besidesthe one thatthe student
has failedtolearn toapply. Failureon a problem may re­
sultfrom (a)not correctlycomprehending theproblem ab­
straction,(b)choosingthewrong abstraction,(c)incorrectly
using the abstractionin the situation,or (d)incorrectly
interpretingtheresultsofusingthe abstractionin thesitua­
tion.Itis importantto distinguishinabilityto comprehend.
This may be easilydetermined by testingthe extentto
which the studentis comprehending the situationbefore he
attemptstheapplicationitems. Determination of the point
of failureas otherthanfailureto comprehend (b,c, or d
above) requires thata sufficientrecord of the student's
problem-solving behavior be kept to allow locationof the
breakdown point. Itis impossible and unnecessary for us
to record every thoughtthatoccurs to the studentin the
solutionof theproblem. In general,it is sufficienttopro­
vide opportunityfor the studentto record his preference at
each choicepointin the solutionto theproblem throughhav­
ing him describe or actuallyrecord his thoughtsat that
127
point. If complete diagnosisis soughtonly on a few cases,
havingthestudentsolvetheproblem aloudwhilean observer
takes notes will get thisinformation. If the cases are
carefullychosen so as to be representativeof the group,
thislattertechniquewillprove very feasibleand economical
for diagnosingthe major troublesof the group as a whole.
The techniqueisofgreataid in the revisionof the testitems
tomake them more validand to findchoicepointsthatshould
be recorded.
Providingopportunityfor recordingchoicepointssounds
easy but is frequentlyvery difficultinpractice.Itsimplica­
tionis thatwe can anticipateallthe correct as wellas al­
ternativeproblem-solving processes of the students. To
avoid this,testconstructorshave triedto constructitems
which were so structuredthatby analyzingthe student's
answer one could infertheproblem-solving process which
the studentused. That is,each distractorin a problem can
be so phrased thatitcan be reached onlyby one set of prob­
lem-solvingsteps.By knowing theanswer choicethe student
made we would then know the method he used to solvethe
problem. Verbal problem solving,in general, has shown
thatthe typesof items and varietyof subjectmatter in
which this techniquecan be successfullyused are few.
Althoughitmay appear thattheprocess can be inferred,
studiesusuallyshow thatstudentscan come up with ways
of arrivingat answers, oftencorrect,thatno teacher
seems tohave anticipated.When accurateknowledge of
process is required, actualrecording of the student's
problem-solvingprocesses can be consideredgenerally
preferablein themajorityof cases to inferencefrom the
product.2
2 The recentlydeveloped"Tab Item" techniqueisan
attempttodo this.In aletterto the editor,Robert Glaser
has describedthe Tab Item:
"A Tab Itempresentsan examinee withthefollow­
ing: a descriptionof a problem situation;a series
ofdiagnosticprocedures which,ifemployed, might
yieldinformationrelevantto solvingtheproblem;
and a listofspecificsolutions,one ofwhich iscor­
rect. In takingthe testan examinee selectsany
number of theprocedures presentedwhich he thinks
<<<PAGE=72>>>
•...
Ilia
128
Adequate sampling ofapplication
We have statedthatwe wish to sample a student'sbe­
haviorat severalpointsinhis applicationof abstractionto
a problem situationbut have not mentioned the obvious
corollarythatwe shouldalso sample thestudent'sbehavior
over several problem situations.This is a general rule
of testingand is anotherway of achievingwhat we commonly
call "testreliability."It is, however, of particular
importance with respectto applicationitems. Since these
items are oftenfelttobe so difficultto construct,the use
ofa singleproblem situationtomake generalizationsabout
an individualisfairlycommon. Sincethestudent'sability
may oftenclearlybe a functionof the particularsituation
used, the necessityfor takinga sample of situationsis
apparent.
willprovidehim withinformationnecessary tosolve
theproblem. The resultinginformationfrom what­
ever procedures theexaminee chooses are givento
him at the time he selectsthem. This is accom­
plishedby givingthe resultsor consequences of a
procedure intheform ofwrittenor diagrammatic
information,which is covered by a tabfastenedto
thepage. When the examinee selectsa procedure
he ripsoffthetabandobtainsthe resultsofthepro­
cedure he has 'performed'. In a likemanner an
examinee isinformed of the correctnessor incor­
rectnessof his choiceof a solution. An examinee
works on an item untilhe findsthe correct solu­
tion,denotedby theword 'yes'under the corres­
ponding tab."
Glaser,R.; Damrin, D. E.;and Gardner, F.M. "The Tab
Item:A Technique fortheMeasurement of Proficiencyin
DiagnosticProblem SolvingTasks," Champaign: Univer­
sityof Illinois,Collegeof Education,Bureau of Research
and Service,June 1952.
129
Types of items illustrated
Major variationsoccur both in the kinds of situations
posed,and in theextentand natureof thebehavior requested
in applicationitems.
Behavior. The major variationsinbehavior involvevaria­
tionsinthe extenttowhich the studentis requiredto carry
throughtheapplicationprocess,and variationsintheextent
to which the student'sproblem-solving processes are re­
corded. These variationsseem to occur most commonly
in the followingpatterns:
Type
1)A recordingof the choiceof correctprinciple(s)is
requestedand itsuse in theproblem is tobe dem­
onstrated. Practicallythe whole applicationpro­
cess is on record.
2) The problem solutionis requestedand the process
of applicationis to be demonstrated and recorded.
The student'sselectionof theabstraction(s)is in­
ferred from thenatureof theprocess and solution
he displays.
3) The complete or partialproblem solutionalone is
requestedand recorded. The selectionand applica­
tionofthe abstraction(s)is entirelycovertand un­
recorded. They are inferredfrom thenatureof the
solutionhe presents. In some instanceswhere only
thesolutionisrequested,ifthe solutionisa complex
one, itis sometimes difficultto determine whether
the individualactuallyhas appliedthe abstraction
correctlyso thatthe whole solutionis correct. In
theseinstancesthe extentof the student'ssolutionand
itscorrectnessis sometimes exploredby asking the
studentto indicatethe implicationsof it.
<<<PAGE=73>>>
r
~ ...
130
4) Selectionofthecorrectabstractionisalonerequested
and recorded. Ifaphenomenon is tobe explained,the
correctapplicationof theabstractionis generallyas­
sumed to accompany a correctselection. Although
merely naming theabstractionis not usuallya suffi­
cienttestof abilityto use the abstractioncorrectly,
problems requiringonlythe selectionof the correct
abstractioncan be used when theabstractionand its
applicationare simple and theproblem's chiefdiffi­
cultyliesin selectingthe correctabstraction.
Situation.As notedearlier,the emphasis in writingappli­
cationitems ison gettingsituationsnew to the student.This
is done by
~
A) presentinga fictionalsituation,
B) usingmaterialwithwhich the studentisnotlikely
to havehad contact.Suchsituationsare frequently
simplifiedversions of complex material which
would ordinarilycome considerablylaterin the
course of study (classificationof an item as of
thistype is dependent entirelyupon thegroup to
whom itis administered),
C) takinga new slanton situationswhich to the group
being testedare common and mundane. In highly
technicalareas,"common" problems may appear
very uncommon to an outsider.
131
3.00 - APPLICATION -- ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
Behavior. This adaptationof a PEA item requires the
studentto selectthe appropriateprinciplesand extrap­
olatebeyond the situationgiven. The principlemust
be drawn from memory in thisessay type item.
(Type 1)
Situation.The situation,while probably not withinthe
directexperienceof all,is at leastwithintheirvicari­
ous experience. Itcouldbe considered as a new slant
on a fairlycommon phenomenon. (Type C)
1. John prepared an aquarium as follows: He carefullycleaned a
ten-gallonglasstank with saltsolutionand put in a few inchesof fine
washed sand. He rooted several stalksof weed (elodea)taken from a
pool and then filledthe aquarium with tap water. Mter waitinga week
he stocked the aquarium with ten one-inch goldfishand three snails.
The aquarium was then leftin a corner of the room. After a month
the water had not become fouland the plantsand animals were in good
condition. Without moving the aquarium he sealed a glass top on it.
What prediction,ifany, can be made concerning the conditionof
the aquarium aftera period of several months? Ifyou believea defi­
nitepredictioncan be made, make itand then giveyour reasons. If
you are unable tomake a predictionfor ~ reason, indicatewhy you
are unable to make a prediction(giveyour reasons).3
3Adapted from Test 1.3B, "Applicationof Principlesin Science,"
Progressive Education Association,Evaluationin the Eight-Year
Study, Universityof Chicago, 1940.
<<<PAGE=74>>>
132
Behavior. This PEA item isan attempt to get a record of the major
aspects of the process of applicationbut yet to use an objective
testitem form. The item form reverses the expectedproblem­
solvingprocedure in thatthe studentstateshis solutionand then ra­
tionalizesitby choosingprinciplesto support it. (Type 1)
Situation.This is a differentway of lookingata common phenome­
non for most students. (Type C)
Problem VI from PEA Test 1.3, Applicationof Principles
2. An electriciron (110 volts,1000 watts)has been used for some
time and the plug contactshave become bllrned.thus introducingaddi­
tionalresistance. How willthisaffectthe amount of heat which the
iron produces?
Directions:Choose the conclusionwhich you believeismost con­
sistentwith the factsgiven above and most reasonable in the lightof
whatever knowledge you may have, and mark the appropriatespace onthe Answer Sheet under Problem VI.
Conclusions:
A. The iron willproduce more heat than when new.
B. The iron willproduce the same heat as when new.
C. The iron willproduce less heat than when new.
Directions:Choose the reasons you would use to explainor support
your conclusionand fillin the appropriatespaces on your Answer Sheet.
Be sure thatyour marks are inone column only--thesame column inwhich you marked the conclusion.
Reasons:
l. The heat produced by an electricaldeviceis always measured by
itspower rating. Itis independentof any contactresistance.
2. Electriccurrentsof the same voltagealways produce the same
amount of heat, and burned contactsdo not decrease the amount
of electricityenteringthe iron.
3. The currentwhich flows through the iron is reduced when the re­sistanceis increased.
4. Increasingthe resistancein an.electricalcircuitincreasesthecurrent.
5. An increasein electricalresistanceincreases the heat developed.
6. Manufacturers of electricironsurge thatthe contactsbe kept
clean to maintain maximum efficiency.
7. An increasein the temperature of a wire usuallyresultsin anincrease in itsresistance.
8. Burned contactsincrease the heat developed in an electriciron
justas increasingthe frictionin automobilebrakes developsmore heat.
9. The heat developedby an electriciron when connectedto 110
voltsis independentof the flow of current.
, I
I
II
! I
133
Behavior. In the followingproblem both the solutionand
process of applicationare requested. The student'scor­
rect selectionof the abstraction,in thiscase a method of
solvingthistype of problem, is inferredfrom the process
and the solutionhe displays. (Type 2)
Situation.The problem situationsare fictionaland prob­
ably not realisticfrom the standpointof most of the groups
which would be tested. Ifthisproblem or one justlikeit
had been solved inclasswork, thiswould be a comprehen~
sion rather than an applicationitem. (Type A)
3. X and Y can do a piece ofwork togetherin 15 days. They work
togetherfor 6 days; then X quitsand Y finishesthe work in 30 more
days. In how many days can Y do thepiece of work alone? Show your
work below.
(a) 30
(b) 40
(c) 50
(d) 60
(e) none of the foregoing
Behavior. This item is similar to the preceding item in
terms of the way thatittestsapplication.In thisinstance
the abstractionbeing testedis a formula relatingthe area
to the lengthand width of a rectangle. (Type 2)
Situation.The problem isfictional.As noted in regard to
the preceding item, iftoo close to the problems used in
class, itwould testcomprehension rather thanapplication.
(Type A)
4. The lengthof a rectangularlotexceeds itsbreadth by 20 yards. If
each dimension is increased by 20 yards the area of the lot will be
doubled. Find theshorterdimension of theoriginallot.Show your work
below.
(a) 20
(b) 30
(c) 35
(d) 40
(e) none of the foregoing
<<<PAGE=75>>>
1".
134
Behavior. The studentmust recallthe principlesofecology and
apply the appropriateones to the situationsnamed in the item.
Only the solutionis requested. (Type 3)
Situation.The situationsare realbut the studentisnot likelyto
be familiarwith them. (Type C)
5. After the number on the answer sheet corresponding to thatpre­
ceding each of the followingpaired items, blacken space
A- ifincreasein the firstof the thingsreferred to isusuallyac­
companied by increase in the second.
B- ifincrease in the firstof the thingsreferred to isusuallyac­companied by decrease in the second.
C- ifincrease in the firstof the thingsreferred tohas no appre­ciableeffecton the second.
1 Number of lemming in an Arctichabitat.
. Number of caribou inthe same habitat.
2. Number of lichensinan Arctic habitat.
Number of caribou in the same habitat.
3. Amount of carbonates dissolvedin the water of a river.
Number ofclams in the river.
I I
135
Behavior. In thisitem the studentis to judge the implicationsof ap­
plyinga givenpolicyfor the distributionof income. The policysitu­
ationis given and the implicationalone is asked for. The principles
involvedand theiruse in determining the implicationsmust be in­
ferred from the student'schoice. (Type 3)
Situation.The situationis fictionalin thatthe settingof the problem
is abstractand the studentispresented with a simplifiedeconomic
situationwhere only one variableat a time is changed. (Type A)
6.. Directions: In the followingitems you are to judge the effectsof a
p~rticularpolicyon the distributionof income. In each case assume
thatthere are no other changes inpolicywhich would counteractthe ef­
fectof the policydescribed in the item. Mark the item:
A- ifthe policydescribedwould tend to reduce the existingdegree
of inequalityin the distributionof income;
B- ifthe policydescribed would tend to increase the existingde­
gree of inequalityin the distributionof income; or
C- ifthe policydescribed would have no effect,or an indetermi­
nate effect,on the distributionof income.
Items:
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Temperature of the environment of a mammal.
Body temperature of themammal.
Compactness of the soilof a given area.
Amount of water absorptionby the soilaftera heavy rain.
Frequency offirein a given coniferousforest.
Number of aspen trees in the forest.
Crop yieldper acre of farmland cultivatedinIllinois.
Amount of soilnutrientsper acre of farmland.
The altitudeof the environment of an animal..
Ext ent to which the circulatingred blood cellsof the animal
undergo mitosis.
Extentof treeplantingactivityon forestland i.nthe UnitedStates.
Degree of water absorptionby the soilper unitof area ofthe same land.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Increasinglyprogressive income taxes.
Confiscation.of renton unimproved urban land.
Introductionof a nationalsales tax.
Increasingthe personal exemptions from income taxes.
Distributinga subsidy to sharecroppers on Southern
farms.
Provision of educationaland medical services, and low
costpublichousing.
Reduction in the degree ofbusiness monopoly.
Increasingtaxes inperiods ofprosperityand decreasing
them inperiods when depressions threaten.
10. Amount of vegetationper square yard of soil.
Amount of availablenitratesaltsin the same area of soil.
11. Amount of humus accumulated in sand during dune succession.Abundance of animal lifein the area.
<<<PAGE=76>>>
136
Behavior. The studentis asked to findthe solution. Correct selection
and use ofthe appropriateprincipleis inferredfrom the solution.
(Type 3)
Situation.Strictlya fictionalsituation,but having a realistic-soundingsetting. (Type A)
7. Suppose an elevatoris descendingwith a constantaccelerationof
gravity"g". Ifa passenger attempts to throw a rubber ballupward,
what willbe themotion of the ballwith respect to the elevator? Theballwill
1. remain fixedat the pointthe passenger releases it.
2. rise to the top of the elevalorand remain there.
3. not rise at all,but willfallto the floor.
4. rise,bounce offthe ceiling,thenmove toward the floorat a
constantspeed.
5. rise,bounce offthe ceiling,thenmove toward the floorat an
increasingspeed.
IBehavior. Here one can testboth the correct selectionand use of the I
abstractionsincethe problem is to explaina phenomenon. (Type 4)
Situation.A common problem isused. (Type C)
Directions: The underlinedstatementat the end of theproblem isas­
sumed tobe a correctanswer. You are to explainthe underlinedcon­
clusionby selectingstatements from the listfollowingthe problem.
(The studentchecks the explanations.)
8. Ifa person isplanningtobathe in the sun, at·what time of day is
he most likelyto receive a severe sunburn? He ismost likelyto re­
ceive a severe sunburn inthe middle of the day (11a.m. to 1 p.m.)because:
( ) We are slightlycloser to the sun at noon than inthe morningor afternoon.
The noon sun willproduce more "burn" than themorning orafternoonsun.
When the sun'srays falldirectly(straightdown) on a surface,
more energy is receivedby thatsurface than when the sun's
rays fallobliquelyon thatsurface.
( ) When the sun is directlyoverhead the sun's rays pass through
less absorbing atmosphere thanwhen the sun islower in the
sky.
The air is usuallywarmer atnoon than at other times of the
day.
The ultravioletof the sunlightismainly responsiblefor sun­burn.4
4Taken from Inventory1.5, Analyzing HealthProblems; Coopera­
tiveStudyin General Education. AtnericanCouncil on Education,Uni­
versityof Chicago, 1941.
137
Behavior. The studentmust recallthe principlesof solar
and planetarymovement and apply them to each of the re­
sponse possibilitiesto determine whether theproblem sit­
uationmight be a resultant.Only the solutionneed be re­
corded. (Type 3)
Situation.Fictional.(Type A)
9. You have acquired some knowledge of the earth and itsmotions as
they reallyexist. In thisexerciseyou are to identifythe effectsof
some wholly imaginary conditions.After each item number on the
answer sheetblacken space
A- ifthe item would be true ifthe earth were not inclinedonitsaxis.
B- ifthe item would be true ifthe orbitof the earth were a circle
rather than an ellipse.
C- ifthe item would be true ifthe earth revolved toward the west
rather than toward the east.
D- ifthe item would be true ifthe earth had halfitspresent diame­
ter but retaineditspresent mass.
E- ifthe item would be true ifthe earth had no moon.
Assume only one of the above imaginary conditionsoccurs at a time.
1. All the solar days would be of equal length.
2. Objects would.weigh four times as much as they do now.
3. The celestialequator and the eclipticwould be identical.
4. The sun would set in the east.
5. A differentNorth Star would need tobe chosen.
6. The force of gravitywould be four times as great.
7. The orbitalspeed of the earth would not vary during the year.
8. We would know much less about the nature ofthe sun.
9. Nightand day would be of equal lengthin alllatitudes
allyear long.
<<<PAGE=77>>>
•....
138
When on Thursday, February 8, 1951 a Chicagoan, Mrs. Dorothy
Mae Stevens, was found unconscious in a passageway after a night of
exposure to 11 degree subzero weather, "she was literallyfrozen stiff."
Her temperature had dropped to an unprecedented 64 degrees (Fahr­
enheit). Twenty hours after her arrival at Michael Reese Hospital, her
temperature had risen to 98.2 degrees. Early Friday itwas 101 and lat­
er 100. On Saturday itwas also 100.
When she was first found, her respiration was slowed to 3 a min­
ute. By Saturday itwas up to 24 a minute.
Her blood pressure was zero on Thursday. By Saturday itwas
132 over 80. On Thursday her pulse rate was 12 a minute; on Saturday
itwas 100. Cortisone was administered early.
I
139
Behavior. The solution alone is requested. (Type 3)
Situation. See firstproblem of this series.
12. When Mrs. Stevens was found in subzero weather her heart was
beating
A- 12 times a minute.
B- 3 times a minute.
C - 0 times a minute.
D- the normal number of times a minute, but not with normal
vigor.
E- subnormally, but there is nothing 'inthe article to indicate
how many times.
10. At a body temperature of 64 degrees
Situation. At the time the item was written Mrs. Stevens'
case was headline news. The item assumes that the stu­
dent has not previously thought about these aspects of the
case. (Type C)
Behavior.
pIe used.
This item requests solution and the princi­
(Type 1)
I Behavior. The student must determine the principles in- I
volved in the production of steam which might apply to
each of the distractors. He then determines whether this
is realistic insofar as the situation is concerned. This
leads him to a choice. An aspect of the solution is re­
quested. (Type 3)
•••
A- the blood carries more oxygen to the cells than normally, be­
cause more gases dissolve in fluids at low temperatures
rather than at high temperatures.
B- the blood vessels of the skin are dilated, because the vasocon­
strictor muscles are relaxed.
C- the heart beats more rapidly, because the cold stimulates the
heart center in the medulla.
D- most activitiesslow down, because all chemical activities
decrease as the temperature falls.
Behavior. Only the solution is requested, the abstrac­
tion used must be inferred from the student's choice.
(Type 3)
Situation. See previous problem,
11. The immediate cause of Mrs. Stevens' unconsciousness was
probably due to the
A - lack of a sufficientamount of oxygen to the brain cells.
B- lowering of the external temperature.
C- slow pulse rate.
D- decrease in muscle tone.
E- low breathing rate .
Situation. A realistic situationprobably not previously
considered by the student. (Type C)
After each exercise number on the answer sheet, blacken the one
lettered space which designates the correct answer. --
13. When a geyser firstbegins to erupt, hot water overflows at the
orifice and this is followed by a rush of steam, mingled with hot water.
The firstoverflow of hot water aids in the production of steam, because
A- less water needs to be heated.
B- more water can seep into the fissure from the surrounding
rocks.
C- the higher the pressure, the greater the steam produced.
D- the lower the pressure, the lower the temperature at which
steam is produced.
E- the water which overflows is necessarily below 2120 F. in
tempe rature.
<<<PAGE=78>>>
io-
140
Behavior. Proper applicationof the operatingprinciplesof certain
bodilymechanisms permits the studenttopredictthe directionand
amount of change which willresultfrom each of the two experiments.
(Type 3)
Situation.This is a fictionalexperiment which is so devised thatit
permits the demonstration of certainprinciples. (Type A)14.
Experiment A: A normal person is seated insidea small airtightcham­
ber inwhich the air at the startof the experiment has a temperature of
720 F. and a relativehumidity of 60. By means of a mask and pipes the
person breathes air drawn infrom outsidethe chamber and the air he
exhales is alsopassed out of the chamber.
Experiment B: The same person islaterseatedoutsideof the same
chamber, but by means of the mask and pipes breathes air drawn from
the chamber and the air he exhales isalso passed intothe chamber. The
composition of the air, airpressure, temperature, and humidity were
the same outsideand insidethe chamber at the startof each of the ex­
periments.
After each item number on the answer sheet,blacken space
A- ifthe statementappliesto Experiment A.
B- ifthe statementappliesto Experiment B.
C- ifthe statementappliestoneitherExperiment A nor Experi­ment B.
The rate and depthof breathingincrease more rapidlyin thisexperi­
ment than in the other experiment.
The rate and amount of perspirationincrease more rapidlyinthisex­
periment than in the other experiment.
The humidity and temperature of the air in the chamber increase more
rapidlyin thisexperiment than in the other experiment.
The 02 concentrationof the air in the chamber increases appreciably.
The CO2 concentrationof the air in the chamber increasesappreciably.
The percentageof heat loss through evaporationdecreases greatly.
The activityof the respiratorycenterof the medulla increases consid­
erably.
The activityof the respiratorycenter of themedulla decreases consid­
erably.
The number of impulses passing through thephrenic nerves in a given
unitof time increases considerably.
The number of impulses passing through the vagus nerves in a given
unitof time increases considerably.
,/-------
III
141
Behavior. The studentmust determine the general principleswhich
operate in the situationdescribedand then predictthe most likely
event. (Type 3)
Situation.A fictionalsituation.(Type A)
15. Mr. Golzak, Mr. A. F. Fell,Mrs. Hunter, and Boss Powers live
in SteelCity.
Mr. Golzakwas born 60 years ago in Central Europe. Today Mr. Gol­
zak is one of SteelCity'stopbusiness leaders. The Golzak family has
"arrived." Wealthy Mrs. Golzak dominates the sociallifeof their
swank suburb, Mapledale. Mr. Golzak, personnel manager for Amal­
gamated Steel,believesin "rugged individualism."Personal freedom
allows enterprisingmen (suchas himself)to achieve wealth and posi··
tion,justas freedom from governmental restraintforbusiness assures
nationalprosperityand a "fulldinner pail"for all. Mr. Golzak believes
labor unions destroy workers' initiativeand undermine business.
Mr. A. F. Fellwas born inSteelCity in a working-class neighborhood.
Like hiS father,Mr. Fellbecame a printer'sapprenticeat 16, and
then a life-longmember of the InternationalTypographical Workers
Union. He works as.a typesetterfor the "SteelCity Sentinel."Mr. Fell
believesthatmanagement and labor should settletheirdifferencesen­
tirelybetween themselves by collectivebargaining. Mr. Fell makes$l.90 per hour, owns his own home and sends his childrento the city
juniorcollege. He believeshis union has made thispossible.
Mrs. Hunter is the wife ofa steelworkers. Mr. Hunter belongs to thecIa. The Hunters and three other familiesshare a "modest" home
(owned by Mr. Golzak) three blocks downwind from the steelmill.Mrs.Hunter attendeda Southern schoolfor Negroes for four years, offand
on. She has littleunderstandingof socialand economic problems, but
she worries over such personal problems as clothingfor four growing
children,privacy in her own home, paying the butcher during the steelstrike,and Junior who "borrows" bicycles.
Boss Powers, slum-born son of an Irishsaloon-keeper,learned con­
vivialityearly inlifeand led his gang againstthe PrairieAvenue Dukes.
Soon he was leadinghis Ward Organizationagainstthe Republicans.
Today he is unquestionedas Democratic Boss of SteelCity. He enjoys
the fruitsofvictory.
1. A business recession would probably mean unemployment for
(A- the Fellsand the Hunters; B- Boss Powers; C- the Hunters;
D- none of these).
2. Mr. Fell'shome isprobably (A- near the steelmill;B- in Maple­
dale;C- inthe zone of transition;D- among twenty-year-old
singledwellingunits).
3. A billis before Congress toadmit an additional100,000 displaced
persons. Most likelyto favor the billis (A- Mr. Golzak, personnel
manager for Amalgamated Steel;B- Mrs. Hunter, wife of an un­
skilledlaborer;C- Mr. Fell,skilledcraftsman; D- Boss Powers,
son ofan immigrant).
4. Mrs. Fellhas chronic headaches althoughher doctor can findnoth­
ing organicallywrong with her. Her headaches are most probably
a resultof (A- personal maladjustment; B- approaching insanity;
C- hidden germs; D- an inheritedmental weakness).
<<<PAGE=79>>>
Behavior. The studentmust recallthe general principlesof supply
and demand and determine theiruse in each situationto determine
the effectof the situation.Solutiononly is requested. (Type 3)
•...~
rll142 143 I
I Behavior. The studentmust apply thephysics principlecorrectly •
in each case. Only the solutionis requested. (Type 3)
Situation.Fictional.(Type A)
Two spheres, X and Y, of equalmasses and radii,are placed on two in­
clinedplanes, as shown in the diagram. Neglect frictionand air resist­
ance, and assume thatpotentialenergy ismeasured from the levelof
pointsL, M, N, and O.
Quantity
---
y -Original
Supply CurveI
/
I/
I/I/
.........
Fictionalsituationswhich exemplify thepointsinvolved.
Price
Situation.
(Type A)
Mter the answer sheet number which precedes each product, blacken
the letteredspace which designatesthepointof intersectionof the
curves which apply to the new conditions. Assume thatthere are no
other changes in supply or demand than those specified.Assume also
thatthere are no restrictionswhich interferewith the existenceof a
free market.
Product New Conditions
1. Automobiles New union agreements have practicallyeliminated
labor grievances. Those who most urgently
wanted new cars have been supplied.
2. Butter During the winter months productionislowest.
Taxes on oleomargarine have been eliminated.
3. Shoes Stockmen are holdingback beef cattlefrom the
market in anticipationof higherprices.
4. Oysters The Chesapeake Bay oysters are found tobe suc-
cumbing to sicknesses inducedby increasing
pollutionof the bay.
17. In the diagram above the unbroken lines represent the original
supply and demand conditionfor each of the products listedbelow.
For each product a change of conditionsis specifiedwhich may cause
a shiftin eitheror both of the originalcurves, such thatthe new point
of intersectionis atA, B, C, D, or E. (B and D represent shiftsin
demand or supply,but not both, while A, C, and E represent a shiftin
both supply and demand.)
1.1
o
Potentialenergy of Y at H.
Potentialenergy of Y at N.
Potentialenergy of X at L.
Kineticenergy of X on falling
to M.
Kineticenergy of Y on rolling
to O.
Work done on X inmoving itfrom L to F.
Work done on Y in raisingit
from N to H.
Accelerationof Y in rolling
down inclinetoward O.
Accelerationof Y infalling
verticallytoward N.
Time ittakes Y tofallto N.
Time ittakes X to fallto M.
Loss ofpotentialenergy of
Y in fallingto K.
L
5. Kineticenergy of X on rollingto L
16. The numbers preceding thepaired items in the exercisebelow refer
to the correspondingnumbers on the answer sheet. Considering each
pair from the standpointof quantity,blacken space
A- ifthe item at the leftis greater than thatat the right.
B- ifthe item at the rightis greater than thatat theleft.
C- ifthe two items are of essentiallythe same magnitude.
1. Potentialenergy of X at F .
2. Potentialenergy of X at M .
,3. Potentialenergy of X at M .
4. Kineticenergy of X on rollingto L
6. Work done on X in raisingitfrom
M to F .
7. Work done on X in raisingitfrom
M to F .
8. Accelerationof X in rollingdown
inclinetoward L .
9. Accelerationof X infallingver-
ticallytoward M .
10. Time ittakes X tofallto M .
11. Time ittakes X torollto L .
12. Loss ofpotentialenergy of X in
fallingto G .
III...
<<<PAGE=80>>>
~ If
145
L
4.00 - ANALYSIS
At a somewhat more advanced level than the skillsof
comprehension and applicationare those involved in analy­
sis. In comprehension the emphasis is on the grasp of the
meaning and intentof the material. In applicationitis on
remembering and bringing to bear upon given material the
appropriate generalizations or principles. Analysis empha­
sizes the breakdown of the material into itsconstituentparts
and detection of the relationshipsof the parts and of the way
they are organized. ItInay also be directed at the techniques
and devices used to convey the meaning or to establish the
conclusion of a communication.
Although analysis may be conducted merely as an exer­
cise in detecting the organization and structure of a commu­
nication and may therefore become itsown end, itis prob­
ably more defensible educationallyto consider analysis as an
aid to fullercomprehension or as a prelude to an evaluation
of the material.
Skillin analysis may be found as an objective of any field
of study. Itis frequently expressed as one of their impor­
tant objectives by teachers of science, social studies, phi­
losophy, and the arts. They wish, for example, to develop
in students the abilityto distinguishfact from hypothesis in
a communication, to identifyconclusions and supporting
statements, to distinguish relevant from extraneous mate­
rial,to note how one idea relates to another, to see what un­
stated assumptions are involved in what is said, to distin­
guish dominant from subordinate ideas or themes in poetry
or music, to find evidence of the author's techniques and
purposes, etc., etc.
No entirelyclear lines can be drawn between analysis and
comprehension at one end or between analysis and evaluation
at the other. Comprehension deals with the content of mate­
rial, analysis with both content and form. One may speak of
"analyzing" the meaning of a communication, but this usually
refers to a more complex level of abilitythan "understand­
ing" or "comprehending" the meaning -- and that is the inten­
tion in the use of "analysis" here. Itis true also that analy­
sis shades into evaluation, especially when we think of "crit­
icalanalysis." As one analyzes the relationshipsof elements
144
of an argument, he may be judging how well the argument
hangs together. In analyzing the form of a communication,
or the techniques used, one may express opinions about how
well the communication serves itspurpose.
And yet the type of abilitywe call analysis may be ab­
stracted, and usefully. One who comprehends the meaning
of a communication may not be able to analyze itat all ef­
fectively,and one who is skillfulin the analysis of material
may evaluate itbadly. In the selection of the illustrativeed­
ucational obJectives and test items which follow, an attempt
has been made to use materials clearly above the level of
comprehension and below that of evaluation.
Analysis, as an objective, may be divided into three
types or levels. At one level the student is expected to
break down the material into its constituentparts, to identi­
fy or classifythe elements of the communication. At a sec­
ond level he is required to make explicit the relationships
among the elements, to determine their connections and in­
teractions. A third level involves recognition of the organi­
zational principles, the arrangement and structure, which
hold together the communication as a whole.
4.10 - Analysis of Elements
A communication may be conceived of as composed of a
large number of elements. Some of these elements are ex­
plicitlystated or contained in the communication and can be
recognized and classifiedrelativelyeasily. Thus, the read­
er of a communication should have littledifficultyin recog­
nizing the hypotheses which are being investigatedsince they
are likelyto be so identifiedby the writer. He may also be
able to recognize the conclusions the writer is drawing be­
cause these are also likelyto be stated explicitlyby the
writer.
However, there are many other elements in a communi­
cation which are not so clearly labelled or identifiedby the
writer. Many of these elements may be of paramount impor­
tance in determining the nature of the communication, and
untilthe reader can detect them he may have difficultyin
fullycomprehending or evaluating the communication. Thus
there are unstated assumptions being made by the writer
<<<PAGE=81>>>
relevance of elements or parts to the central idea or thesis
in the communication.
4.20 - Analysis of Relationships--IllustrativeEducational
Objectives
Skillin comprehending the interrelationshipsamong the
ideas in a passage.
il I14': 147 I
I I
which can only be inferred from an analysis of a series of
statements within the document. Itis also of value to the
reader ifhe can detect the nature and functionof particular
statements in the communication. Some are stwements offact, some are statements of value, while others may be
statements of intent. Many other types of statements may
be included and itis leftto the reader to determine the na­
ture of each.
,...-"
4.10 - Analysis of Elements--lliustrative Educational
Objectives Abilityto recognize what particulars are relevant to the
validation of a judgment.
The abilityto recognize unstated assumptions.
Skillin distinguishingfacts from hypotheses.
Abilityto recognize which facts or assumptions are es­
sentialto a main thesis or to the argul1lentin support of
that thesis.
The abilityto distinguishfactualfrom normative state­
ments. Abilityto check the consistency of hypotheses with given
information and assumptions.
Skillin identifyingmotives and in discriminating between
mechanisms of behavior with reference to individualsand
groups.
Abilityto distinguishcause-and-effect relationships from
other sequential relationships.
Abilityto distinguisha conclusion from statements which
support it.
Abilityto analyze the relations of statements in an argu­
ment, to distinguishrelevant from irrelevant statements.
4.20 - Analysis of Relationships Ability to detect logical fallacies in arguments.
Having identifiedthe differentelements within a commu­
nication, the reader stillhas the task of determining some
of the major relationshipsamong the elements as well as
the relationshipsamong the various parts of the communica­
tion. At the most obvious level he may need to determine
the relationshipof the hypotheses to the evidence, and in
turn the relationshipbetween the conclusions and the hypo the­
ses as well as evidence. Analysis would also include the re­
lationshipsamong the differentkinds of evidence presented.
At a more difficultlevel is likelyto be the analysis of a
communication into the parts which are essential to or which
form the main thesis as contrasted with those parts or ele­
ments which may help to expand, develop, or support this
thesis. Much of analysis of relationshipsmay deal with the
consistency of part to part, or element to element; or the
Abilityto recognize the causal relations and the impor­
tant and unimportant details in an historical account.
4.30 - Analysis of Organizational Principles
At an even more complex and difficultlevel is likelyto
be the task of analyzing the structure and organization of a
communication. Rarely will the producer of a communica­
tion explicitlypoint out the organizational principles he has
used and quite frequently he may not be aware of the princi­
ples he has utilized. Thus, his purpose, point of view, atti­
tude, or general conception of a fieldmay be discerned in
the writing and the reader may be unable to fullycomprehend
or evaluate the communication untilhe has determined them.
iii...
<<<PAGE=82>>>
~---
148
Similarly,theproducer of a communication selectssome
form, pattern,or structureand organizeshis arguments,
evidence,or otherelementsaround these. The analysisof
theseunderlyingorganizationalqualitiesshouldhelp in the
comprehension as wellas evaluationof the entirecommuni­
cation. Frequentlyitis impossibletomake an evaluation
untilthishas been done.
4.30 - Analysisof OrganizationalPrinciples--Illustrative
EducationalObjectives
Abilityto analyze,in a particularwork of art,the rela­
tion of materials and means ofproductionto the "ele­
ments" and to the organization.
The abilityto recognizeform and patterninliteraryor
artisticworks as a means of understandingtheirmean­
ing.
.. I
149 IT,st"'"forAnalysis,andillustrativetestit,ms'
In testingthe abilitytoanalyze, the studentmay be
asked questionsaboutsome materialwithwhich he ispre­
sumed tobe familiar,or thematerialfor analysismay be
presentedtohim in the testsituation.His abilityto ana­
lyzematerialis usuallytestedmore dependablyin thelatter
case,for thenone can be more confidentthathis answers
are not affectedby lackof familiaritywith thematerialor
inabilitytoremember itadequately. While itis truethat
knowledge isused, and isoftenrequired,inmaking an ade­
quateanalysisof any communication, thereare few occa­
sionswhen one must analyzematerialwithouthaving that
materialbeforehim. Ifthematerialtobe analyzedisnew
tothe student,and appropriatequestionsare used, itis
likelyto be a genuinetestofhis analyticalabilities,forhe
has no opportunitytouse analyticalcomments which he sim­
ply recallsfrom previousdiscussionsof thematerial.
ilio....
The abilityto inferthe author'spurpose, pointof view,
or traitsof thoughtand feelingas exhibitedinhis work.
Abilityto inferan author'sconceptof science,philosophy,
history,or of his art as exemplifiedin his practice,
Abilityto see the techniquesused inpersuasive materi­
als,such as advertising,propaganda, etc.
Abilityto recognizethepointofview or bias of a writer
in an historicalaccount,
I
The materialgivenforanalysisin a testmay be a liter­
ary passage, a descriptionof a scientificexperiment or a
socialsituation,a set of data,an argument, a picture,a
musical selection,etc.,etc. Or the studentmay be placed
inan actualsituation,such as a laboratoryinwhich he ana­
lyzes the reactionsof materials,or a classroom in which he
must analyzethe interactionsof members of the group, or-­
as is wellknown inmilitarytrainingand testing--afieldsit­
uationin which he must identifyand relatea varietyof fac­tors.
The studentmay show his abilityby making a seriesof
free or guidedresponses, or by selectingthebestanswers
to objectivequestions. An advantageof thelattermethod
isthatitemscan be structuredso thattheanswers include
common errors which studentsare likelytomake.
The errors inanalysismay be grouped as follows:
A. Crude errors
Misjudgingthenatureof elementsof the communi­
cationor the relationshipsbetween elements. Con­
fusingbasic and subordinateelements.
<<<PAGE=83>>>
li.....
150
Inabilityto identifyforms and patterns. Failure
to see thebearingof elements upon theintentof
thecommunication as a whole.
B. Incompleteanalysis
The studentmay be essentially"on therighttrack,"
but he misses some of theelements, relationships,
or principleswhich he oughtto see.
C. Over-analysis
Some studentsgo toofar in theireffortto analyze
a communication, breakingitup intomore minute
elements thanis appropriatefor thegivenmaterial,
and therebyoftenmissing themore importantrela­
tionships.
D. Other limitederrors
Test items may be so structuredthatseveralan­
swers are partlyrightbut one representsa more
adequateanalysisthantheothers. Here the dis­
tinctionisnotbetween rightand wrong, or between
abilityand inability,but is made in terms of the
qualityof analysis.
151
4.00 - ANALYSIS n ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
4.10 - Analysis of Elements
In Items 1 - 9 each item requires studentsto
identifyan element ofa communication. No.8
asks for an "importantIIunstatedassumption,
which would seem to involveanalysisof rela­
tionships;actually,however, allexcept one
of the answers presented in the item are eith­
er statedor not assumed, so thatthe student
has only to identifythe one answer which rep­
resents an unstatedassumption.
1. Galileoinvestigatedthe problem of the accelerationof fall­
ing bodiesby rollingballsdown very smooth planes in­
clinedat increasingangles, sincehe had no means of de­
terminingvery short intervalsof time. From the data
obtainedhe extrapolatedfor the case of free fall. Which
of the followingisan assumption implicitin the extrapo­
lation?
1. That air resistanceis negligibleinfree fall.
2. That objectsfallwith constantacceleration.
3. That the accelerationobserved with the inclinedplane
is the same as thatinvolvedinfree fall.
4. That the planes are fdc tionless.
5. That a verticalplane and one which is nearly so have
nearly the same effecton theball.
2. A and B were arguing about the desirabilityof adoptinga na­
tionwidesystem of compulsory healthinsurance in the
United States. B saicithat,while he had no fundamental ob­
jectionto healthinsurance, he feltstronglythatpeople
shouldnot be compelled toparticipatein it. "Now, look
here," he said, "Do the people want healthinsurance or
don'tthey? I don'tthinkthey do, but in eithercase, com­
pulsory insurance isbad. Ifthe people reallywant health
insurance,there isno need for compulsion. Ifthey don't
want it,itis impossibleto force them toparticipate.And
so the answer is clear."
Which of the followingstatementsmost nearly expresses the
logicalconclusionof B's argument?
1. Health insurance isbad.
2. Compulsory healthinsurance isbad.
3. Compulsion is imposs ible.
4. Compulsion isunnecessary.
5. Compulsion is eitherunnecessary or impossible.
<<<PAGE=84>>>
r- 'I n
iIo...
152
(Item 3 accompanies a reading passage in the testbooklet.)
3. Which of the followingisan assumption,specificto thisexperi­
ment, thatwas made in the determinationof the charge?
1. The force of gravityis the same whether the drops are
charged or not.
2. Opposite charges attracteach other.
3. Only a singlecharge ispresent on a drop.
4. The mass of a drop is equal to itsdensitytimes itsvolume.
5. None of these.
Items 4 and 5 refer to the followingparagraph:
"For what men say is that,ifI am reallyjustand am not
2 also thoughtjust,profitthere is none, but the pain and loss
on the other hand is unmistakable. But if,thoughunjust,I
4 acquire the reputationof justice,a heavenly lifeispromised
to me. Since then appearance tyrannizesover truthand islord
6 of happiness, to appearance Imust devotemyself. Iwillde­
scribearound me a pictureand shadow ofvirtuetobe the
8 vestibuleand exteriorof my house;behind I willtrailthe
subtleand craftyfox."
4. Which one of the foUowing best statesthe major premise of the
argument?
1. "For what men say is" (line1).
2. "ifI am reallyjust"(line1).
3. "profitthere isnone" (line2),
4. "appearance tyrannizesover truthand islord of happiness"
(line5).
5. "to appearance I must devotemyself" (line6).
'5. Which one of the followingbest statesthe conclusionof the argu­ment?
1. "For what men say is" (line1),
2. "ifI am reaUy just"(line1)
3. "profitthereisnone" (line2).
4. "appearance tyrannizesover truthand is lord of happiness"
(line5).
5. "to appearance I must devotemyself" (line6).
(Other items, involvinganalysisof relationships,can be
based on thissame paragraph. See Item 17, below.)
153
Item 6 refers to the followingsituation:
The collegecommittee in charge of socialregulationswas hold­
ingan open hearing on a proposal thatthe rule on chaperoning
coeducationaloutings(wiener roasts, overnighthikes, campfires,
etc.)shouldbe more strictlyapplied. A studentinthe audience
got the floorand made thisspeech:
(A) This whole discussionis ridiculous,
(B) for we shouldn'thave chaperones at all!
(C) You see, any chaperone you get willeitherarrange not to
see what h$l.ppensor he willbe so badly outnumbered he
canItkeep track of what is going on.
(D) But chaperones are supposed to guarantee thatwhat goes
on is respectable.
(E) So the chaperonage system is utterlyineffectiveand full
ofhypocrisy.
(F) Besides, collegianswillnever develop maturity unless
they are given responsibilitiesto exercise and are really
trustedwilh these responsibilities.
6. There is one statement in the student'sargument for which reasons
are offered,but which he does not offeras a reason for any other
statement. That statement,his main conclusion,is
1. A..4.E.
2.
B. 5.F.
3.
C.
(The followingquestionisbased on an excerpt from Lindsay,
The Modern Democratic State,which was distributedprior
tothe examination and studentswere permitted to refer to
the book and to any notes during the examination.)
7. The main questionthatLindsay attempts to answer in Chapter Iis:
1. What is the sovereign authorityin the state?
2. What is the relationof law to sovereignty?
3. What is the relationof authorityand consent to sovereignty?
4. Is sovereigntyadvisable?
Items 8 and 9 refer to the followingsituation:
A group of collegestudentswere discussingthe relativemerits
of two grading systems. Ithad been suggested thatonly two
grades be used: S (satisfactory)and U (unsatisfactory),instead
of the A-B-C-D-F system then inuse at the college. One student
made the followingstatement:
<<<PAGE=85>>>
r-
II...
154
"People go to collegetolearn, not justto get grades. Grades
are no indicationof absolutedegree of learning,they are
purely relativeand thenmostly determined by chance or
probability(guessing,multiple-choicetests,etc.). The stu­
dent is a betterjudge of how he is doing than the professor.
Therefore, an S-U system would be bettersince itwould cut
down the amount of differentiationbetween grades and give a
betterpictureof how the studentis doing."
8. An importantunstatedassumption involvedinthisargument isthat
1. the accuracy of the A-B-C-D-F system cannot or willnot
be significantlyimproved.
2. people go to collegeto learn.
3. the studentis a betterjudge of how he is doing than the
professor.
4. an S-U system would be better.
5. grades have no importance.
9. The conclusionof thisstudent'sargument is that
1. grades shouldbe abolished.
2. studentsdo not care about theirgrades.
3. studentsshould grade themselves.
4. a new grading system shouldbe substitutedfor the presentone.
5. thepresent grading system isbetterthan the proposedsubstitute.
(Other items, involvinganalysisof relationships,can
be based on thissame situation.See Items 18 and 19,
below.)
I~
155
4.20 - Analysis of Relationships
'items 10 and 11 callfor analysisof the relation­
ships of statements in an argument. Theyaccom­
pany Item 6 ina test.
Items 10 and 11 refer to the followingsituation:
The collegecommittee in charge of socialregulationswas holding
an open meeting on a proposal thatthe rule on chaperoning coedu­
cationaloutings(wiener roasts, overnighthikes, campfires, etc.l
shouldbe more strictlyapplied. A studentin the audience got the
floorand made thisspeech:
(A) This whole discussionis ridiculous,
(B) for we shouldn'thave chaperones at all!
(Ci You see, any chaperone you get willeitherarrange not to
see what happens or he willbe so badly outnumbered he
can'tkeep track of what is going on.
(D) But chaperones are supposed to guarantee thatwhat goes
on is respectable.
(E) So the chaperonage system is utterlyineffectiveand full
of hypocrisy.
(F) Besides, collegianswillnever develop maturity unless
they are given responsibilitiesto exercise and are really
trustedwith these responsibilities.
10. The studentofferedA as a reason for
1. B.
2. C.
3. D.
4. E.
5. None of these.
11. The studentofferedB as a reason for
1. A.
2. C.
3. D.
4. E.
5. None of these.
(Similaritems refer to statements C, D, E, and F.)
<<<PAGE=86>>>
IF~
r
156 157
Items 12 - 14 require studentsto interpretthe quoted
statement and to analyze the relationsof elements of
the statement and of the play to the general import of
the statement. Items 12 and 13 involveanalysisin
terms of relevance; Item 14 involvesanalysisin terms
of consistency.
Items 12 to 14 are based on the followingparagraph:
Items 15 and 16 are designed to testsuch an objec­
tiveas "abilityto recognize which factsor assump­
tionsare essentialtoa main thesisor to the argu­
ment in support of thatthesis." Item 16 accompa­
nies Item 3 in a test.
15. Statement of facts: The followingtablerepresents the relation­
shipbetween the yearly income of certainfamiliesand themed­
icalattentionthey receive.
(Item 16 accompanies a reading passage inthe testbooklet.)
Which one of the followingassumptions would be necessary to
justifythe conclusion?
Conclusion: Members of familieswith smal1 incomes are health­
ier thanmembers of familieswith large incomes.
16. Which of the followingassumptions isnecessary in order to de­
termine the mass of a drop by the method described?
47
40
33
24
14
Per Cent of Family Members
Who Received No Medical
__~.!.!~ntl~_PllE~!'K_t.~_~e_~__
Under $1,200 .
$1,200 to $3,000
$3,000 to $5,000
$5,000 to $10,000
Over$10,000 ..
F'~J:I1:~!.):'__~'O.<:llJ!_<:__
1. Wealthy familieshad more money to spend for medical care.
2. All members offamilieswho needed medical attentionre­
ceived it.
3. Many members offamilieswith low incomes were not able
topay theirdoctorbills.
4. Members of familieswith low incomes oftendid not receive
medical attention.
"(I)Hamlet is given a command by the ghost of his murdered father
to takevengeance upon the murderer, Claudius. (2)He is not able
to do so immediately because he does not have sufficientproof that
Claudius has murdered his father. (3)In the process offindingthis
proof, Hamlet unwittinglyallows the king to discoverhis suspicions.
(4)As the actionproceeds, Hamlet cannot take vengeance because he
never has a real opportunityto do so. (5)As the actionends, Ham­
letbecomes involvedin a duel arranged by Claudius which has as its
consequence the death of the hero and his adversary as well as the
more important of the subordinatecharacters."
1. Hamlet's interviewwith the ghost in Act I.
2. The lapse of time between Acts I and II.
3. The play withinthe play.
4. Hamlet's departure for England.
5. The shortlapse of time between the play withinthe play
and Hamlet's departure for England.
12. A discussionand evaluationof the statement given above would
revolve most around the pointsmade in
1. sentence1.
2. sentences 2 and 3.
3. sentences 2 and 4.
4. sentence 5.
13. Assume, temporarily, complete agreement with the statement.
In discussingvarious parts of the play, which among the follow­
ing would you tend to minimize?
14. Which of the followingstatements about Hamlet isleastincon­
sistentwith the generalpositiontaken in the statement?
1. Hamlet isa man of action.
2. Hamlet isby nature a meditativeperson, not accustonted
to meet problems by directaction.
3. Hamlet isan intellectual,over whom someone more shrewd
even ifless learned has the advantage in the world of prac­
ticalaffairs.
4. Hamlet isnormally a sensitive,good-naturedperson, who,
however, during theperiod covered by the firstfour acts
of the play, is in a stateofmelancholy -- a conditionin­
duced by his father'sdeath and accompanied by a great
lethargy.
1. The drop fallswith uniform acceleration.
2. All the drops sprayed intothe chamber are of the same
size.
3_ The drop is charged.
4. The drop isnearly spherical.
5. The electricalforce is equal to the gravitationalforce.
li..
<<<PAGE=87>>>
r--
158
-------1
---------, 159 I
i I
I
19. Which of the followingstatements isleastessentialas a part
of the argument?
2
4
6
8
17.
Item 17, callingfor analysisof the way one element
functionsin relationto others, accompanies Items 4
and 5 in a test.
Item 17 refers to the followingparagraph:
"For what men say is that,ifI am reallyjustand am notalso
thoughtjust,profitthere isnone, but the pain and loss on the
other hand isunmistakable. But if,though unjust,I acquire
the reputationof justice,a heavenly lifeispromised tome.
Since then appearance tyrannizesover truthand islord of hap­
piness, to appearance I must devotemyself. Iwilldescribe
around me a pictureand shadow ofvirtuetobe the vestibule
and exteriorofmy house;behind I willtrailthe subtleand
craftyfox."
What is the functionof the lastsentence (lines6-9)? The sen­
tence
L restatesthe centralthesisinfigurativelanguage.
2. advances thepremise of the argument.
3. presents factualdata to support the centralthesis.
4. contradictsthe centralthesis.
5. introducesa new concept. 20.
1. Grades are no indicationof absolutedegree of learning.
2. An S-U system would cut down the amount of differentia­
tionbetween grades.
3. An S-U system would give a betterpictureof how the stu­
dent is doing.
4. Grades are determined by chance or probability.
5. The studentis a betterjudgeof how he is doing than the
professor.
Items 20 and 21 are based on an excerpt from
Lindsay's The Modern Democratic Stateand accom­
pany Item 7 in a test.These two items callforanaly­
sis of relationshipsbetween elements of a communi­
cation. Note thatNo. 20 requires, not merely the
identificationof an element (assumption),but a judg­
ment concerningwhat assumption is essentialin re­
1ationtoother elements.
An assumption basic to Lindsay'sprefe~nce for voluntaryassociationsrather than government ordf,rs(Paragraph 73)
is a belief
lit..
Items 18 and 19 require analysisof the relevance and
importance of elemEnts inan argument. Theyaccom­
pany Items 8 and 9 in a test.
Items 18 and 19 refer to the followingsituation:
A group of collegestudentswere discussingthe relativemerits of
two grading systems. Ithad been suggested thatonly two grades be
used: S (satisfactory)and U (unsatisfactory),insteadof the A-B-C­
D-F system then inuse at the college. One studentmade the follow­
ing statement:
"People go to collegetolearn, not justto get grades. Grades are
no indicationof absolutedegree oflearning,theyare purely rela­
tiveand then mostly determined by chance or probability(guessing,
multiple-choicetests,etc.). The studentis a betterjudge of how
he is doing than the professor. Therefore, an S-U system would
be bettersince itwould cut down the amount of differentiationbe­
tween grades and givea betterpictureof how the studentis doing."
18. The conclusiondepends fundamentallyon the propositionthat
1. people do not go to collegejustto get grades.
2. the studentis the best judge ofhow he is doing.
3. grades are very inaccurateindicationsofwhat students
have learned.
4. one grading system isbetterthan the other.
5. multiple-choicetestsare used in determining grades.
1. thatgovernment isnot organized to make the best use
of experts.
2. thatfreedom of speech, freedom of meeting, freedom of
association,are possibleonly under a system of volun­
tary associations.
3. in the value of experiment and initiativeas a means of
attainingan ever-improving society.
4. in thebenefitsof competition.
21. The relationbetween the definitionof sovereigntygiven in
Paragraph 2 and thatgiven in Paragraph 9 isbest expressed
as follows:
1. There isno fundamental differencebetween them, only a
differenceinformulation.
2. The definitiongiven in Paragraph 2 includesthatgiven in
Paragraph 9, but in additionincludessituationswhich are
excludedby thatgiven in Paragraph 9.
3. The definitiongiven in Paragraph 9 includesthatgiven in
Paragraph 2, but inadditionincludessituationswhich are
excludedby thatgiven in Paragraph 2.
4. The two definitionsare incompatiblewith each other;the
conditionsof sovereigntyimplied in each exclude the
other.
<<<PAGE=88>>>
r---
II...
160
The followinggroup of items is designed to testthe
objective:"Abilityto recognize what particulars
are relevantto the validationofa judgtnent."
Items 22 to 26 are to be judged in relationto thisresolution:
Resolved: That the term of the Presidentof tlleUnited States
shouldbe extended tosix years.
Some statements in Items 22 to 26 support the resolution,eitherdi­
rectlyor indirectly,some couldbe used inarguing againstthe res­
01ution'and some have no bearing on the issue atall. Mark each
statement
A. ifyou feelthatitcouldbe used by the affirmativeside in a
debate on the resolution.
N. ifyou feelthatitcould be used by the negativeside.
X. ifyou feelithas no bearing on eitherside of the argument.
(NOTE: You are not asked tojudge the truthor falsityof the
resolutionor the statements.)
22. Efficiencyincreases with experience....
23. According to the principlesupon which the UnitedStateswas
founded, the people should have a frequentcheck on the Presi­
dent.
24. The party system has many disadvantages.
25. During most ofa presidentialelectionyear the economic life
of the nationis depressed by the uncertaintyas to the outcome.
26. The people shouldhave the opportunityto keep a satisfactory
President as long as they wish.
II
:[1
ii,
161
4.30 - Analysis of OrganizationalPrinciples
The followingquestionrelatesto a selectiongiven in
the test. Studentscannot answer thisquestionsim­
ply by findinga statement which is true of the article
to which the item refers. They must judge which state­
ment best expresses thepurport of the articleas a
whole; thisrequires analysisof the organizationand
structureof the entirecommunication.
27. Which one of the followingis the best descriptionof the articleas a whole?
1. Itpresents historicalevidence toprove what a govern­
ment of equal rightsislike.
2. Itpresents evidence thatpoliciespursued in the past have
not been consistentwith the idealof a government of equal
rights.
3. Itpresents arguments to show thatcertainpoliciespur­
sued inthe past are undesirable.
4. Itis an effortto definethe true functionsof government.
Items 28 and 29 are based on a composition which is
played during the test. No. 28 callsfor analysisof the
systematic arrangement or structurewhich makes the
composition a unit. No. 29 testssuch an objectiveas
"abilityto analyze, ina particularwork of art, the re­
lationof materials and means ofproductionto the
'elementsI and to the organization."
28. The general structureof the composition is
1. theme and variations.
2. theme, developmEnt, restatement.
3. theme 1, development; theme 2, developmEnt.
4. introduction,theme, development.
29. The theme is carried essentiallyby
1. the strings.
2. the woodwinds.
3. the horns.
4. allin turn.
<<<PAGE=89>>>
~ ~
5.00 -- SYNTHESIS
Synthesisis here definedas theputtingtogetherof ele­
ments and parts so as to form a whole. This isa process
ofworking with elements, parts,etc.,and combining them
in such a way as to constitutea patternor structurenot
clearlytherebefore.Generallythiswould involvea recom­
binationofpartsofprevious experience withnew material,
reconstructedintoa new and more or less well-integrated
whole. This is the category in thecognitivedomain which
most clearlyprovidesforcreativebehavioron thepart of
thelearner. However, itshouldbe emphasized thatthisis
not completelyfree creativeexpressionsincegenerallythe
studentis expectedto work withinthelimitssetby particu­
larproblems, materials,or some theoreticaland methodo­
logicalframework.
Comprehension, application,and analysisalso involve
the puttingtogetherof elements and the constructionof
meanings, but these tendtobe more partialand less com­
pletethansynthesisin themagnitude of the tas~.Also there
is less emphasis upon uniqueness and originalityin these
otherclassesthanin theone under discussionhere. Perhaps
the main differencebetween these categoriesand synthesis
liesin thepossibilitythattheyinvolveworking witha givenset ofmaterialsor elements which constitutesa whole in it­
self. They involvestudyinga whole in order to understand
itbetter. In synthesis,on theotherhand, the studentmust
draw upon elements from many sources and put these to­
gether in~oa structureor patternnot clearlythere before.
His effortsshould yielda product--something that can be
observed through one or more of the senses a,ndwhich is
clearlymore thanthe materialshe began towork with. It
is to be expectedthata problem which is classifiedas a
task primarily involvingsynthesiswillalso requireall of
thepreviouscategoriesto some extent.
We recognizethe difficultyof classifyingessay questions.
The tendency is to place them in the synthesiscategory.
For example, if the studentwrites out his comprehension
or analysisof a reading selection,does such a form of
response constitutesynthesisas we have definedit? Ifhis
essay involvesanalysisinterms ofunderlyingelementsand
thelike,perhaps not,sincehe has not come outwith a pro­
duct substantiallydifferentfrom thatwhich he is studying.
162
Il...
I
163
Ifwe accept thispoint ofview, then we would not regard
every act of writing as an act of synthesis. We would
assume thatwritingas such is primarily a skillin expres­
sion'much of which representsthe remembering of ideas,
the interpretationof given materials,and the translation
of ideasintowriting.
For thepresent, itseems best to distinguishbetween
differentkinds of synthesisprimarily on the basis of the
product. Such an approach does permit classificationinto
threerelativelydistinctdivisionswhich have some practical
significance.Classificationon the basis of product isnot
inconsistentwith the taxonomy, since the constructionof
differentproductsmay well requiresomewhat differentpro­
cesses. A similar assumption is made in the Knowledge
and Analysiscategoriesof thisHandbook.
In thefirstsub-category,one may view theproduct or
performance as essentially~ unique communication. Usu­
allytheauthoris tryingto communicate certainideas and
experiences to others,but in some instanceshe may be
interestedin expression for itsown sake. Usuallytoo he
triesto communicate forone or more of thefollowingpur­
poses--toinform, to describe,topersuade, to impress, or
to entertain.Ultimately,he wishes to achievea given ef­
fect(response)in some audience. Consequently,he uses
a particularmedium of expression,togetherwith itsforms
and conventions,to organizecertainideasand experiences.
The product,or outcome of the synthesis,can be considered
"unique" in at least two respects. First, it does not
represent a proposed set of operationsor specificationsto
be carriedout, exceptperhaps in thenarrow sense offur­
nishingan expressivedesignwhich may be interpretedand
performed by an individualor group, as in the reading
aloudofpoetry,thepresentationof a play, or the perform­
ance of a musical composition. Secondly, it does not ordi­
narilyrepresenta contributionto our fund of testedknowl­
edge; in fact,itsrelationtoan externaltheoreticalstruc­
tureisnotat issue.
In the second sub-category,one may view theproductas
~ plan ~ proposed setof operationstobe carriedout. This
may be illustratedas follows:
<<<PAGE=90>>>
,-
164
Proposed set
of operations
Plan for an
experiment
A teaching unit
Specifications
for a new house
Process-i.e., carrying
out the set of operations
Carrying out the
experiment
Teaching
Building the house
Expected
outcome
Experimental
findings;proba­
bilitystatement
Changes in be­
havior
The house
T
!
165
focal in consciousness, and are perceived as "figure";
others remain peripheral and become part of the back­
ground; stillothers remain out of consciousness entirely.
In a very real way, central organization represents a syn­
thetic act. Because of itsvery pervasiveness, however, it
would not help us draw distinctionsamong different forms
of cognitive behavior. The same would be true of the pro­
cess of "integration,IIthe notion that every experience in­
volves a combination of parts of previous experience with
the present experience in such a way that the organism is
permanently changed, however slightly.
iIo.
The products of synthesis classified here thus fallin the
first column. Clearly, each represents a kind of commu­
nication in the sense that a particular author or worker is
trying to tell somebody something and has recorded his
ideas (inrare instances he may carry these ideas around in
his head and we then have to infer them from his process of
carrying them out). But these effortsrepresent more than
communication in the sense just outlined. They represent
an attempt to propose a set of operations. In this sense,
products that fallin this group are incomplete; until they
are translated into action they represent mere ideas. Or­
dinarily,products of synthesis thatfallin this second group
must meet a set of fairlyrigorous objective criteria.
In the third sub-category, one may view the product of
synthesis as primarily ~ set ~ abstract relations. The set
of relations may be derived from an analysis of certain
observed phenomena, in which case they may be considered
possible relations, or hypotheses to be tested; or they may
be derived from an analysis of relations among propositions
or other symbolic representations, in which case they may
be considered necessary relations, or deductions. The
distinguishing feature of this sub-category is thus the at­
tempt to derive abstract relations from a detailedanalysis.
The relations themselves are not explicitfrom the start;
they must be discovered or deduced.
Re lated concepts and processes. Since certain other con­
cepts and processes overlap with the synthesis category, we
will discuss them briefly. One of these is the phenomenon
of central organization in which the brain and nervous sys­
tern act as a vast organizing system. Some stimuli become
!I
Often the concept of integrationis discussed in terms of
"creative learning." This raises the philosophical question
of whether or not alllearning is "creative." In one sense,
all learning is creative; the individualhas acquired an un­
derstanding or some other reorganization of experience
which is novel for him. The novelty for him is what makes
the experience "creative." Many psychologists and educa­
tors would argue similarly, and certainly thisview would
be consistent with the theoreticalframework of this taxon­
omy. Other writers, particularly sociologistsand anthro­
pologists, would prefer restrictingthe meaning of "creativ­
ity" to the production of something new, unique, and origin­
al in man's culture--the traditionalmeaning.
A concept related to "creative learning" is that of "crea­
tive expression." The latter concept usually refers to a
type of education which encourages self-expression on the
part of the learner. Rich sensory experience and freedom
to express one's whole personality are considered basic
conditions. Although literature,fine arts, music, and drama
seem to be the most popular media, creative expression
need not be limited to these. Such activitiesrepresent
syntheticprocesses to the extent that they require the indi­
vidual to organize ideas into new patterns, and probably
many of them do. However, many do not qualifybecause
they emphasize expression of emotional impulses and phy­
sical movements, rather than organization of ideas. Prob­
ably the main differencebetween "synthesis'!and "creative
expression" lies in the greater inclusiveness of the latter
term. Whether all effortsat synthesis shallbe considered
"creative expression, " however, would not seem immediately
evident. Much would depend on the nature of the individu­
al's motivation and how freely he gave himself to the task.
<<<PAGE=91>>>
ruu
L
166
Educationalsignificanceof synthesisobjectives.Philo­
sophicalarguments for the cultivationof synthesisobjec­
tivesare numerous and need not be documented here.
Typically,they emphasize personal expression as against
passiveparticipation,and independenceof thoughtand action
as againstdependence. Personal expressionisviewed as
an end in itself;itislivingat itsbest and fullest.Independ­
ence of thoughtand actionare defended largelyon social
grounds:a democratic societythrivesbestwhen itscitizens
are able to arriveat theirown decisionsratherthan when
someone inauthoritydoes the thinkingfor them.
Arguments in terms of theneeds and demands of society
do not stopat thelevelof philosophicaldiscussion. They
emphasize real problems thatface democratic countries
here and now, and point out thatwe cannotexpect topro­
gress nor even to surviveunlesswe developand draw upon
the creativepotentialitiesof the entirepopulation. This is
partlya problem of identifyingcreativetalent,but italso
is one of exploringthenatureofproductivethinkingand of
findingbetterways of cultivatingit.1
One couldcitemany articlesand studieswhich deplore
theneglectof synthesisobjectives.A fairlycommon theme
is thatcurrent programs overemphasize activitiesinwhich
the learner functionsas a consumer and criticof ideas
1Recent writingand research on creativenessand
productivethinking(which overlap with syntheticabilities)
attestto theimportance attachedto theseproblems by many
psychologistsand educators. The recentchallengeby Allison
Davis and othersisworth notingat thispoint. AllisonDavis
and Robert D. Hess, "What About IQs?" Journalof theNa­
tionalEducationAssociation~ (Nov., 1949), pp. 604-605.
Kenneth Eellsand others,Intelligenceand CulturalDiffer­
~, Chicago:UniversityofChicago Press, 1951, xii 388.
After demonstratingthatconventionalintelligencetestsun­
derratetheabilityof childrenfrom lower socio-economic
levels,theyconcludethatwe are deprivingourselvesof un­
tappedresources ofhuman abilityand robbingsuch children
of theirrightto fulldevelopment. Furthermore, because
most pupilsgetlimitedexperiencein genuineproblem solv­
ing,theseinvestigatorsbelievethatpresentprograms retard
pupilsoflow occupationalgroups by two years, on theaver­
age, afterthey have been in school onlyfouryearsICer­
tainlythisindictmentdemands seriousattention.
II
'1"
,
167
ratherthanthoseinwhich he functionsas a producer. Often
criticismis directedagainsttheover-use of objective-type
examinationson the grounds thattheseforms do not force
the studenttoproduce originalideasor to organize them.
Whether or not thisargument is defensibleisa matter tobe
decidedby furtherstudy;in any case, however, lack of ap­
propriatepracticemust surelyaccountfor many shortcom­
ings inthe development of synthesisabilities.
The psychology of learningprovides another hnportant
source of criteriafor judgingthe worth of synthesisobjec­
tives. Especiallyimportant are those criteriarelatingto
multipleoutcomes and the permanence of learning. It is
probable thattasks involvingsynthesisobjectivesprovide
a wider kind ofexperiencethan thoseinvolvingmainly acqui­
sitionof ideas. In elementary schoolscience,for example,
pupilsmay work as a group definingimportant problems
dealingwith combustion, proposing hypotheses to account
for combustion phenomena, planningsimple experiments to
testthese ideas,and actuallycarryingoutthe experiments
eitherindividuallyor in small groups. Such activities
should fosterproductivethinking,some independence in
approach as well as co-operativeness,knowledge of com­
bustionphenomena, knowledge of scientificmethod, and
perhaps most important,some skillwith scientificmethod
as method. Over severalyears, experiencein thisform of
learningshouldproduce profoundchanges inmany abilities
and traitsand at the same time contributeto thepupil1s
growth in knowledge as such. Because such experiences
involvethe relatingof ideas,methods, values,etc., they
probablyfosterinterrelationof outcomes betterthanexpe­
rienceswhich do not requiregenuineproblem solving. And
thisinturnprobablycontributestobetterretentionand gen­
eralization,particularlyof problem-solvingprocesses, to
other situations.Evidence for multi-objectiveefficiency
comes from such outstandingevaluation programs as the
Wrightstone studiesinNew York Cityand theEight-Year
Studyof theProgressive EducationAssociation. Evidence
on interrelationand permanence of learningis scanty but
inagreement with thearguments outlinedhere.
Especiallyimportanttooare the tremendous motivational
possibilitiesin synthesisactivities.Such taskscan become
<<<PAGE=92>>>
~-
168
highlyabsorbing,more so thantheusualrun of school as­
signments. They can offer rich personalsatisfactionsin
creatingsomething thatis one'sown. And they can challenge
the studentto do furtherwork ofa similarsort.
Synthesisobjectivesoccur at most levelsof education.
Some goals,such as "skillinwriting"and lIabilitytoformu­
latehypotheses," are as appropriateat the elementary
school levelas at thePh. D. The same may be saidof the
"abilityto seta poem tomusic." Obviously,the taskscor··
respondingto theseobjectiveswilldifferin theirmagnitude
and complexityfrom leveltolevel.We would expecta pro­
gressionfrom relativelysmall taskstomuch larger tasks
as the studentmoves throughthe educationalprogram. Per­
haps many synthesisobjectivesof thekindwe have inmind
shouldbe postponeduntilrelativelylate in a student'sedu­
cation,especiallyin collegeand post-graduatework. But
thismatter isnotwell understoodatpresent.
5.10 Productionofa uniquecommunication
Under thiswe includethose objectivesinwhich primary
emphasis isupon communication--upon gettingideas, feel­
ings,and experiencesacross to others. The importantcon­
trollingor limitingfactorsin such tasksare thefollowing:
thekindsof effectstobe achieved;thenatureof theaudience
in whom theeffectsare tobe achieved;theparticularmedium
throughwhich thestudentexpresses himself;and theparti­
cular ideasand experiencesthatthe studentcan draw upon
or thathe wishes to communicate.
By "effects"we mean theresponse or change in response
desiredinsome audience.This would includesuch outcomes
as the following:theacquisitionof information;the under­
standingof an idea,pointofview, etc.;the acceptance of
an idea,pointofview, etc.;motivationto carry outa pur­
pose thattheauthorhas inmind; change inattitudeor belief;
the creationof a mood or feeling;enjoyment or emotionalsatisfaction.
The natureof theaudienceto whom the Studentaddresses
himselfor his work isoftencrucialin determiningwhat he
does. This is likelytobe the case whenever he must ex­
press himselftoa specificaudience,as againstone thatis
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
169
ratherlooselydefinedor notphysicallyassembled. In some
cases, however, it is likelythatthe studentneed not take
intoaccount any specialaudience;he carries out the task
accordingto certainminimum standardsthatwillbe applied
by thosewho willevaluatehis work.
Obviously,a key part in such assignments is the effec­
tivenesswithwhich the studentuses theparticularmedium
of expression,togetherwithitsforms and conventions,to
translateand to organize his ideas. The pointis thatthe
particularmedium also setslimitswithinwhich the student
must accomplish thepurposes setby the task.
The productof synthesisisalso rendered uniquebecause
of the great latitudeallowed the individualin puttinghis
own ideas, feelings,and experiences intoit. In other
words, much of the contentof the synthesisis not rigor­
ously predetermined by the requirements of the task;it
flowsfrom theperson and isused by him ifhe alone deems
itworthy of incorporatingin his work. Of course, as we
said earlier,thisis not completelyfreeexpressionsince
thestudentmust stillmeet certainminimum requirements
such as thosesetby conventionand by the other conditions
outlinedabove.
5.10 Productionof a unique communication--Illustrative
educationalobjectives.
Skillinwriting,usingan excellentorganizationof
ideasand statements.
Abilitytowritecreativelya story,essay,or verse
forpersonalpleasure,or for the entertainmentor
informationof others.
Abilityto tella personalexperienceeffectively.
Abilityto make extemporaneous speeches.
Abilitytowrite simple musical compositions,as
in settinga shortpoem tomusic.
<<<PAGE=93>>>
r
iIo...
170
5.20 Production of a plan, or proposed set of operations
Objectives that fallin this sub-category in general aim
at the production of a plan of operations. The production of
the plan constitutes the act of synthesis. What happens
after the production of the plan is another matter; the plan
of operations might very well be carried out in parts byseveral individuals.
The product, or plan of operations, must satisfythe re­
quirements of the task. Usually the requirements are laid
down in the form of specificationsor data to be taken into
account by the student. These data or specificationsmay
be given the student,in which case he may assume that they
are sound, or they may have to be worked out by him before
he can proceed. But in any case, the specificationsdo fur­
nish a rather well-defined criterion against which the stu­
dent's product may be evaluated. In this sense, his product
must always meet an empirical test of itssoundness.
Although the student must meet such empirical require­
ments, this does not mean that there is no room for the
"personal touch," or that values have no place in his work.
Here too, as with the previous sub-category, there is con­
siderable opportunity for the student to put his own ideas
into the product, apart from any other considerations. Even
the most limiting kind of purpose, such as the testing of a
specific hypothesis, stillpermits the student to conceive of
a way of accomplishing itthat is uniquely his own. In many
tasks that fallin this sub-category, values also enter the
picture. They are reflected in the specificationsor other
data with which the student works, but ultimately reside
in the purposes to be served by the outcome of the plan.
5. 20 Production of a plan, or propos ed set of operations__
Illustrativeeducational objectives.
Abilityto propose ways of testinghypotheses.
Abilityto integrate the results of an investigation
intoan effectiveplan or solutionto solve a problem.
I
171
Abilityto plan a unit of instructionfor a particular
teaching situation.
Abilityto design simple machine tools to perform
specified operations.
Ability to design a building according to given
specifications.
Ability to synthesize knowledge of cherpistry,
knowledge of the unit operations, and data avail­
able in the technical literature,and apply these
to the design of chemical processes. (Chemical
engineering.)
5.30 Derivation of a set of abstract relations
In this sub-category we include objectives that require
the student to produce, or derive, a set of abstract rela­
tions. There seem to be two somewhat differentkinds of
tasks here: (1)those in which the student begins with con­
crete data or phenomena and which he must somehow either
classify or explain; (2)those in which the student begins
with some basic propositions or other symbolic representa­
tions and from which he must deduce other propositions or
relations.
The first of these types of tasks may take the form of
classifyingcertain phenomena. In effect,the student is to
study the phenomena, or facts based upon them, and then
come up with a logically consistent scheme for classifying
or organizing them. The scheme should adequately account
for the relations existing among the range of phenomena. At
a very high level,one can offer as examples the development
of the periodic table in chemistry in which the various chem­
ical elements have been grouped according to their funda­
mental properties, or the development of the taxonomies for
classifyingplants and animals, respectively,again according
to their fundamental properties. Also at a high level--but
suitablefor the graduate student in educational psychology-­
would be the derivation of a conceptual scheme for categoriz­
ing teacher-pupil interactionduring classroom discussions.
I
I,
<<<PAGE=94>>>
...-------------------...,.-------------------'!II
lo..
172
The firsttypeof taskmay also taketheform of explain­
ing certainobserved phenomena. Inthiscase,thereislittle
emphasis upon developinga classificationscheme. The
problem istoformulatea hypothesisthatwilladequatelyac­
countfor a wide range of seemingly interrelatedphenomena.
As with a classificationscheme, the hypothesisor theory
must fitthe factsand inadditionbe internallyconsistent-­
i.e., freefrom logicalcontradictions.
The second broad typeof taskclearlybeginswithabstract
symbols, propositions,and thelike, ratherthanwith con­
crete data. The problem is tomove from these symbolic
representationsto deductionsthatcan reasonablybe made.
In otherwords, thestudentoperateswithinsome theoretical
framework, and he must reason in terms of it. He is thus
quitecircumscribed inwhat he does, althoughthe task can
permit him to carry his thinkingquitefar. But always in
the background are rigorous objectivecriteriawhich his
productof synthesismust meet; subjectivestandards,of the
sortthatpredominate in thefirstand second sub-categories,
allbut vanishhere.
5.30 Derivationofa setofabstractrelations--Illustrative
educationalobjectives.
Abilitytoformulateappropriatehypothesesbased
upon an analysisof factorsinvolved,and tomodify
such hypotheses in thelightof new factorsandconsiderations.
Abilitytoformulatea theoryoflearningapplicable
toclassroom teaching.
Abilitytoperceivevariouspossibleways inwhich
experiencemay be organizedtoform a conceptualstructure.
Abilitytomake mathematical discoveriesand
generalizations.
173
Testing for Synthesis>and illustrativetest items
SpecialProblems
A major problem in testingfor synthesisobjectivesis
thatofprovidingconditionsfavorableto creativework. This
problem is not peculiarto synthesisobjectives,but it does
seem tobe more crucialthanwith some of theother objec­
tives.Perhaps themost importantconditionis thatof free­
dom. This should includefreedom from excessive tension
and from pressures to adopt a particularviewpoint. The
studentshouldbe made tofeelthattheproductof his efforts
need not conform to theviews of theinstructor,or the com­
munity' or some otherauthority,if such freedom isother­
wise consistentwith thenatureof thetask. If the effortis
tobe rathercreative,the studentshouldalsohave consider­
able freedom of activity--freedomto determine his own pur­
poses, freedom to determine thematerialsor otherelements
thatgo intothefinalproduct,and freedom to determine the
specificationswhich the synthesisshouldmeet. Creativity
seems to be fosteredby such conditions.Too much control
and too detailedinstructions,on theotherhand, seem to
stifleproductivity.Time is another important condition.
Many synthesistasksrequirefarmore time thanan hour or
two; the product is likelyto emerge only afterthe student
spends considerabletime familiarizinghimselfwiththetask,
exploringdifferentapproaches, interpretingand analyzing
relevantmaterials,and tryingoutvariousschemes oforgan­
ization.In some situations,the examiner can shortenthis
periodofpreparationby permittingthe studentto do many of
thepreliminarytasksbefore the time of the examination,if
such an arrangement does not otherwise interferewiththe
validityof the examination. A good example is the essay
exerciseoutlinedon pages 177and 178. In thatcase, the ex­
aminer may distributethe specialreadingmaterialswell in
advance of the examination so that studentswillhave had
sufficienttime toanalyzethem and become familiarwith the
importantideas.
A second major problem is thatof sampling. Again this
problem seems tobe especiallycrucialinthe testingof syn­
thesisobjectives.For one thing,many synthesistaskstake
time--daysand weeks insteadofhours--sothata singleprod­
uct usuallymay have to representthe student'sability.Under
<<<PAGE=95>>>
r
174
such conditions, of course, the examiner must consider
whether or not that sample is sufficientlyreliableto be ac­
cepted as truly representative of the studentIs ability. Ob­
taining a second sample, however, in itselfposes many
practical problems which the examiner may not be able to
surmount. It is probable too that some synthesis tasks in­
volving a high degree of creativeness require special condi­
tions of stimulation, mood, fluency, and the like, and that
such conditions tend to make performance rather variable
ifnot downright unstable. Synthetic skillsand abilitiesmay
thus be rather unstable and unpredictable.
A third major problem is that of evaluation. Exercises
involving synthesis often yield rather complex products for
which objective criteriaof evaluation are lacking. A new
poem, a new musical piece, or a new design may defy evalu­
ation. Who is to pass judgment on the qualityof the product
and by what standards? In the absence of an objective stand­
ard such as an external framework, theory, or the like, the
examiner may have to rely h,eavilyupon the opinions of com­
petent judges. Check listsand rating scales should be es­
pecially useful here, but the examiner ought to insure that
they do not emphasize elements of the product to the neglect
of global qualitieswhich, after all, may be more fundamen­
talin any synthesis.
At this point we might note the projective character of
many products of synthesis. While it is true that most
behavior is projective in the sense that the individualun­
consciously or otherwise reveals idiosyncrasies, situations
undoubtedly vary greatly in the extent to which they evoke
such traits. Tasks callingfor synthesis of materials, ideas,
and the like would seem to provide an excellent means of
encouraging projection. The writing of an essay, for ex­
ample, is more than an expression of skillin writing; it is
an expression of the writer's personality. Thus itmay re­
veal not only peculiaritiesof language usage, but also atti­
tudes toward various issues, feelings about the self, and
r~-----­ 1"1
175
so on. The product bears the stamp of the person. 2
Clinical psychologists have long been interested in such
personal products as a means of studying personality, but
instructors make comparatively littlesystematic use of
them for that purpose. It is probable that educational re­
search willmake increasing use of personal products as a
method of studying personality development and various
subtle changes that take place during the course of learning.
Such efforts will call for refinements in our methods of
appraisal.
A fourth major problem worth noting is the practical
problem of administration. Special materials and equip­
ment are often necessary, even when the examination is
administered to a group. A synthesis task in architectural
design or musical composit~on would require individual
equipment toa greater extent than would be needed for tasks
involving analysis. Materials to be used for analysis by a
class can often be printed, recorded, or otherwise repro­
duced so thatthe entire group may work with a single speci­
men or copy. In many cases, too, exercises calling for
synthesis can only be properly administered on an individual
basis, and thispractice is quite costly.
Occasionally examiners have resorted to indirectmethods
of testingsynthesis objectives. For example, some publish­
ed tests attempt to measure effectiveness of expression,
particularly abilityto organize ideas, through multiple­
choice items. Thus the testmay ask the student to rearrange
a group of sentences to form a coherent paragraph, or a
group of paragraphs to form a coherent essay. Ifsuch in­
direct methods can be shown to yield valid indexes of the
behaviors in question, then some of the practical problems
of administration can be overcome and economies can be
realized.
2 Studies by Allport and others have shown that style of
writing is rather consistent and can be identifiedwith con­
siderable accuracy. Cf. F. H. Allport, L. Walker, and E.
Lathers, "Written Compositions and Characteristics of Per­
sonality,"Archives ofPsycholoi1:Y,26, (1934),No. 173, p.82.
<<<PAGE=96>>>
r
176
Thus we recognizethatshort-answer questionsmay not
be testingsynthesisdirectly,even thoughtheyare intended
to evoke thesortsof operationswe would regard as acts of
synthesis. Itis quitepossiblethatshort-answer questions
may indirectlyappraisesuch abilities.Whether or not they
can is, of course, an empirical matter. At the present
time, we cannot give a generalizationon thispoint. Only
furtherresearch can do that.
Types of Errors
In general,a synthesisis faultyto theextentthatitlacks
"goodness offit"to therequirements of theproblem. Faulty
synthesismay be due to oneormore of thefollowingfactors,
many of which seem to reflectfaultycomprehension and
analysis:
Misinterpretingthepurpose or natureof theproblem.
Misinterpretingthenatureof importantelements and
theirinterrelations.Confusingbasic and subordinateelements.
- 'I
Ii
177 !'
5.00 - SYNTHESIS -- ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS I
5.10 Production of a unique communication II
Directionsfor the Essay I
(Time: 3 hours) I
1. (Note: Studentswere given a number of shortpassages dealingwith II
the problem. ) ,I
DIRECTIONS: Write a unifiedpaper on some restrictedaspects of the
questionof the future ofprivateproperty in America. The paper may
be eitheran argument in support of some form of ownership which you
favor, or an attackupon some form which you oppose, or both. Itmust,
however, observe the followingstipulations:
Itmust includea discussionof the moral bases and socialeffects
of the kind of ownership which you favor or wish toattack.For example,
what ultimate right has anyone to claim anything as his own? What
should he be allowed to do with what he owns? How should such rights
be achieved, or protected,or limited? What will be the effectson so­
cietyof thepolicieswhich you discuss?
It must relate your thesisto the arguments pro and con of the
passages distributedbefore the examination which are relevantto your
position. Itmust not merely report what these passages said in the
order in which they were printed. In the course of developingyour own
positionyou must make use of the arguments which support itand refute
the arguments which oppose it.
Omittingimportantelements.
Applyingirrelevantor inaccurateelements.
Over-organizingthesynthesis,so thattheresultis too
artificialor inflexibleto satisfyvarying requirements,
as witha plan of investigationor an architecturaldesign.
Otherwise failingto satisfytherequirements ofan ex­
ternaltheory,framework, or ofsome otherstandard.
Itmust show some applicationof your theoreticalpositionto one
or more examples of property rightsdrawn from your own experience,
observation,or reading. The followingexamples may suggest possi­
bilities:private property in the family, or in the dormitory; rented,
owned, and cooperativehousing;publicand privateschools;independent,
chain, and cooperative stores;making the University Bookstore a co­
operative;municipal ownership of utilitiesand transportation;nationali­
zation of banks, coal mines, railroads,and communications; national
developments such as TV A; the rightsof capital,management, labor,
and consumers in the controloflarge corporations,etc.
In form, the paper must be an argument. It must not be a mere
assertion of your opinionssupportedby a descriptionof the practices
which you favor. Itmust give reasons for the positionwhich you favor
and against the positionswhich you oppose. The reasoning must be
logical,but itneed not make explicitreference tologicalforms.
The argument shouldbe clear, interesting,and acceptableto the
audience to which itisaddressed. In a preliminary paragraph, separate
from the rest of the paper, describebrieflythe traitsof your audience
which you intendto keep inmind while writingyour paper.
The paper must be effectivelyorganized and well written. Itmust
not followthepointsgiven above as a writingoutline.Itmust not ignore
them, however. Studentsare expected to deal with the assignment.
I
'I
II
<<<PAGE=97>>>
r
178 179
Write a sImple melodic line.
Write a composition with a single tonal base.
Set a poem to music. (An appropriateone can be furnishedthe
student.)
4. A variety of exercises ranging from the fairlysimple to the fairly
complex can be used in the schools to test abilityto compose music:
(Add a second verse of
four lines.)
(Finishthisdescription
of cars at nightby add­
ing two lines.)
****
"Men cannot swim
As fishesdo,
They only slave
A hard way through."
"Shininglikeslugs,
The cars came fast;
Across the night
Their glances glowed;
With purring hearts
Approached and passed"
3.The exercisesbelow can be used to testthe abilityto write poetry.
The studentmay be given a line and asked to complete a verse, or
he may be given a verse and asked to write a second verse.
"Isaw old autumn in the misty morn" 3 (Add three linesto com­
pletethisverse.)
Here also the student must achieve a novel organizationof ideas.
He must produce and organize them to form a whole consistentwith
the parts already given.The preceding exercise qualifiesas a synthesis task because the
studentmust achieve a novel organizationof ideas. While he may.
have many ideas on the topic,and these may represent a consistent
viewpoint,he probably cannot produce from memory a coherent ar­
gument which will satisfythe specificstipulationsof thisassignment.
He must relatehis argument to some specificreading passages dis­
tributedbefore the examination;he must apply knowledge drawn from
his own experience;he must consider related problems; and he must
develop a reasoned positionwitha specificaudience inmind. Inother
words, he must undertake a detailedanalysisbefore he can begin to
organize his ideas intoa coherent argument.
Itwillbe wise to spend abouthalfan hour thinkingabout the as­
signment and planningthe paper, and to reserve halfan hour at the end
to read over and revise what you have written. Do not attempt more
than you can treatadequatelyin two hours ofwriting. A carefullimita­
tionof the scope of thepaper is one mark of a good essay. The exami­
nationbooklethas been enlarged;ifpossible,confineyour essay to one
booklet. The firstpages may be used for notes, an outline,or a rough
draft;but draw linesthrough thismaterial to indicatethatitisnot part
of the finishedessay. Please write in ink, and as legiblyas you can.
Since therewillnot be time tomake a faircopy of the essay in itsfinal
form, portionsmay be crossed out and correctionsinsertedbetween the
linesand inthe margins, but please make the correctionsas clearly
and neatlyas possible. Dictionariesmay be used, and any notes which
you have writtenon your copy of the Passages for Study.
*):c:<~~'<:
The nature of the opinions expressed in thispaper will have no
effecton grades, and willnever be revealed. Papers willbe read only
by members of the English 3 staff,and only after the names of the
writers have been removed.
2. The followingexercises can be used to testthe abilityto make up
short stories. Each may be given as an oral or written exercise,with
or without much preparation on the part of the storyteller.
"Think of some time in your own lifewhen you were up againsta
difficulty,something that stood inyour way and had tobe overcome.
Make up a storyaround thisdifficultyand tellitto the class."
"Think of a plotbased upon an obstaclethatcould occur between the
followingtwo sentences,and then develop a short story using these
sentences and your plot."
Write a composition using two tonal levels.
Write a specificwork in a larger form for any of the accepted medi­
ums of expression such as a chamber group, orchestra, chorus, or
piano. The composition should be of at leastten minutes' duration
and have received performance. Suggested designs are as follows:
a string quartet,a trio,or a sonata for violinor violoncelloand
piano, or a work for fullorchestra, or a dramatic work or a cantata
for solos,chorus, and orchestra of at leastfifteenminutes1 duration.
(Thesisrequirement for master's degree in music.)
****
Itwas an event tobe honored with a party, preferablya
surpriseparty... "Itwas a surprise,allright--asur­
prise allthe way around!"
*':<*:>;(
Here the student draws upon past experience for suitableideas. He
must produce and organize these to achieve such effectsas build-up
and climax.
All of these exercises seem to qualifyas synthesis tasks. They
require a novel product--something that the student cannot produce as
a whole from memory. While the elements in thiscase are musical
tones, and thus seem to be sensory in character, their arrangement
into combinations of tones and themes seems to represent a genuine
intellectualeffort. The process of composing seems to involve the
testingof tones and combinations of tones against each other, as well
3R. M. W. Travers, "The Evaluationof the Outcomes of Teaching
in English," Journal of Experimental Education, Vol. XXVII, 1948,
pp. 325-333.
"---
<<<PAGE=98>>>
,.......--
••••
180
as against the requirements of a particulartype of music. In the
case of the firstexercise above, the composer must comprehend the
elements in the poem --particularideas, moods, etc.,--and try to
embody them in his music. When such a stimulus is not furnished,
of course, the composer must draw these elements from his own
experience.
5.20 Productionof a plan, or proposed set of operations
5. Several authoritieswere asked toparticipatein a round table dis­
cussion of juveniledelinquency.They were given the followingdata
about City X and for three of the communities, A, B, and C within
City X.
For City X For Com-For Com-For Com-
as a whole munity A
munity Bmunity C
JuvenileDelinquency Rate (annualarrestsper 100persons aged 5-19)
4.2418.11.34.1
Average Monthly Rental
$60. 00$42.00$100.00$72.00
InfantDeath Rate (per
1000 births)
52.376.032.156.7
Birth Rate (per.1000
inhabitants)
15.516.710.115.4
Inaddition,they were toldthatin Community A the crimes against
property (burglary,etc.)constituteda relativelyhigher proportion of
the totaljuvenileoffensesthan in Communities Band C, where crimes
against persons (assault,etc.) were relativelygreater.
(l) How would ~ explainthe differencesin these juveniledelinquency
rates in lightof the above data? (You may make use of any theory ormaterial presented in the course.)
(2) Inlightofyour explanationof the data what proposals would you
make for reducing the juveniledelinquencyrate in each of the threecommunities?
':',;<':<:~:(
Conceivably,both questionsof this exercise could qualifyas pri­
marily synthesistasks. The firstmight be considered as a demand
for hypothesisformulation,provided the phenomena reported upon have
not been previously studied. Ordinarily, however, this task would
represent applicationof generalizationsacquired in social studies
courses. The response to the second questionwould depend closely
on the kind of explanationgiven to the first. The firstquestion sets
the framework within which the student makes his proposals. Again,
if proposals have not been developed in a course, the studentmust
produce some which are consistentwith his analysisof factors asso­
ciatedwith delinquency. Itisthisprocess of selectingand organizing
.....,....
181
means (courses of action)in relationto the desired ends (controlor
reductionof delinquency)thatqualifiesthe task as synthesis.
6. Design a simple drilljig for performing the lastoperation in the
production of the part shown in the accompanying drawing. The l.ast
operation is to "drillallholes." One thousand parts only are td be
made and XLO bushings 1/2" O. D. and 1/2" long are tobe used.4
(Design not shown)
This exercise represents synthesisbecause the student must com­
bine two sorts of elements to produce a novel product:(1)specifica­
tions for the device, and (2)principlesof design. The student has
some freedom in designing the device, provided it will perform the
required job satisfactorily. _
7. A Problem in Chemical Process Design
The followingproblem was used ina course in chemical engineer­
ing. The studentmust prepare a process design which meets the
specificationsoutlinedin the accompanying letter.
AJAX PETROLEUM CORPORATION
Office of the Chief Engineer
March 5, 1951
To Process Engineering Division:
Our management has decided to increase the outputof aviationgaso­
linebase stockfrom our East Chicago Refinery. The only major addi­
tionto the refinerynecessary willbe a butane isomerizationunit. The
engineering schedule requires that the process engineering and cost
estimate must be completed and the information transmitted to the
Mechanical Engineering Department by April 4, 1951. The process
design shouldbe in our usual report form and includea flow diagram,
utilitiesrequired,equipment specifications,instrumentation,and draw­
ings of theplotplan and elevation. The isomerizationprocess is tobe
selectedby you, and your choice shouldbe supportedby adequate argu­
ments and description.
Will you please proceed according toyour best judgment based upon
the attachedconditions.
Very trulyyours,
AJAX PETROLEUM CORPORATION
4 From The Measurement of Understanding, The Forty-FifthYear­
book of the NationalSocietyfor the Study of Education,Part I,Chicago:
The Universityof Chicago Press, 1946, pp. 299-300.
This problem and an accompanying check listwere developed by
E. Rosenthal,Brooklyn Technical High School.
<<<PAGE=99>>>
r
182
A Problem in Chemical Process Design (continued)
183
5.30 Derivationof a set of abstract relations
Ajax Petroleum Corporation
1000 BFSD Butane IsomerizationUnit
East Chicago, Illinois
Job. 774
8. Facts:Dry gases X and Y react readilywhen mixed in a glass flask.
If,however, justbefore the gases are introduced,the flaskis heated
stronglyand cooled, no reactiontakes place. Ifa copper container is
used, no reactionoccurs.
Feed Stock:
Pressure: 275 psig at batterylimits.
Source: De -ethanizedcatalyticcracker gas.
Site: 175 feetx 150 feet,levelat NE corner of catalyticunit.
Soilbearing load 3000 Ibs./sq. ft.6 feetbelow grade.
Water is a necessary participantin the reaction.
Copper forms a stablecompound with the gas X and prevents reac­
tionwith the other gases.
A- Hypothesis isnot tenableor cannotbe testedexperimentally.
B- Dry the flaskwithoutheatingitbefore introducingthe gases.
C- Leave the flaskopen aftermixing the gases.
D- Moisten the walls of the copper containerbefore introducing
the gases.
E- Heat the glass flaskstrongly,allow itto cool,and leave it
open for several days before introducingthegases.
DIRECTIONS: Consider each hypothesisbelow in the lightof the facts
above. Ifthe hypothesisis untenableor isnot statedina way thatcould
be testedexperimentally,blacken answer space A. Otherwise choose
the experiment which willbest testthe hypothesisand blacken the appro­
priateanswer space.
30
2850
4560
845
750
80
140
saturated
Ibs./hour
ethane
propane
iso-butane
n-butane
pentane
propylene
butylenes
water
Composition:
Yield: 1000 bbl./stream day 98% isobutane
Storage: 30 days product storage required
Utilities:water: availableat 40 psig
72~F maximum summer temperature,
37 F minimum winter temperature.
Electricity:110v singlephase and 220/440 3 phase.
Steam: 250 psig - 500F superheat
5 psig - saturated
"***
This problem involves synthesis of a number of elements: steps
in the chemical process, conditionsof operation,utilitiesrequired,equipment specifications,and instrumentation.Some of these elements
are given the student; others he must determine through proper analy­
sis and through applicationof principles. He must considerthe above
elements in relationto one another and to the requirements of the pro­
cess design,and he must supporthis solutionby adequate arguments.
While analysis and applicationenter this exercise toa great extent,
the studentmust organize a variety of ideas in order to accomplish
the design.
A- Hypothesis isnot tenableor cannot be testedexperimentally.
B- Inspectthe interiorsurface of the copper containerwith a
high-power microscope.
C- Increase the concentrationof gas X in the copper container
and note whether the reactionbegins.
D- Moisten the walls of the copper containerbefore introducing
the gases.
E- Coat the interiorwith paraffin.
The reactiontakes place by a simple collisionof X and Y molecules
in the body of the gas.
A- Hypothesis isnot tenableor cannot be testedexperimentally.
B- Carry out the reactionin a glas!>containerwhose interioris
linedwith copper.
C- Carry out the reactionwith gases X and Y dissolvedin water.
D- Cover the interiorof the flaskwith paraffin.
E- Increase the gas concentrationsof gas X in a glassflaskand
note whether the rate finallyreaches a constantlimitingvalue.
The preceding seems to involve synthesis in that the studentmust
relate several ideas. He must firstof all draw some inferences to
account for the given phenomena--e.g., the reaction failedto take
place because heating drove off a necessary agent--water;or,because
heating affectedthe chemical conditionof the glass in some way. For
question 1, he must ignore this second possibilityby choosing an
experiment which tests solely the effectof water. This operation,
<<<PAGE=100>>>
,..--
184
incidentally,involvesthe applicationof an abstraction--theconcept of
experimental control. But the applicationoccurs as a part of this
process of relatinga number of ideas to account for the given mate­
rials,in thiscase, report of some specificphysico-chemical phenom­
enon. In addition,the studentmust synthesizefurtherby consideringsome other hypotheses.
9. The formulation of reasonable hypotheses.5 A housing concern
has made some experiments on methods of heatinghouses. A room was
constructedwith walls thatcouldbe heated or refrigeratedat the same
time thatair of any temperature was being circulatedthrough the room.
Several individualswere asked to record theirsensationsas the condi­tions were varied as follows:
WallAir
Trial TemperatureTemperatureSensations
I
850850Uncomfortably hot2
850500Uncomfortably hot3
700850Comfortable
4
700700Comfortable
5
700500Comfortable
6
500500Very cold
7
500700Uncomfortably cold8
500850Cold
How can you explainthe sensationof "coldness" by a person in a
room where the air temperature is 850 and the wall temperature is 500
{alltemperatures Fahrenheit}? Consider the followingquestionsand
organize your thinkingunder the outlinegiven below.
a) Make allthe suggestionsyou can which you believewillexplain why
a person is cold ina room where the air temperature is 850 and the
wall temperature is 500. Give your reasons as to why you believe
each of these suggestionswillexplainthephenomenon.
b) What kinds of evidencewould you want to collectwhich would enable
you to decideamong your suggested hypotheses?
c) Now go over the suggestions which you have made above and select
the one which you believetobe the "best" explanationand give your
reasons for your selection.
",o:o~~~
This exercise is similar to the preceding one. It, too, requires
that the student relatea number of ideas to explain a phenomenon.
Question c) involves evaluationas defined in thisHandbook.
5Adapted from The Measurement ofUnderstanding,The Forty-Fifth
Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, Part I,
Chicago: The Universityof Chicago Press, 1946, p. 118.
6.00--EVALUATION
Evaluationis definedas themaking of judgments about
the value,for some purpose, of ideas,works, solutions,
methods, material,etc. Itinvolvesthe use of criteriaas
wellas standardsfor appraisingthe extentto which parti­
culars are accurate,effective,economical, or satisfying.
The judgments may be eitherquantitativeor qualitative,
and thecriteriamay be eitherthose determined by thestu­
dentor thosewhich are givento him.
Evaluationis placed at thispoint in the taxonomy be­
cause itis regarded as being at a relativelylatestagein a
complex process which involvessome combination of all
the other behaviorsof Knowledge, Comprehension, Appli­
cation,Analysis,and Synthesis.What is added are criteria
includingvalues. Evaluationrepresents not only an end
process in dealingwith cognitivebehaviors,but alsoa ma­
jor linkwiththe affectivebehaviors where values, liking,
and enjoying(andtheirabsence or contraries)are the cen­
tralprocesses involved. However, the emphasis here is
stilllargelycognitiveratherthanemotive.
Although Evaluationis placedlastin the cognitivedo­
main because itis regarded as requiringto some extentall
the other categoriesof behavior,itis not necessarilythe
last step in thinkingor problem solving. Itis quitepossi­
ble thatthe evaluativeprocess willin some cases be the
preludetothe acquisitionof new knowledge, a new attempt
at comprehension or application,or a new analysisand
synthesis.
Man isapparentlyso constitutedthathe cannotrefrain
from evaluating,judging,appraising,or valuingalmost
everythingwhich comes withinhis purview. Much of this
evaluatingis highlyegocentricin thatthe individualjudges
thingsas they relatetohimself. Thus, ideas and objects
which are usefultohim may be evaluatedhighly,whileob­
jectswhich are less usefulto him (butwhich may be ex­
tremely usefulto others)are evaluatedlesshighly. Al­
though utilityisan importantcriterionfor theindividual's
evaluations,familiarity,lack of threatto self,statuscon­
siderations,and ease of comprehension may also form
185
<<<PAGE=101>>>
r
186
criteriafor judgments which are no less egocentricthan
utility.
For themost part, theevaluationscustomarilymade
by an individualare quickdecisionsnotpreceded by very
carefulconsiderationof the variousaspectsof the object,
idea,or activitybeing judged. These might more properly
be termed opinionsratherthan judgments. Customarily,
opinionsare made at less thana fullyconscious leveland
the individualmay notbe fullyaware of theclues or bases
on which he is forming his appraisals. For purposes of
classification,only those evaluationswhich are or can be
made with distinctcriteriain mind are considered. Such
evaluationsare highlyconsciousand ordinarilyare based
on a relativelyadequate comprehension and analysisof the
phenomena to be appraised. Itisrecognizedthatthismay
be far from thenormal stateof affairs.Itis,however,
based on a recognitionthateducationalprocedures are in­
tendedto developthemore desirableratherthanthe more
customary typesof behavior.
Althoughitis recognizedthatan individualis, on many
grounds, entitledto his own opinionas wen as his own
judgments about the value of specificideas,objects,or
activities,one major purpose of educationis tobroaden the
foundationon which judgments are based. Thus, itis anti­
cipatedthatas a resultof educationalprocedures,individu­
als willtake intoconsiderationa greatervarietyof facets
of the phenomena to be evaluatedand thatthey willhave in
mind a clearerview of the criteriaand frames of reference
being used in the evaluation.
One typeof evaluationcan be made largelyon thebasis
of internalstandardsof criticism. Such internalstandards
are for themost part concerned with testsof the accuracy
of thework as judgedby consistency,logicalaccuracy, and
the absence of internalflaws. It is recognized thateven
when a document, product,or work isperfectlyaccurateor
consistenton the basis of internalstandards,it does not
necessarilyconstitutea work which can be valued highly
unless it alsosatisfiescertainexternalstandards. A sec­
ond type of evaluationmay be based on the use of external
standards or criteriaderivedfrom a considerationof the
~ ~
187
ends tobe served and the appropriatenessof specificmeans
for achievingthese ends. Such evaluationsare primarily
based on considerationsof efficiency,economy, or utility
of specificmeans forparticularends. This typeof evalua­
tionalsoinvolvestheuse ofparticularcriteriawhich are re­
garded as appropriateformembers of the class ofphenom­
ena being judged,i.e., in terms of standards of excellence
or effectivenesscommonly used in thefieldor in a compari­
son ofparticularphenomena with other phenomena in thesame field.
<<<PAGE=102>>>
~
~
188
6.10 Judgments in terms of internalevidence
Evaluationof a communication from such evidence as
logicalaccuracy,consistency,and otherinternalcriteria.
Formal educationin a democracy has generallybeen ex­
tremely cautiousin dealingwith problems of evaluating,
especiallyin the socialsciences and, to some extent,in
the humanitiesand naturalsciences. Undoubtedly,this is
inlargepart dictatedby the fear thatthe school might be
doingspecialpleadingbefore the individualisreallymature
enough to be fullyinformed aboutalternatives.Itis also
dictatedby a beliefthatin a democracy each citizenis ex­
pected--especiallyon politicalproblems--to consider the
major alternativesand then make hisown decision. As a
resultof thiscaution,evaluationobjectivesin the schools
have largelyemphasized judgments aboutaccuracy,usually
with reference to internalstandards such as consistency,
logicalaccuracy, and the absence of particularinternalflaws.
After an individualhas comprehended and perhaps ana­
lyzed a work, he may be calledupon to evaluateitin terms
ofvariousinternalcriteria.Such criteriaare for themost
part testsoftheaccuracy of thework as judgedby thelogi­
calrelationshipsevidentin thework itself.Has thewriter
(or speaker) been consistentinhis use of terms, does one
idea reallyfollowfrom another, and do the conclusions
followlogicallyfrom the material presented? There are
other internalstandards which may be used to determine
thatthere are no major errors in thetreatmentor report­
ingof dataand thatstatements are made withsome preci­
sion or exactness. Itis also possibleto judge a work to
determine whether the manner in which the writer cites
sources or documents or the care with which particulars
are givenislikelyto yielda high probabilityof accuracy.
189
Evaluation--Illustrativeeducationalobjectives
6.10 Judgments in terms of internalevidence
Judgingby internalstandards,the abilityto assess
generalprobabilityof accuracy in reportingfa c ts
from the care givento exactnessof statement,doc­
umentation,proof, etc.
The abilityto applygivencriteria(basedon internal
standards)to the judgment of thework.
The abilityto indicatelogicalfallaciesin arguments.
<<<PAGE=103>>>
r--
"-
190
6.20 Judgments in terms of externalcriteria
Evaluationof material with reference to selectedor
remembered criteria.--The criteriamay be ends to be
satisfied;thetechniques,rules,or standardsby which such
works are generallyjudged;or the comparison of thework
with other works in the field.This typeof evaluationin­
volvestheclassificationof thephenomena in order thatthe
appropriatecriteriafor judgment may be employed. Thus,
a work of historyis to be judged by criteriarelevantto
historicalworks ratherthan toworks of fiction.A rhetori­
calwork is tobe judgedby criteriarelevantto such works
ratherthancriteriaappropriateto differentkindsofverbal
presentations.Just so, a work of art may be judged by
many differentcriteria,dependingupon the classification
of thework, e.g., representational,expressional,as com­
municatinga particularmessage or idea,etc. Allof this
involvestheassumption thateach phenomenon is a member
of a classand is tobe judged by criteriawhich are appro­
priateto thatclass. This also includesthe possibilityof
comparing a work withothermembers of the same classofwork.
Itshouldbe pointedout thatthe classificationof a work
and the evaluationof itin terms of the criteriaappropriate
to theclass involve some relativelyarbitraryjudgments.
Clearlya work is at one and the same time a member of
many differentclasses. Thus, an historicalwork may also
be a rhetorical,philosophical,or even poetic work. The
decisionas to the class in which itis tobe evaluateddoes
not preclude itfrom being also evaluatedas a member ofanotherclass.
Quitefrequentlythe externalcriteriaare derived from
a member of the class which is consideredtobe a model
member in some respects(notnecessarilythe idealor best
member). This may resultin thejudgments focusingon the
comparison of thetwo members of the classratherthan on
the extenttowhich one member satisfiesselectedabstractcriteria.
This typeof evaluationmay alsoinvolvethe classifica­
tionof a work withregard to theends tobe achievedby the
191
work, followedby a judgment as towhether themeans used
are appropriateto the ends in terms of efficiency,economy,
and utility. This involvesthe assumption thatparticular
means serve some specificends betterthan others,and that
particularends are best served by some specificmeans. It
should be recognized thatthemajor problem inmany judg­
ments of thiskind is what ends are tobe considered. The
ends may be those conceivedby theoriginatorof the work
or idea,or they may be those deemed appropriateby the
critic.Itshouldalsobe recognized that a particularwork
or ideamay be evaluatedin terms of many differentmeans­
ends relationships.This may requirethe answering of the
followingquestions:Do the means employed represent a
good solutionto the problem posed by the ends desired?
Are themeans the most appropriateones when the alterna­
tivesare considered? Do the means employed bring aboutends other than those desired?
<<<PAGE=104>>>
,.....--
•••
192
Evaluation--Illustrativeeducationalobjectives
6.20 Judgments in terms of externalcriteria
The comparison ofmajor theories,generalizations,
and factsaboutparticularcultures.
Judgingby externalstandards,theabilityto compare
a work withthehighestknown standardsin itsfield-­
especiallywith otherworks of recognizedexcellence.
Skillsinrecognizingand weighingvaluesinvolvedin
alternativecourses ofaction.
The abilityto identifyand appraisejudgments and val­
ues thatare involvedin the choiceof a course of ac­
tion.
The abilityto distinguishbetween technicalterminol­
ogy which adds precisionto a textby permittingmore
appropriatedefinitionof terms, and thatwhich merely
replacesa common name by an esotericone.
The abilityto evaluatehealthbeliefscritically.
The abilityto applyself-developed(aesthetic)stand­
ards to the choiceand use of the ordinaryobjectsoftheeveryday environment.
193
Testing for Evaluation,and illustrativetestitems
6.10 Judgments in terms of internalevidence
The major typeofbehaviorfor evaluationof thistype
of judgment isthatthe individual,when givena new work,
is abletolocateerrors withinitor is able to determine
what in the document is treatedin such a way thatitmay be
regarded as internallyconsistent.Thus, when givena com­
munication,the individualcan judgeit correctlyas being
consistentor inconsistent,accurateor inaccurate,carefully
done or carelesslywritten,etc. In additionto making an
over-allevaluationof thework with regard to accuracy,the
testproblem may be posed in such a manner thatthe in d i­
vidualis expectedto citethe specificpointswithinitwhich
are accurateor inaccurateas well as the reasons why they
are judgedinthisway.
Althoughtheindividualmay finallybe exp e c te d to
make some over-allevaluationas to accuracy, the testing
problem isone of determiningwhether he is clearlyaware
of the specificways inwhich thematerialis accurateand
internallyconsistentor theflaws in itwhich make itinac­
curateor inconsistent.Itispossiblefor thetestingtobe
concerned withrelativelysmall problems inwhich each of
themajor typesofpossibleerrors or flawsmay be tested
separately. This typeof test ing may be used to infer
or predictthe individual'sabilityto evaluatelargerworks
where many ofthesepointsare includedin complex combi­
nations. However, itwould seem more economical from a
testingviewpointas wellas more realisticand of higher
facevalidityto testfor evaluationof accuracy on whole
problems which may involveevaluationof othertypesof ob-
jectivesas well.
The othermajor problem in testingfor evaluationof
accuracy is the questionof thelegitimacyof usingrecogni­
tiontypesof questions. Quite frequently the multiple­
choiceor otherrecognitionforms may callthe examinee's
attentiontopossibleerrors which he would not otherwise
note. The use of recognitionforms of questionsfor this
<<<PAGE=105>>>
--
Ii..
194
classof objectivesor behaviorsmust depend on evidence
thatthistechniqueis highlycorrelatedwith recallforms
of questionson the same pointsas well as on the ju d g ­
ments of expertsand otherevidencethatthemental proc­
esses requiredare essentiallythoseof evaluationabout
accuracy ratherthanreactionsto stimuliand cue s not
clearlyrelevanttothistype ofobjective.
6.20 Judgments in terms of externalcriteria
This typeof evaluationrequiresthatthe individual
have a relativelydetailedknowledge of the classofphenom­
ena under consideration,thathe know the criteriacustom­
arilyemployed in judgingsuch works or ideas,and thathe
have some skillin theapplicationof thesecriteria.In a
work of some complexityitisalsonecessary thatthe indi­
vidualbe able to comprehend and analyzethework before
evaluatingit.
The testingof thisintellectualabilityrequires that
theindividualbe givensome new work or ideatowhich spe­
cificcriteriaor ends may be applied. The problem may
vary from one in which the studentis givena new work or
ideaand asked to evaluateit to problems which are more
specificin thattheindividualis asked to evaluateitas a
member ofa givenclass,or where he isasked to evaluate
itin comparison withanothergivenwork. The problem may
requirethathe make judgments ofappropriate-inappropriate,
good-bad, or judgments of thedegree towhich particular
means-ends relationshipsare involved.
The amount of knowledge requiredformany evaluation
problems is very extensive,sincethe classof works, cri­
teriafor the class,ends to be served, as well as illustra­
tionsof theclassmust be clearlyinmind beforetheindivid­
ual can applyexternalcriteriato thejudgment ofa new workor idea.
Although a singlefinaljudgment may be an important
aspectof theproblem, thesimple recordingof such an over­
all judgment is ordinarilyinsufficientevidenceof the qual­
ityof competence of the examinees in evaluation.Itis fre­
quentlynecessary tobreak down theproblem intoa series
of ratherspecificjudgments as wellas analysesin order to
be sure thattheentireprocess of evaluationisa competent
I
I
195
one or inorder tofindthetypesof errors and difficulties
encountered.
The typesof evaluationdiscussedhere are not fre­
quentlyused in secondary or collegiateeducation. As a
resultofthe lack of emphasis on theseobjectivesand be­
haviorsin the curriculum, littlehas been done to develop
appropriatetestingtechniques. Some illustrationsare
available,but thesearenot the clearestorbest techniques
possible. Most frequentlythe testingtechniquesused are
of the essay or recalltypewhich do notfocus sharplyon
thebehaviors desired. They do give the examinee an op­
portunityto demonstrate his competence, but they do not
necessarilyevoke thesebehaviors;as a result,they are
not very efficienttestingprocedures. Furthermore,
availabletestingtechniquesdo not permit much intheway
of analysisof errors made or even a very detailedanaly­
sis of themethods by which such testscan be structured.
Perhaps the greatestvalue of the taxonomy atthispoint
is inpointingto theneed for furtherstudyand develop­
ment of testingtechniquesfor measuring competence in
evaluatingdocuments, material,and works.
<<<PAGE=106>>>
r
196 197
6.00 - EVALUATION -- ILLUSTRATIVE TEST ITEMS
Directions: Examine the conclusionsgivenbelow. Assuming that
theparagraphs above give a fairstatementof the problem, which one
of the conclusionsdo you thinkis justified.
6.10 Judgments in terms of internalevidence
Given a problem, determine a logicalconclusionand judge the
logicalaccuracy of statements in relationto the conclusion
Team owners urged theseplayers not to apply for unemployment com­
pensation. According tothe owners' interpretation,theplayers were
under contractallyear around, althoughthey worked and were p aid
only during the playingseason. On the other hand, the stateofficials
in Ohio and Missouri were inclinedto agree with theplayers thattheywere entitledtobenefitpayments.
youIn your reading of other authors on the Englishlanguage,
findthatseveral of them went to Denmark to studyunder
Jespersen.
Mr, Jespersen's name is not includedin the DictionaryofAmerican Scholars.
So far as you can find,Jespersen never livedin Englandor
the United Statesfor any considerableperiod.
The players argued indirectly(ifothers receivecompensation,
why shouldn'twe?) and forgotthatothersneeded thecompen­
sationmore than they.
Mr. Jespersen was Professor of English at Copenhagen
University.
The statement in questionwas taken from thevery first
articlethatMr. Jespersen published.
Mr. Jespersen'sbooks are frequentlyreferredtoinother
works thatyou consult.
A changed definitionmay lead to a changed conclusioneven
though the argument from each definitionislogical.
5. No one who earns $8,000 a year or more shouldgetunemploy­
ment compensation.
4.
3.
9.
8.
7.
6.
10.
11.
6.20 Judgments in terms of external criteria
Given possiblebases for judgments about accuracy, recognize
criteriawhich are appropriate.
For items 6 - 11, assume thatin doingresearch for a paper aboutthe
English language you finda statementby Otto Jespersen which contra­
dictssome pointofview on language which you have alwaysaccepted.
Indicatewhich of the statementswould be significantin determiningthe
value of Jespersen's statement. For the purpose of theseitems, you
may assume thatthese statements are accurate.
Key: 1. Significantpositively--i.e., might lead you totrusthis state­
ment and to reviseyour own opinion.
2. Significantnegatively--i.e., might lead you todistrusthis
statement.
3. Has no significance.
(Source:PEA Test 5,12)
A: Statements which explainwhy your conclusionislogical.
B: Statementswhich do not explainwhy your concIu­sion islogical.
C: Statements about which you are unableto decide.
The stateofficialsare the ones who considerappeals for unemploy­
ment compensation, and theiropinioncarries more weight than theopinionsof team owne rs.
The SocialSecurityAct mayor may not provide thata man who
works and receivespay during onlypart of each year isunemployedduring the remaining part of the year.
Mark in
column
SocialSecurityofficialssome times face perplexingproblems in study­
ing appeals for unemployment compensation. Some major-league base­
ballplayers in Ohio and Missouri decided in January that,because they
had not played ballsince the end of the season, they had a rightto con­
sider themselves unemployed. Although some ofthem were earning
good salariesof $8,000 to $10,000 a year inbaseball,they maintained
thatthcy were entitledto the benefitsof the unemployment sectionofthe SocialSecurityAct.
Conclusions
A. The players were entitledto thebenefitsof the unemploymentsectionof the SocialSecurityAct.
B. The players were not entitledto the benefitsof the unemploymentsectionof the Socia:lSecurityAct.
C. More informationis needed to decidewhether or not theplayers
were entitledto thebenefitsof the unemployment sectionof theSocialSecurityAct.
Statements
1,
2.
<<<PAGE=107>>>
198
Given a poem, determine criteriaof evaluationwhich are ap­
propriate and apply them.
199
Given a means-ends relationship,judge itsvalidityand support
this judgment
A. Defend or attackthe truthofproposition(a)above. In doing this,
take intoconsiderationspecificconditionsin the areas of economic
and politicallifein America from the CivilWar to the present.
(Suggestedtime: 15 minutes)
B. Defend or attackthe truthofproposition(b). In doing this, make
clear (i)what meaning you are givingtv "liberty"and "regulation,"
(ii)the precise positionyou are takingin regard to such problems
as distributionof income, monopoly, the effectivenessof a free
market to regulateour economy, and the possibilitiesof planning.
(Suggestedtime: 25 minutes)
"The idea oflibertyas formulated in the eighteenthcentury, al­
though validenough forthattime, has in one fundamental respect ceased
to be applicableto the situationin which we find ourselves. In the
eighteenthcentury the most obvious oppressions from which men suf­
fered derived from governmental restraintson the free activityof the
individual.Liberty was thereforenaturallyconceived in terms of the
emancipation of the individualfrom such restraints. In the economic
realm thismeant the eliminationof governmental restraintson the
individualin choosing his occupation,in contractingfor the acquisition
and disposalof property, and the purchase and sale ofpersonal serv­
ices. But inour time, as a resultof the growing cOl:p.plexitiesof a
technologicalsociety,(a)the emancipation of the individualfrom gov­
ernmental restraintinhis economic activitieshas created new oppres­
sions, so that(b)for the majority ofmen libertycan be achieved only
by an extensionof governmental regulationof competitive business
enterprise."
12. Since there'sno help, come letus kiss and part;
Nay, I have done, you get no more ofme,
And I am glad,yea glad with allmy heart
That thus so cleanlyI myself can free;
Shake hands forever, cancelallour vows,
And when we meet at any time again,
Be itnot seen in eitherof our brows
That we one jotof former love retain.
Now at the lastgasp oflove'slatestbreath,
When, his pulse failing,passion speechlesslies,
When faithis kneelingby his bed of death,
And innocence is closingup his eyes,
Now ifthouwouldst, when allhave givenhim over,
From deathtolifethoumightst him yet recover.
Write an essay offrom 250 to 500 words, describingand evaluatingthe
foregoingpoem. In your descriptionyou should employ such terms as
willreveal your recognitionof formal characteristicsof the poem.
Your principlesof evaluationshould be made clear--althoughthe y
should not be elaboratelydescribed or defended.
Take time to organize your essay carefully. Save time for revisions
and proof-readingso thatthe essay as itappears in your examination
bookletrepresentsyour best intention. Itis suggested thatyou give
20 minutes to planning,80 to writing,and 20 to revising your essay.
Please try to writelegibly.
13. Essay I
Given an end, recognize the appropriatenessof a particularmeans.
This assumes specificinformationabout the phenomena involved.
Itmay be worthwhile for the manufacturer ofbusiness goods touse
space in consumer media solelytohave the opportunityto reach those
readers who as business men are interestedinbuying his product. Con­
sider each of the followingbusiness goods. On the answer sheet, oppo­
sitethe number which identifiedeach product, blacken under column:
A- ifsuch an approach would appear toprovide enough worth­
while coverage to justifythe expenditure;
B- ifsuch an approach would not be likelyto reach enough good
prospects to justifythe expenditure.
14. Chevroletautomobile
15. Nationalrock drills(miningindustry)
16. Remington typewriters
17. Buckner textilemachines
18. Hammermill Bond Paper
<<<PAGE=108>>>
~. ---------
200 I'------------11
l.
Given an end, recognize best of several means19.
Many people believethatitwould be betterifour stateshad more uni­
form divorce laws. Itis recognized,however, thatthereare dangers
in an attempt toachieve such uniformity. Which one of the following
procedures would be most likelytoavoid the greatestof these dangers?
A- An amendment to the U. S. Constitutionispassed, which es­
tablishesthe grounds for divorce tobe recognized inallcourts.
B- A federallaw ispassed which sets forththemaximum grounds
which can be recognizedby any state.
C- A commission appointedby the Presidentworks out standards
for a divorce code and encourages allstatesto consider these
standards in revising their laws.
D- A conferenceof stategovernors decides on a divorce code and
each governor attempts to have itmade thelaw ofhis state,
E- The U.S. Supreme Court establishesa uniform set of practices
by rulingagainstalldivorcelaws which do not conform to its
standard.
Given a particularend, determine the means which willserve itbest
20. --
Jane isfaced with the problem of selectingmaterial for a school dress.
The dress willreceivelotsofwear and willbe laundered frequently,
Which of the fabricswould be her best choice? (The testshouldinclude
examples offabrics,includingsome rayons. This would allow more
reasons tobe givenbelow.)
Check the qualitiesthe fabricyou choose possesses which make itsupe­
rior for Jane's purpose.
____ (a) Material is colorfastto washing
____ (b) Material is crease resistant
____ (c) There islittleor no sizingin thematerial.
____ (d) Materialis easilycared for
(e) Material is softand willdrape easily
____ (f) Weave isfirm, close and smooth
____ (g) Material is colorfastto sunlight
____ (h) Materialwillnot show soileasily
____ (i) Design isprintedwith the grain
201
APPENDIX
Condensed Version of the
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives
CognitiveDomain
KNOWLEDGE
1.00 KNOWLEDGE
Knowledge, as defined here, involves the recall of specificsand uni­
versals,the recallof methods and processes, or the recallof a pattern,
structure,or setting. For measurement purposes, the recallsituation
involveslittlemore thanbringingtomind the appropriatematerial. Al­
though some alterationof the material may be required, this is a rela­
tivelyminor part of the task. The knowledge objectivesemphasize most
the psychologicalprocesses of remembering. The process of relating
is also involvedin thata knowledge testsituationrequires the organiza-'
tion and reorganizationof a problem such thatitwillfurnishthe appro­
priatesignalsand cues for the informationand knowledge the individual
possesses. To use an analogy, if one thinksof the mind as a file,the
problem in a knowledge test situationis thatof findingin the problem
or task the appropriatesignals,cues, and clues which willmost effec­
tivelybring out whatever knowledge is filedor stored.
1.10 KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFICS
The recallof specificand isolablebitsof information. The em­
phasis is on symbols with concrete referents. This material,
which is at a very low levelof abstraction,may be thoughtof as
the elements from which more complex and abstractforms of
knowledge are built.
1.11 KNOWLEDGE OF TERMINOLOGY
Knowledge of the referentsfor specificsymbols (verbaland
non-verbal). This may includeknowledge of the most generally
accepted symbol referent,knowledge of the varietyof symbols
which may be used for a singlereferent,or knowledge of the
referentmost appropriate to a given use of a symbol.
*To definetechnicalterms by givingtheirattributes,
properties,or relations.
*Familiaritywith a large number of words in their
common range of meanings.
1.12 KNOWLEDGE OF SPECIFIC FACTS
Knowledge of dates, events, pcrHonH, pll"""".1'1".'1'11III'"l'Y
include very precise and spcelrklllf'"""ld,lol,,".,1,,," II,,,
specific date or exact rnagllHlId(~of :1 ,,111111111111'111111. II IlIllY
also includeapproximate 01' I'dalJveIlIfol"/llall"1I1111•.11 ,," ,"I
*lllustrativeeducationalobjecl:ivellflel(~d"dI'l'olllIIII'IIt,·",,1III',·.
<<<PAGE=109>>>
I...
202
approximate time period or the general order of magnitude of
a phenomenon.
*The recall of major facts about particularcultures.
*The possession of a minimum knowledge about the organ­
isms studied in the laboratory.
1.20 KNOWLEDGE OF WAYS AND MEANS OF DEALING WITH
SPECIFICS
Knowledge of the ways of organizing,studying,judging,and criti­
cizing. This includesthe methods of inquiry,the chronological
sequences, and the standards of judgment withina fieldas well as
the patternsof organizationthrough which the areas of the fields
themselves are determined and internallyorganized. This knowl­
edge is at an intermediatelevelof abstractionbetween specific
knowledge on the one hand and knowledge of universalson the other.
Itdoes not so much demand the activityof the studentin using the
materials as itdoes a more passive awareness of theirnature.
1.21 KNOWLEDGE OF CONVENTIONS
Knowledge of characteristicways of treatingand presenting
ideas and phenomena. For purposes of communication and con­
sistency,workers in a fieldemploy usages, styles,practices,
and forms which best suittheirpurposes and/or which appear
to suitbest the phenomena with which they deal. Itshould be
recognized thatalthoughthese forms and conventionsare likely
to be set up on arbitrary,accidental,or authoritativebases,
they are retainedbecause of the general agreement or concur­
rence of individualsconcerned with the subject,phenomena, or
problem.
*Familiaritywith the forms and conventionsof the major
types of works, e.g., verse,plays,scientificpapers, etc.
*To make pupilsconsciousof correct form and usage in
speech and writing.
1.22 KNOWLEDGE OF TRENDS AND SEQUENCES
Knowledge of the processes, directions,and movements of
phenomena with respect to time.
*Understandingof the continuityand development of American
cultureas exemplified in American life.
*Knowledge of the basic trends underlyingthe development of
public assistanceprograms.
203
1.23 KNOWLEDGE OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND CATEGORIES
Knowledge of the classes, sets, divisions,and arrangements
which are regarded as fundamental for a given subjectfield,
purpose, argument, or problem.
*To recognize the area encompassed by various kinds of
problems or materials.
*Becoming familiarwith a range of types of literature.
1.24 KNOWLEDGE OF CRITERIA
Knowledge of the criteriaby which fads, principles,opin­
ions, and conduct are tested or judged.
*Familiaritywith criteriafor judgment appropriateto the
type of work and the purpose for which itis read.
*Knowledge of criteriafor the evaluationofrecreational
activities.
1.25 KNOWLEDGE OF METHODOLOGY
Knowledge of the methods of inquiry,techniques,and proce­
dures employed in a particularsubjectfieldas well as those
employed in investigatingparticularproblems and phenomena.
The emphasis here is on the individual'sknowledge of the
method rather than his abilityto use the method.
"Knowledge of scientificmethods for evaluatinghealth
concepts.
"The studentshallknow the methods of attackrelevant to
the kinds of problems of concern to the social sciences.
1.30 KNOWLEDGE OF THE UNIVERSALS AND ABSTRACTIONS IN
A FIELD
Knowledge of the major schemes and patternsby which phenomena
and ideas are organized. These are the large structures,theories,
and generalizationswhich dominate a subjectfieldor which are
quitegenerallyused in studyingphenomena or solvingproblems.
These are at the highestlevelsof abstractionand complexity.
1.31 KNOWLEDGE OF PRINCIPLES AND GENERALIZATIONS
Knowledge ofparticularabstractionswhich summarize obscr'­
vations of phenomena. These are the abstractionswhich aiel'or
value in explaining,describing,predicting,or in del:l'nnillilll(
the most appropriateand relevantactionor directioll10 Ill'lul«'u,
*Knowledge of the important principleflby which 0111' I'X
perience with biologicalphenomena i.1lHUnllllll/'I'l.l'd,
'~The recall of major general.izal.i.oIlBabout pal'll<'ulal'
cultures.
<<<PAGE=110>>>
204
1.32 KNOWLEDGE OF THEORIES AND STRUCTURES
Knowledge of the bod:¥ofprinciplesand generalizationstogether
with their interrelationswhich present,'aclear, rounded, and
systematicview of a complex phenomenon, problem, or field.
These are the most abstractformulations,and they can be used
to show the interrelationand organizationof a great range of
specifics.
*The recallof major theoriesaboutparticularcultures.
*Knowledge of a relativelycomplete formulation of the
theory of evolution.
INTELLECTUAL ABILITIES AND SKILLS
Abilitiesand skillsrefer to organized modes of operationand general­
ized techniquesfor dealingwith materials and problems. The materials
and problems may be of such a nature thatlittleor no specializedand
technicalinformationis required. Such informationas isrequired can
be assumed tobe part of the individual'sgeneralfund of knowledge.
Other problems may require specializedand technicalinformation at a
rather high level such that specificknowledge and skillin dealingwith
the problem and the materials are required. The abilitiesand skills
objectivesemphasize the mental processes of organizingand reorganiz­
ingmaterial to achieve a particularpurpose. The materials may be
givenor remembered.
2.00 COMPREHENSION
This represents the lowest levelof understanding. Itrefers to a
type of understandingor apprehension such thatthe individual
knows what isbeing communicated and can make use of the mate­
rialor ideabeing communicated withoutnecessarilyrelatingitto
other material or seeing its fullestimplications.
2.10 TRANSLATION
Comprehension as evidencedby the care and accuracy with
which the communication is paraphrased or rendered from one
one language or form of communication toanother. Transla­
tionis-judgedon the basis of faithfulnessand accuracy, thatis,
on the extentto which the material in the originalcommunica­
tionispreserved althoughthe form of the communication has
been altered.
"The abilityto understand non-literalstatements
(metaphor, symbolism, irony, exaggeration).
*Skillin translatingmathematical verbal material
into symbolic statements and vice versa.
205
2.20 INTERPRETATION
The explanationor.summarization of a communication. Where­
as translationinvolvesan objectivepart-for-partrendering of
a communication, interpretationinvolves a reordering, re­
arrangement, or a new view of the material.
*The abilityto grasp the thought of the work as a whole
at any desired level of generality.
*The abilityto interpretvarious types of soeial data.
2.30 EXTRAPOLATION
The extensionof trends or tendenciesbeyond the'given data to
determine implications,eonsequences, corollaries,effects,
etc.,which are in accordance with the conditionsdescribed in
the originalcommunication.
*The abilityto deal with the conclusionsof a work in terms
of the immediate inferencemade from the explicitstate­
ments.
*Skillin predictingcontinuationof trends.
3.00 APPLICATION
The use of abstractionsinparticularand concretesituations.The
abstractionsmay be in the form of general ideas,rules ofproce­
dures, or generalizedmethods. The abstractionsmay also be
technicalprinciples,ideas, and theorieswhich must be remem­
bered and applied.
'"Applicationto the phenomena discussed in one paper of
the scientificterms or concepts used in otherpapers.
*The abilitytopredictthe probable effectof a change in a
factoron a biologicalsituationpreviouslyat equilibrium.
4.00 ANALYSIS
The breakdown of a communication intoitsconstituentelements or
parts such thatthe relativehierarchy of ideas ismade clear and/or
the relationsbetween the ideas expressed are made explicit.Such
analyses are intendedto clarifythe communication, to indicatehow
the communication is organized, and the way in Which itmanages
to convey its effects,as well as itsbasis and arrangement.
4.10 ANALYSIS OF ELEMENTS
Identificationof the elements included in a communication.
*The abilityto recognize unstated assumptions.
*Skillin distinguishingfacts from hypotheses.
<<<PAGE=111>>>
L
206
4.20 ANALYSES OF RELATIONSffiPS
The connections and interactions between elements and parts
of a communication.
*Ability to check the consistency of hypotheses with
given information and assumptions.
*Skill in comprehending the interrelationships among
the ideas in a passage.
4.30 ANALYSIS OF ORGANIZATIONAL PRINCIPLES
The organization, systematic arrangement, and structure
which hold the communication together. This includes the
"explicit" as well as "implicit" structure. Itincludes the
bases, necessary arrangement, and the mechanics which
make the communication a unit.
*The ability to recognize form and pattern in literary or
artisticworks as a means of understanding their meaning.
*Ability to recognize the general techniques used in persua­
sive maierials, such as advertising, propaganda, etc.
5.00 SYNTHESIS
The putting together of elements and parts so as to form a whole.
This involves the process of working with pieces, parts, elements,
etc., and arranging and combining them in such a way as to con­
stitute a pattern or structure not clearly there before.
5.10 PRODUCTION OF A UNIQUE COMMUNICATION
The development of a communication in which the writer or
speaker attempts to convey ideas, feelings, and/or experi­ences to others.
*Skill in writing, using an excellent organization of ideas
and statements.
*Ability to tell a personal experience effectively.
5.20 PRODUCTION OF A PLAN, OR PROPOSED SET OF
OPERATIONS
The development of a plan of work or the proposal of a plan of
operations. The plan should satisfy requirements of the task
which may be given to the student or which he may develop forhimself.
*Ability to propose ways of testing hypotheses.
*Ability to plan a unit of instruction for a particular
teaching situation.
207
5.30 _D_E_R_I_V_A_T_I_O_N__(~l.':_I\S 1';'1'()I<'../\-'-!.8_"_r_lt_A_C_"l_'_l_'t_E_L_A_T_I_O_N_S
The development or a HI·tor ahHtl'ad relations either to classify
or explain partkul:u' data ot'phenomena, or the deduction of
propositions and rdal.ions from a set of basic propositions or
symbolic representations.
*Ability to formulate appropriate hypotheses based upon an
analysis of factors involved, and to modify such hypothe­
ses in the light of new factors and considerations.
J
':<Abilityto make mathematical discoveries and generalizations.
6.00 EVALUATION
Judgments about the value of material and methods for given pur­
poses. Quantitative and qualitativejudgments about the extent to
which material and methods satisfy criteria. Use of a standard
of appraisal. The criteria may be those determined by the stu­
dent or those which are given to him.
6.10 JUDGMENTS IN TERMS OF INTERNAL EVIDENCE
Evaluation of the accuracy of a communication from such evi­
dence as logical accuracy, consistency, and other internal
criteria.
*Judging by internal standards, the ability to assess gen­
eral probability of accuracy in reporting facts from the
care given to exactness of statement, documentation,
proof, etc.
*The ability to indicate logical fallacies in arguments.
6.20 JUDGMENTS IN TERMS OF EXTERNAL CRITERIA
Evaluation of material with reference to selected or re­
membered criteria.
*The comparison of major theories, generalizations,
and facts about particular cultures.
*Judging by external standards, the ability to compare a
work with the highest known standards in its field-­
especially with other works of recognized excellence.