<<<PAGE=1>>>
The Collection, 9456
Analysis,
and Use
of -
Monitoring
and
Evaluation
Data
DennisJ. Casley : 7 
Krishna Kumar t4
~~~~L
A World Bank Publication'
 Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
<<<PAGE=2>>>

<<<PAGE=3>>>
The Collection,
Analysis, and Use
of Monitoring
and Evaluation Data
A Joint Study
The World Bank International Fund Food and Agriculture
for Agricultural Organization of the
Development United Nations
<<<PAGE=4>>>
This book is the second in a series on the monitoring and evaluation of
agriculture projects. The series includes a companion volume, Project
Monitoring and Evaluation in Agriculture, as well as brief technical notes
to be published in the World Bank Technical Papers series.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
The Collection,
Analysis, and Use
of Monitoring
and Evaluation Data
Dennis J. Casley and Krishna Kumar
Ram C. Malhotra, editor of the series
Published for The World Bank
The Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore and London
<<<PAGE=6>>>
© 1988 The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development / THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, N.W, Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
The Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore, Maryland 21211, U.S.A.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this study are the results of research
supported by the World Bank, but they are entirely
those of the authors and should not be attributed
in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations, to members of its Board of
Executive Directors or the countries they represent;
to the International Fund for Agricultural
Development; or to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
First printing March 1988
Second printing January 1989
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Casley, D. J.
The collection, analysis, and use of monitoring and
evaluation data.
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
1. Statistics. 2. Economic surveys. 3. Economic
development projects-Evaluation-Statistical methods.
4. Sampling (Statistics) I. Kumar, Krishna. II. Title.
HA29.C36 1988 001.4'2 87-46375
ISBN 0-8018-3670-7
ISBN 0-8018-3669-7 (pbk.)
Cover photograph: Winnowing grain in Chad. By A. Girod.
Courtesy Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
1 Introduction I
Purposes of Data Gathering 2
Qualitative and Quantitative Data 3
Constraints on Options for the Collection of Data 6
Data Analysis and Interpretation 7
2 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants 10
Types of Qualitative Interviews 10
Guidelines for Qualitative Interviews 15
Reliability of the Interview 21
General Respondents and Key Informants 24
Limitations of Qualitative Interviews 24
3 Conducting Group Interviews 26
Community Interviews 27
Focused Group Interviews 34
Limitations 40
4 Participant Observation 41
Conceptual Framework and Data Requirements 42
Site Selection and Timing 45
Understanding Fieldwork 46
Study Instruments 49
Minimizing Biases 51
Limitations 52
5 Structured Surveys 54
Socioeconomic Surveys: Baseline and Follow-up 54
Planning a Structured Survey 56
Data Requirements 57
v
<<<PAGE=8>>>
vi Contents
Survey Design 57
Concepts and Definitions 59
Questionnaire Construction 64
Interviewing the Respondents 74
6 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation 76
Probability versus Informal Sampling 78
Sample Size 83
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques 85
Two-Stage Sampling Techniques 92
Sampling for Rare Events 94
7 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields 96
Area, Production, and Yield 97
Area Measurement 99
Yield and Production Measurement 102
8 Exploratory Analysis 114
Simple Graphic Examination 115
Ordering the Data and Measures of Location 117
Trimming and Transforming Data 123
Measures of Dispersion 126
Fitting Straight Lines 127
Analysis of Residuals and First Differences 127
Moving Averages 129
Proportions 131
Analysis of Subsamples 131
9 Statistical Analysis of Data 132
Comparing Two Sample Means 133
2 X 2 Tables 134
Cross-Tabulations 137
Comparing Differences from Multiple Groups: The
Analysis of Variance 138
Regression and Correlation 142
Cautionary Comments about Correlation and
Regression 145
10 Presenting Data to the User 148
Frequency Distributions 149
Truncation of Digits and Summary Distributions 150
Presentation of Cross-Tabulations 155
Presenting Percentages 159
Graphs and Figures 161
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Contents vii
Attribution of Accuracy and Significance 161
Writing the Main Report 167
Suggested Readings 169
Index 171
Examples
1 A Guide for a Topic-Focused Interview 12
2 An Interview Involving Sensitive Questions 16
3 Involving Participants in Community Interviews 31
4 Group Interviews for Generating Quantitative Data
in Costa Rica 32
5 Introductory Remarks for a Focused Group Interview 36
6 Developing a Conceptual Framework for a Participant-
Observation Study 43
7 Steps in Conducting Participant-Observer Evaluation 48
8 Observation Record Form for General Meetings of a
Multipurpose Cooperative Society 49
9 Document Summary Form 50
10 A Two-Way Table for Livestock Numbers 65
11 Agricultural Research and Extension Project 66
12 A Verbatim Survey 70
13 Recent Study of Maize Yields in Zimbabwe 105
14 Bangladesh Postharvest Project 106
<<<PAGE=10>>>

<<<PAGE=11>>>
Acknowledgments
As was its companion, this book is a joint effort of the World Bank, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). We particularly
acknowledge the help of Ram Malhotra, the series editor, and Monica
Fong of IFAD; and Chandra Arulpragasm, Clifford Morojele, and
Francoise Petry of the FAO.
Chapter 6 is based on Samplingfor Monitoring and Evaluation, a mono-
graph by Chris Scott previously published (Washington, D.C.: World
Bank, 1985); revisions were undertaken by him. Similarly, chapter 7
draws on another monograph, Estimating Crop Production in Development
Projects, by C. Derek Poate and Dennis J. Casley (Washington, D.C.:
World Bank, 1985). Vijay Verma also contributed to the revision of this
chapter and provided comments on others. We thank these colleagues
for their assistance.
We also wish to thank our colleagues Ronald Ng, Vinh Le-Si, and
Josette Murphy for their substantial comments and assistance during the
writing of the book. Diana Crowley once again provided us with invalu-
able assistance in researching material and producing the data for the ex-
amples. We are grateful also to many who reviewed sections of the
manuscript. Finally, we thank Joy Vendryes, Workie Ketema, Susan
Smith, and Michael Alloy for patiently preparing the various drafts of the
manuscript.
ix
<<<PAGE=12>>>

<<<PAGE=13>>>
1 | Introduction
THIS VOLUME FOCUSES on the topics in data collection, analysis, and
use that were raised in its companion book, Project Monitoring and Evalu-
ation in Agriculture (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1987). The introductory chapter summarizes these topics in the context
set by the companion volume, which documented the importance of
monitoring and recommended that ambitious evaluations be done only
selectively.
Later chapters in this book further explain the data collection and anal-
ysis techniques referred to in the companion volume. The book is thus se-
lective; it does not provide comprehensive coverage of all methods. Fur-
thermore, for those methods it does cover it advocates simplicity and
economy, which we believe are necessary given the limited resources of
many development projects.
We emphasize qualitative interviewing methods because most moni-
toring and evaluation efforts will need to use them for limited,
nonrandom coverage of respondents. Our examples of sample theory
and sample selection, conversely, are mainly in terms of rates of adoption
and similar indicators because most projects require moderate-size ran-
dom samples to monitor such rates. In a similar vein, we advocate greater
reliance on farmer estimates when discussing crop production and yield,
for we are concerned with this issue in the context of project beneficiary
responses rather than of aggregate national or regional estimates.
Finally, we make no apology for the very simple treatment of data
analysis issues. We know that many of our readers, isolated at a project
site, seek a source of simple calculation procedures and simple guidelines
for constructing tables. And some of the simple rules frequently are bro-
ken by even sophisticated analysts with libraries of textbooks.
Because each chapter deals with a specific area of data collection, anal-
ysis, or use, it is somewhat discrete and autonomous. Although there is
some logic to the chapter sequence, the book is meant to be consulted as a
particular issue arises rather than read straight through. In order, the sub-
jects covered are qualitative data collection methods; structured surveys
I
<<<PAGE=14>>>
2 Introduction
and sampling and crop measurement problems; preliminary, exploratory
data analysis; formal analysis; and data presentation.
Purposes of Data Gathering
The data gathered for monitoring and evaluation have three purposes:
description, explanation, and prediction. These purposes are not mutu-
ally exclusive; rather, there is a logical progression from the first to the
last. The description of a phenomenon or process is the first step toward
explaining its nature, underlying causes, relationships, and context. And
prediction usually, though not always, requires both description and
explanation.
Descriptive data answer questions of who, when, and where but not of
how or why, which would require probing into causes. The data gener-
ated for physical and financial monitoring are the best examples of de-
scriptive data. Although they record progress, describe the relationship
between expenditure and achievement of the physical targets, and iden-
tify possible deviations from the planned course, they do not shed light
on the reasons for progress or the lack of it. Most of the data from benefi-
ciary contact monitoring are also descriptive.
An explanation requires an extrapolation of a cause and effect relation-
ship; the investigator tries to understand why a phenomenon, process, or
event occurred or did not occur. In diagnostic studies, we search for an ex-
planation. For example, when project staff are trying to find out why
farmers in the project area are not responding positively to a technical
package which has proved highly successful elsewhere, they are search-
ing for factors and conditions that shed light on this unexpected phe-
nomenon. They are seeking to answer the question of why.
The presence of a large number of factors and conditions interacting
with one another in a changing environment makes it difficult to estab-
lish a causal relationship in the study of economic and social phenomena.
What we generally get is a reasonable indication of a strong association
between a set of variables in a temporal sequence, which is logically justi-
fiable. This, we suggest, is more than sufficient for most project evalua-
tion situations.
In the past, the ambition to establish causal relationships on the basis
of hard, empirical data often led to unrealistic evaluation designs which
were beyond the capability of monitoring and evaluation resources and
proved unsuccessful. We stress throughout the companion volume the
need to have realistic expectations for evaluations.
Predictions are based on an understanding of the causes of events.
Project staff are usually not involved in long-range predictions about the
outcomes of a project or its components. In most cases, they do not go be-
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Qualitative and Quantitative Data 3
yond making short-term projections that take into consideration a few
variables.
The above primary uses of information-description, explanation,
and prediction-affect the overall design, scope, and modes of data col-
lection and the analysis. More specifically, the data gathered in monitor-
ing and evaluation are used:
* To monitor physical and financial progress. The data required for
physical and financial monitoring are usually available in project
records and documents. The primary focus in this particular case is
with the collation, rather than with the collection, of data, and with
its analysis.
* To examine the responses of the project beneficiaries to the services
and inputs being provided by the project. To do this requires struc-
tured surveys designed to answer questions on beneficiaries' knowl-
edge of, reaction to, and future use of project inputs and services.
Here the data collection methodology is the principal issue; analysis
of such data as adoption rates is relatively simple.
* To study specific implementation problems facing a project with a
view to diagnosing their cause and suggesting practical solutions.
Such investigations, called diagnostic studies, are to be undertaken
from scratch and completed within a matter of weeks rather than
months so that timely, relevant information and recommendations
are available. A blend of data collection methods may be appropri-
ate, but qualitative information will almost certainly be required.
* To assess (or predict) the effects of the project on production. Two
questions are raised in this regard: Was any change in levels of pro-
duction or yield detected? Can such a change be attributed to project
intervention?
* To assess the socioeconomic impact of the project, particularly by
collecting and interpreting data on income, living standards, peo-
ples' participation, and the environment. Such data raise the most
complex issues of all the data requirements, which is why we advo-
cate selectivity in conducting such studies and practical, limited ob-
jectives for them.
Qualitative and Quantitative Data
There are two types of data collection methods: qualitative and quantita-
tive. The most obvious distinction between the two is that quantitative
methods produce numerical data and qualitative methods result in infor-
mation which can best be described in words. Examples of the latter are
"descriptions of situations, events, people, interactions and observed be-
<<<PAGE=16>>>
4 Introduction
haviors; direct quotations from people ... and excerpts or entire passages
from documents, correspondence, records and case studies."
Moreover, qualitative methods focus on the signs and symbols that de-
code the reality seen by the target population. This is reflected during
data collection. Suppose in response to the same question two farmers
give the identical answer: 'If I had money, I would purchase a small trac-
tor to plow my fields.' The interviewer in a structured survey will code
the farmers' responses identically, for both said the same thing. If quali-
tative methods are used, however, the investigator will be more cautious
and will also examine the context and manner in which they spoke. In
other words, an attempt will be made to see if the two farmers meant the
same thing. Both verbal and nonverbal behavior are examined in qualita-
tive studies in order to understand the views, attitudes, and perspectives
of the respondents.
Finally, qualitative methods are iterative. There is an ongoing opportu-
nity to revise interview protocols, guides, and observation record forms
as the study progresses and new facts are brought to light. Even the un-
derlying framework can undergo significant changes at the stage of data
collection. Such iteration is not common in the collection of quantitative
data. The enumerators in a structured survey, for example, are not usu-
ally expected to ask additional questions, even if they feel such questions
will provide useful information. Nor are they allowed to discard an inter-
view, even if they have a hunch that the respondent did not give candid
answers.
The most widely used method for collecting quantitative data is the
structured survey, which entails administering a written questionnaire to
a sample of respondents. Such surveys can be done at one point in time or
at various intervals. The latter are useful for discerning changes and
trends in yields, productivity, and the standard of living of the target
population. The advantages of structured surveys are that the interview
mode and construction of questions can be standardized on the basis of
experience so that the size of biases introduced by either the enumer-
ator's style or the respondent's misunderstanding is controlled. Further-
more, if sampling theory is used to select the respondents, the sample re-
sults can be used to derive estimates for the whole population within
known margins of probable error.
Quantitative data may be obtainable from the records of project agen-
cies and other institutions. Statistical offices may have extensive data on
file which can be recoded, aggregated, disaggregated, and reanalyzed for
diagnostic studies and impact evaluations. Such data must be used with
caution because serious errors can result from differences in the defini-
1. Michael Q. Patton, Qualitative Evaluation Methods (Beverly Hills, Calif.:
Sage, 1980).
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Qualitative and Quantitative Data 5
tions of main variables or in the circumstances in which the data were
collected.
One method of obtaining qualitative data is to conduct in-depth inter-
views with individual respondents. In such interviews, the interviewer
gently probes the respondent, which permits them to have a conversa-
tion in which ideas flow freely. The interviewer must, however, take elab-
orate notes. Such interviews can be conducted with a few well-informed
persons called "key informants" or with ordinary members of the target
population. Village leaders, tribal chiefs, extension workers, teachers,
and local government officials generally make good key informants.
A second qualitative method is group interviews. These are usually of
two types: community meetings and focused group discussions. The for-
mer are open to all adults in the community or village. They are usually
well attended if sufficient notice is given. Such meetings are best con-
ducted by a team of two or three interviewers, who address queries to the
participants. Focused group discussions are sessions for a small number
of invited participants, who discuss a topic among themselves. The inter-
viewer simply stimulates the discussion and keeps it focused on a desired
topic.
A third qualitative method, participant observation, involves direct,
extensive observation of an activity, behavior, or relationship. Participant
observation can also include qualitative interviews with the informants.
The merit of this approach is that the investigator gets an inside picture of
the situation as seen by the people involved.
Most information systems within projects require the collection of
both quantitative and qualitative data. Choosing the right method for
each particular data need is a principal responsibility of the monitoring
and evaluation staff; both kinds of data have their strengths and weak-
nesses.
Quantitative data are obviously needed when a number, rate, or pro-
portion related to the target population must be estimated or a variable
such as crop production must be measured. Qualitative data are needed
when the attitudes, beliefs, and perceptions of the target population
must be known in order to understand its reactions to project services.
The decision whether to gather quantitative or qualitative data in a par-
ticular case also influences decisions regarding the scale of the survey and
the procedures for selecting respondents. Qualitative methods are best
used with small numbers of individuals or groups-which may well be
sufficient for understanding the human perceptions and behaviors which
are the main justification for a qualitative approach. Moreover, the selec-
tion of the individuals or groups may be done deliberately according to re-
quired characteristics rather than at random from the population.
If quantitative inferences about the population or a section of it must
be made, however, a random selection of a somewhat larger number of
<<<PAGE=18>>>
6 Introduction
respondents dispersed throughout the population will be necessary.
Many options exist as to how to design such a sample (these are intro-
duced briefly in chapter 6). Complex sample designs may occasionally be
necessary, but the design usually should be simple.
One other decision may be linked to the choice of data collection
method: how broad or narrow the study should be. One may restrict the
study to the collection and analysis of only the essential variables of in-
terest. Or one may wish to interview respondents about a broad range of
issues so as to be able to explore relationships and reactions that may un-
expectedly turn out to be relevant.
The companion volume states that data collection for monitoring and
evaluation should be limited in scope and sharply focused. The reasons
for this-constraints on skills, time, and budgets-are described in the
next section. Certainly the number of variables in quantitative surveys
should be kept to a minimum. Data collection to supply a management
information system is not meant to be done with general-purpose,
multisubject surveys.
In the case of qualitative studies, there is more justification for a broad,
in-depth pursuit of a subject. Even in such cases, however, the study
should limit its range to the subject of concern rather than try to cover a
wide range of subjects on the grounds that multiple purposes may be
served within a single inquiry. Multisubject qualitative studies tend to be
vaguely conducted and result in poor data.
Constraints on Options for the Collection of Data
A common constraint on the options at each stage of the process of de-
signing a system to collect data is the level of available resources. The old
saying that one should cut one's suit to fit one's cloth is apt. It is fruitless
to design a data collection operation to reach a widely dispersed sample
of respondents with the use of questionnaires and in-depth interviewing
techniques if neither the logistic resources to manage such an operation
nor the skills to collect and observe accurate data are available.
Clearly, the options and tradeoffs in the design of an operation to col-
lect data are not reviewed and decided upon only according to criteria of
theory and precision. One must have the resources to collect the data on
the scale envisaged and in the time required and the resources to turn the
data into useful information. Available funding is clearly important, but
money alone is not the main issue. Survey management skills will be the
vital-and in many cases limiting-factor, for these will be in shortest
supply. If a small unit within a project has limited survey experience and
skills, it should concentrate on simple monitoring, contact-type surveys
rather than ambitiously embark upon a complex longitudinal study of
socioeconomic variables that will be doomed to failure by poor data re-
sulting from indifferent questionnaire design and inadequate interview-
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Data Analysis and Interpretation 7
ing skills. In such a case, this limit must be clearly recognized and under-
stood by data users and collectors alike at the planning stage. This is the
principal theme of the companion volume.
Another basic constraint on available options is the time within which
the data must be collected and analyzed. This very real issue is ignored
extraordinarily often. The companion volume comments on a number of
surveys that collected data over several seasons for an ambitious analysis
requiring a time series that outstripped the life of the project. There may
be a case for such a patient endeavor if there will be users outside the
management of the project. But surveys usually are justified as a means
of producing information to improve the implementation of the project.
We have said elsewhere that information required to help managers
make decisions becomes valueless-however accurate-if it is provided
after the decisions have been made. This can frequently impose a very
tight time limit on a monitoring officer attempting to carry out a diagnos-
tic study. Methodology may have to be ad hoc: there may be no time for
adequate sample frame preparation; the number of respondents may
have to be limited; and the interviews may have to be conducted by the
monitoring officer and a couple of trusted aides rather than a bevy of
field staff. Monitoring officers must be flexible and pragmatic, but this is
acceptable as long as all parties are aware of the constraints that have
been applied and the inferential limitations thus imposed.
The converse of course is also true. If time is not a constraint, then the
senior staff should give the preparatory phases of data collection the at-
tention and care they merit. The design of questionnaires is a prime ex-
ample: insufficient time for design and a failure to test the draft are com-
monplace, even when time is available for these vital steps. Should a
survey require the use of junior enumerators, training for them is another
preparatory aspect that must not be skimped on. However skillful the de-
sign of the questionnaire and however enthusiastic the enumerators, if
they go into the field less than totally confident and with less than a total
grasp of the entire range of the interview and methodology concerned,
the survey will fail. Bringing the enumerators to this level takes consider-
ably longer than many people suppose. The length of training obviously
depends on the complexity of the survey. It does not take very long to
train an enumerator to conduct a simple interview on the adoption of a
particular recommendation, but it may take two weeks to train a limited
number of enumerators to measure land areas and crop yields and to in-
terview farmers regarding their marketing behavior.
Data Analysis and Interpretation
The companion volume emphasized repeatedly that the only justifica-
tion for collecting data is that they will be used for a specific purpose that
has been clearly identified and agreed upon in advance. Even if the ap-
<<<PAGE=20>>>
8 Introduction
propriate data are collected and processed accurately, analysis and inter-
pretation are essential if they are to be used to facilitate decisionmaking.
This may seem a tautological statement, yet there are many examples of
valuable data rendered valueless by an inability to turn them into usable
information.
At one extreme, there is a total failure to carry out analysis if a com-
puter is used to prepare basic, voluminous tabulations and these are
passed on to managers as if they constituted information rather than
merely regurgitated data from a machine. At the other extreme, there is
an excess of analysis if complex statistical techniques are applied in order
to fit relationship functions and distill the data down to regression coeffi-
cients and significance-level statements. Often these techniques go be-
yond what is required, are misapplied to data that do not meet the sta-
tistical conditions, and result in coefficients that the user does not
understand.
Monitoring staff should pay much greater attention to simple explora-
tory analysis and to carefully presented tabular material. There are occa-
sions when more advanced analytical techniques are demanded, but
even then they should be used only if their theoretical basis and the con-
ditions that validate their use are fully understood. We discuss these mat-
ters in chapter 9.
The decision whether computers are needed to help maintain and use
the management information system is one that most monitoring and
evaluation staff and their project managers have to make in these days of
easily accessible, inexpensive microcomputers. Computerization should
be considered carefully during project preparation as part of designing
the information system; it should not be undertaken automatically-as is
now frequently done. As the staffs of many current projects-particu-
larly those involving extensive data collection-have found, computeri-
zation is almost assumed. But computerization alone does not guarantee
the smooth function of data operations; it often causes delays and prob-
lems. Computerization also absorbs both scarce capital and manpower in
many projects that could be devoted to other important tasks.
Recommendations on computerization can be summarized by the fol-
lowing statements:
* If an existing manual system works efficiently and no extensive data
gathering is required, computerization is not an immediate concern.
* If report preparation is a big problem, and many revisions are needed
before final approval, some word processing capability should be
considered (plans for expansion to include data processing should be
taken into account at this stage).
* If data will be collected extensively for several years and analyzed in-
tensively and quantitatively, plans should be made for computeriza-
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Data Analysis and Interpretation 9
tion. In the case of survey data processing, if sample sizes are in the
hundreds, a large number of variables are required, and there are
many repetitive calculations, computerization provides a definite
advantage.
* If computerization is contemplated, detailed plans for organizing
and operating the system should be made while the information sys-
tem is being designed.
* There should be provision for backup to the system in case of major
breakdowns; maintenance contracts should be established with ven-
dors and should include provisions for equipment loans.
* To meet the needs for skilled staff to operate a computerized system,
the project should have a minimum of two specialists able to main-
tain service continuity.
* Training should be provided not only to computer staff but to other
staff who use the system regularly, and this training should be a con-
tinuing process to keep trained persons up to date.
Whereas it is possible to introduce the reader to the analytical tools
used to handle numerical data, the analysis of qualitative information is a
different matter. Certain indicators may be derived from data that can be
treated in a quasi-numerical manner. As will be seen in the following
three chapters, however, most learning from qualitative interviews is ob-
tained by writing descriptive summaries and collating and sorting these
summaries into categories of response. The best advice we can offer the
inexperienced in this context is the same that might be offered to a bud-
ding writer: read many examples by respectable practitioners of the art.2
2. A good starting point is Matthew B. Miles and A. Michael Huberman, Quali-
tative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook of New Methods (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage,
1984).
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Qualitative Interviewing of
2 Individual Informants
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT SOURCES of information for monitor-
ing and evaluating agriculture and rural development projects is qualita-
tive interviews. Qualitative interviews with project participants and
other key informants help in understanding the complex ecological, soci-
ological, cultural, and other situations with which the project must deal.
They can also provide an in-depth understanding of the perspectives,
attitudes, and behavior patterns of the target population, which will not
be fully captured by other modes of data gathering. Moreover, qualita-
tive interviews can be used to generate hypotheses and propositions
which can then be tested on a wider population using a structured ques-
tionnaire.
The potential of qualitative interviews has not been fully realized by
monitoring and evaluation staff. Most of them, trained in agricultural
economics or statistics, are more familiar with quantitative data collec-
tion and analysis procedures and have not been exposed to qualitative
methodology. Both the staff and project managers tend to be suspicious
of information based on qualitative interviews; it is considered 'soft,' im-
pressionistic, and not able to carry as much weight as numerical esti-
mates derived from structured surveys. Project monitoring and evalua-
tion would benefit if this neglect were corrected. To do so would require
monitoring and evaluation staff to develop skills in qualitative interview-
ing. A conscious effort would also need to be made to encourage
decisionmakers to realize the utility of qualitative information. This
chapter thus focuses on qualitative interviews of individuals. It presents
the general typology of qualitative interviews, guidelines for conducting
them, and their limitations. The next chapter describes a particular vari-
ant, group interviews.
Types of Qualitative Interviews
Qualitative interviews are distinct from the more familiar structured in-
terviews, which use a formal questionnaire administered by enumerators
10
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Types of Interviews 11
trained only to ask preset questions. There are some similarities-in each
case a respondent must be approached and his' cooperation elicited-
but there are essential differences in their nature, the techniques used,
the role of the interviewer, and the type of analysis conducted. Qualita-
tive interviews are not limited by a set of predetermined questions to be
asked in a given sequence; instead, an interview guide lists the topics to
be covered. If certain questions are agreed upon in advance, they are
posed in an open-ended way to encourage free conversation and inserted
in the interview as the conversation flows. The interviewer enjoys a piv-
otal role in qualitative interviews; without a formal questionnaire, it is
possible to pursue avenues that open as the interview develops. Another
difference is that the information generated by qualitative interviews is
not usually in the form of numerical or coded data but is contained in
notes and summary transcriptions. This is both an advantage and a dis-
advantage.
Qualitative interviews are usually classified according to three broad
types: informal, conversational; topic-focused; and semistructured,
open-ended.
Informal, Conversational Interviews
In informal, conversational interviews, the interviewer enjoys complete
freedom and flexibility to explore a broad subject with the respondents,
who are encouraged to share their views, experiences, values, and inf or-
mation. Issues as they emerge can be further pursued by the interviewer.
The interviewer takes few notes during the interview so as to preserve the
informal atmosphere.
Despite outward appearances, such interviews must be more than ca-
sual conversations. The interviewer has a purpose in mind and must con-
trol the conversation to serve that purpose. For example, the monitoring
staff of a project talk with several farmers in the project area to gain a bet-
ter understanding of the farmers' problems in obtaining short-term
credit. The talks cover many topics and issues not directly related to
credit, but are guided so as to provide insight into farming and local is-
sues that affect the way the farmers perceive their credit needs and the
means of satisfying these needs.
This type of interview has several limitations. First, it can be very time-
consuming; the conversation can become unfocused and wander around
in circles as the respondent expresses views on many issues unrelated to
the inquiry. Second, information gathered from one respondent may not
be comparable with that from another. When respondents focus on
1. Throughout this book, "he," 'his," "manpower," and so on are used
generically and are not meant to imply sexual bias.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
12 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
different issues, it becomes difficult to assess whether or not broad agree-
ment exists on any one of them. This problem is aggravated when several
interviewers are involved. Third, this type of interview is highly suscepti-
ble to 'interviewer effect": because the setting is informal, the respondent
is more prone to be influenced by the personality and views of the inter-
viewer. For example, if the interviewer is particularly warm and friendly,
the respondent may reciprocate by avoiding strongly negative state-
ments.
The main strength of this type of interview is that a wide range of is-
sues may emerge-some of which may have been unforeseen by project
staff. When the interview is handled with skill, much may be revealed
that would not be volunteered in more formal settings. The informal in-
terview is especially useful for diagnostic studies when the problem that
project managers see emerging was unforeseen and project staff know no
obvious reasons for it.
Topic-Focused Interviews
Topic-focused interviews are conducted using an interview guide which
lists the main topics and subtopics to be covered (see example 1). The in-
terviewer, however, exercises discretion in using the guide; he chooses
how to phrase questions, asks them in a way that permits a smooth flow
of conversation, and dwells in detail on matters which particularly excite
the respondent's interest. Although the guide is used, it does not unduly
constrain flexibility in pursuing the conversation.
The interview guide can also provide general instructions to the inter-
viewer, especially when several interviewers conduct a single study. It is
important that the initial list of topics and subtopics be limited; other-
wise, there will be insufficient time for in-depth and candid discussions.
But it should not be so brief that relevant items are excluded. The guide it-
self can be drawn up on the basis of issues raised in a small preliminary
study which uses informal, conversational interviews.
EXAMPLE 1. A Guide for a Topic-Focused Interview
A project is promoting the planting of an improved variety of maize that re-
quires the special application of fertilizer. Monitoring data indicate that the
demand for the new seed and fertilizer is not increasing as predicted. The
monitoring and evaluation staff are therefore asked to elicit the farmers' rea-
sons for nonadoption.
The interview guide would list topics and subtopics similar to the follow-
ing:
* The farmer's understanding of the composition of the technical package.
(What is it all about? What does it involve? What steps are necessary if one
intends to adopt it?)
<<<PAGE=25>>>
Types of Interviews 13
* The farmer's perceptions regarding the advantages and costs of the tech-
nical package. (What may be gained by cultivating the new variety? Is it
economically profitable? What investments does it require?)
* The farmer's judgment concerning the relevance of the package. (Are
there constraints on land, credit, or labor that prevent him from adopting
it?)
* Thefarmer's views regarding the availability of services. (Does thefarmer
think he could obtain the needed inputs? What confidence does he have in
the available extension advice?)
* The farmer's assessment of the risks involved. (Is the new variety seen as
less reliable than the traditional variety? Are there consumption, prepa-
ration, or palatability problems associated with the new variety? On
what basis does he make such an assessment?)
* The farmer's assessment of the potential rewards. (Is he interested in in-
creasing production given existing prices?)
* Background information. (Availability of labor in the household, size of
holding, cropping patterns, and so on.)
The interviewer will have complete freedom to cover the above topics and
subtopics in any order which seems appropriate in a given case. But all the
items listed in the interview guide should be covered. More time, however,
should be spent discussing issues about which the respondent has particu-
larly emphatic feelings, and those in which the respondent has no interest can
be passed by quickly.
If thefarners are classified into those who have never used the new variety,
those who tried and rejected it, and those who are currently using it, different
guides can be provided for each type.
Topic-focused interviews have at least two advantages over the more
informal type. First, since all the interviewers cover the same topics, the
data generated are more comparable. Therefore the analysis will be able
to indicate the relative priority of various issues: in example 1, the major-
ity of the informants could have indicated that they were not in a position
to take the risks involved or suggested that the taste of the new variety of
maize was not acceptable to their families. Second, the discussions stay
within the context of the subject of interest and thus save time.
Semistructured, Open-ended Interviews
Semistructured, open-ended interviews are the most structured form of
qualitative interviewing. They use an open-ended questionnaire which
lists the specific questions to be asked.
Semistructured interviews superficially resemble the interviews con-
ducted for structured surveys but differ from them in three main ways.
First, the questions are open-ended; respondents are encouraged to ex-
<<<PAGE=26>>>
14 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
press themselves fully rather than respond to a predetermined list of op-
tions. Second, the sequence of the questions is not predetermined; the in-
terviewer is still allowed to exercise discretion in controlling the course of
the interview. Third, additional questions can be asked in order to pursue
interesting leads.
Semistructured, open-ended interviews have several strengths. First,
the information obtained specifically answers certain questions that
project managers wish to address. Second, the information from various
respondents is comparable enough to determine the simple frequency of
responses, although the main emphasis will continue to be placed on the
in-depth understanding provided by the respondents. Third, compared
with the other types of qualitative interviews, success is less dependent
upon the interviewer's interpersonal communication skills and grasp of
the subject. Fourth, this type of qualitative interview can be conducted
more quickly than the others.
The most serious limitation of this type of survey is that when the in-
terviews are conducted by others than the initiating project officer or sur-
vey designer the interviewers tend to confine themselves to the written
questions only-they do not pursue promising leads and thus in effect
conduct a fully structured interview. The value of the information gener-
ated is then too dependent on the quality of the questionnaire.
Combining Types of Qualitative Interviews
The types of qualitative interviews just described can be combined in a
single investigation. For example, an informal, conversational interview
can be immediately followed by a set of semistructured, open-ended
questions.
The following factors and conditions should be considered in the se-
lection of the interview type or mix of various types:
* The nature of the information required. Obviously, if comparable in-
formation on a few specified topics is the requirement, the semi-
structured, open-ended format should be preferred. When a deeper
understanding of the respondent's perspective is called for, other
forms are more suitable.
* The skills and expertise of the interviewer. Conversational and topic-
focused interviews usually require the interviewer to have a high
level of interpersonal communication skills and a good grasp of the
subject. These skills are often in short supply and thus have a high
opportunity cost. Semistructured interviews require a somewhat
lower level of professional skills.
* The background of the respondent. Experience has shown that con-
versational and topic-focused interviews are preferable for well-
<<<PAGE=27>>>
Guidelines 15
informed respondents capable of clearly articulating their view-
points. Such informants feel constrained by a formal question-and-
answer interview.
* The nature of analysis and presentation that is needed to carry credi-
bility with the decisionmakers.
* Time constraints. Informal, conversational interviews are undoubt-
edly the most time-consuming; indeed, they are most useful when
carried out in several sessions.
Guidelines for Qualitative Interviews
Sociologists, anthropologists, and applied farm study economists have
contributed a considerable literature on qualitative interviews. Some
general guidelines for these interviews have been developed, although
they are not as formal as those for structured surveys. The following are
particularly relevant for studies in the rural sector.
Initial Contact
The initial contact is very important for any type of interview. But estab-
lishing a basis for easy communication with the respondent is particularly
important for a qualitative interview, in which it is hoped that the respon-
dent will frankly state his views, perceptions, and concerns.
The appearance, style, and manner of introduction adopted by the in-
terviewer do make a difference. Dress should be appropriate to the
setting-expensive clothes, for example, are out of place on a farm and
may emphasize the different status of respondent and interviewer. The
interviewer's language should be free from jargon, unnecessary technical
terms, and pedantic forms of expression.
The purpose and scope of the inquiry must be carefully explained in a
way tailored to the needs of the particular audience. Before government
officials and professionals are interviewed, the purpose of the inquiry
and relevant specifics can be given in some detail, albeit succinctly. When
approaching project participants, however, details may be confusing; a
brief statement of the main purpose and scope may suffice-together
with such promises of confidentiality as can be offered.
Sequencing of the Questions
It is polite to begin with general conversation; for example, the inter-
viewer could ask about the children (if they are around), cultural events
(if they are being planned), or any subject which might interest the re-
spondent. The interviewer in turn should volunteer information about
<<<PAGE=28>>>
16 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
his own background, family, and experiences to help the informant to
place him in a familiar social category. Such preliminary conversation
helps overcome any initial reservations of the respondent.
The interview itself should then begin with simple questions that re-
quire neither further interpretation nor lengthy recall on the part of the re-
spondent. Questions such as 'Are you a member of the farmers' club?,"
'Do you participate in meetings of the club?,' and 'How many normally at-
tend a club meeting?" are factual and in most cases uncontroversial.
Care is needed when moving on to more sensitive questions. Consider
example 2.
EXAMPLE 2. An Interview Involving Sensitive Questions
An agency responsible for the distribution of fertilizers is performing
poorly. Evaluation staff have been requested to conduct in-depth interviews
with agency officials in order to learn the causes of the problem. Such an in-
terview might begin:
"I know little about the delivery system that has been set up except what I
have read in project documents. So let us start from scratch. When did you re-
ally start operating?"
Once the informant has given a brief history-which probably will intro-
duce some of the problems faced by the organization-a noncommittal com-
ment can be made, such as, "Oh, so you havefaced a lot of difficulties. Can you
be more specific about the problem of ?' This will keep the dis-
cussion going. The informant is likely to introduce more detail. Gradually, the
probing can begin, with questions such as, "How do you think this [problem]
has affected the performance of your organization?"
Now the core of the interview commences.
As a rule of thumb, only after an informant has described some event
or activity should the interviewer proceed to ask for his opinions, feel-
ings, and explanations. For example, only when the informant has de-
scribed the working of an organization should the interviewer ask for his
own evaluation of its performance.
As far as possible, the interviewer should begin with the present and
then move to questions about the future or past. Answers about the past
suffer from lapses of memory and recall biases. Questions about the fu-
ture are speculative and cause many respondents to be hesitant.
Wording of Questions
By definition, qualitative interviews require the interviewer to frame
questions on the spur of the moment. Three major considerations should
be kept in mind.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
Guidelines 17
First and most obvious, the questions must be put in an understand-
able way. There may be significant variations in the style of language and
expressions used by different socioeconomic groups. Questions appro-
priate for senior officials may require rephrasing when addressed to vil-
lage chiefs.
Second, questions should be phrased in such a way as to elicit detailed
responses. One mistake often made is to ask questions that can be an-
swered by a simple yes or no. Such answers are often eminently suitable
for structured surveys but not for qualitative interviews, which are de-
signed to provide deeper meanings, in-depth descriptions, and expla-
nations.2 This danger is most evident when underprivileged groups are
interviewed. Nervousness and reticence tend to produce answers in sim-
ple yes or no terms. From the respondent's point of view, risk of contro-
versy is thus minimized and the interview may be shortened. Inex-
perienced interviewers try to solve the problem by offering lengthy
explanations themselves and then asking the respondent to agree or dis-
agree. Such a practice is highly unsatisfactory and may invalidate the in-
terview, for words are being put into the respondent's mouth. Table 1
gives a few examples of alternative wordings of questions that will pro-
duce either a brief or detailed response.
The third consideration is that two or more questions should not be put
simultaneously. This tends to confuse the respondent, who does not
know which question to answer first and in the process of answering one
will fail to answer the other. (We say more on the wording of questions in
the context of structured surveys in chapter 5.)
Role Playing
In order to make abstract questions more concrete, and thus facilitate em-
pathy and communication, the respondent can be asked to assume a spe-
cific role. For example, 'What should be the duties of an agricultural ex-
tension worker?' may evoke a more considered response if the question is
reworded as: "Suppose you are appointed as an agricultural extension
worker; what would you do under the present circumstances?" The re-
phrased question will enable a farmer or village chief to visualize the role
more vividly.
Role playing can help to reduce embarrassment in responding to sensi-
tive questions. Investigators studying deviant behavior often use this
technique to obtain information. They do not ask a drug dealer how he
secures cocaine. Rather, they ask him: 'Suppose somebody wants to pro-
cure cocaine. How would he get it in an area like this?' When interview-
2. This point is well elucidated by Michael Q. Patton in Qualitative Evaluation
Methods (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1980), pp. 213-19.
<<<PAGE=30>>>
18 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
Table 1. Form of Questions Leading to Varying Responses
Leading to Leading to detailed
yes or no response response
Have you heard of the extension What do you know about the exten-
services operating here? sion services operating in this area?
Do you think that if you use What is your view about the likely
your production of result of using
maize will increase?
It is sometimes said that the market- What is your view regarding the
ing agency only deals with large way the marketing agency operates?
farmers. Is this true?
Has the program been successful? What effects has the program had
on you? On your neighbors?
Do you have difficulty in obtaining Please describe how you go about
[specify inputs]. obtaining the [specify inputs].
Would you grow more What would be the effect on
if the government if the government
raised the price? raised the price?
ing a farmer about crop sales in a situation that has constraints on who
may legally buy, the question is better put thus: 'Suppose you were a
grower who was looking for the best price. How ... ?" A candid answer
may still not be forthcoming, but the chances of it are improved.
A variant of this technique is for the interviewer to assume a role. For
example, a question might be put as follows: 'Suppose I am the manager
of a cooperative store. What would you like me to do?' Or, 'What advice
would you give me to improve the running of the cooperative store?'
Respondents should be asked to assume only roles with which they
can readily identify. It is unwise to ask a farmer, "What would you do if
you were the minister of agriculture?' The respondent may regard the
question either as a joke or, worse, as holding him up to ridicule.
Probing
Skillful probing is essential in seeking elaborations, details, or clarifica-
tions. The success of a qualitative interview largely depends upon the ca-
pacity of the interviewer to probe without annoying the respondent.
Some have the natural ability to do this successfully, but for many train-
ing and experience are necessary. The conversational tone must be main-
tained; the respondent must not feel cross-examined.
When more details are required on a point raised by the respondent,
signals can be given to encourage elaboration. A nod of the head or a sim-
ple yes may be sufficient to spur the respondent on. If not, remarks such
<<<PAGE=31>>>
Guidelines 19
as 'This is a crucial subject, and I would appreciate it if you would give me
more details' or 'I am getting the picture, please continue" are usually
sufficient to provide the needed stimulus.
It is often necessary to encourage the respondent to be more specific. A
reply such as 'Oh, farmers like me do not get credit from the cooperative
society" can be followed by probes such as 'Do you know of a specific
case in which someone was denied credit? When did it happen?' Simple
questions such as "How did it happen?," When did it happen?," "Where
did it happen?,' or "To whom did it happen?" draw the respondent into
the desired specificity.
The interviewer should never give the impression that he considers the
respondent inarticulate. On the contrary, he must assume blame for fail-
ing to understand a comment such as "I am sorry, I missed the point. Will
you kindly repeat it?" or he must rephrase the question to stimulate a re-
vised answer. If a clear answer is not obtained after a second attempt, the
question should not be pursued. Perhaps the respondent has nothing to
say or does not want to say it. Persistence can be dysfunctional in such a
case. If the question is important, a further attempt may be justified later
in the interview.
Controlling Conversations
Interviewers encounter situations in which the respondent gives long
and seemingly irrelevant answers. For example, a question on the effec-
tiveness of a marketing agency produces a discourse on corruption in
public institutions. It is important that the interviewer seek to understand
what the respondent is trying to communicate here; indirect answers
may convey pertinent ideas and issues which the interviewer has over-
looked. The respondent who mentions corruption is perhaps hinting that
financial irregularities exist in the marketing agency but is careful to
avoid saying it openly. Points which appear to be marginal or irrelevant at
first can come to be regarded as significant and relevant in later analysis.
Some conversations, however, go seriously off the point and if not con-
trolled will waste time. One step is to cease giving the respondent cues to
continue talking. Stop nodding the head, saying yes, or taking notes.
Glance away, breaking eye contact. Most respondents are sensitive to
such nonverbal reactions, but if such attempts are unsuccessful interrupt
with statements such as "What you said is very enlightening and I under-
stand your point; now I would like to know. .. or "What you have said
prompts me to ask another question." We stress the obvious point that the
interruption must be made without giving offense.
Neutral Attitude
An interviewer should be both a sympathetic listener and a neutral ob-
server; he should avoid giving the impression of having strong views on
<<<PAGE=32>>>
20 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
the subject under discussion. This neutral attitude should not be a mere
facade; the respondent is entitled to his own views-the interviewer's
role lies in eliciting them. Despite occasional temptations, attempts to
convert the respondent to a point of view must be avoided.
Several strategies can be pursued for dealing with controversial issues.
One is to stress that the purpose is to search for information and that the
interviewer will be able to form an accurate judgment only when the
study is over. Such a posture, though evasive, can reassure the respon-
dent. It may of course require that the interviewer try to distance himself
from specific activities of the project to which he is formally attached.
A second strategy, known as the illustrative example format, consists
of stafing both sides of the issue to demonstrate familiarity with it with-
out taking sides. For example, consider a series of in-depth interviews
with farmers who have not repaid their loans to the agricultural credit
bank. Besides assuring them that the interviewer has not come to collect
the loans or to persuade them to repay the balance, the interviewer can
also state an appreciation of both sides of the issue. On the one hand, the
bank is right when it insists that those who borrowed should strictly fol-
low the terms of the contract. On the other hand, the interviewer can
sympathize with borrowers who are not in a position to repay. Therefore,
he has come to understand the problems which have placed them in this
unfortunate position.
A third strategy is to candidly express one's views and engage in an
honest dialog. This strategy is rewarding only when the informant is
knowledgeable and does not feel constrained in expressing his opinions.
Although an interviewer can follow this course with government offi-
cials, experts, or project staff, he might not find it suitable in interviewing
small farmers, who are usually reluctant to say anything which can con-
tradict the visitor in any way.
Recording the Interview
The advantages of a well-conducted interview are lost if an adequate
record is not made either during or immediately after the interview (espe-
cially since the informal conversational interview is not conducive to note
taking during the conversation.)
The use of a tape recorder releases the interviewer from elaborate note
taking, but consideration is needed before using one with respondents
who are unaccustomed to it as it may lead to an unnatural response. Even
when a recorder is used, there are several reasons why notes should be
written up. First, the nonverbal behavior of the informant may be rele-
vant. For example, if the respondent becomes excited when discussing
the working of a participatory organization, this should be noted, for it
will be relevant when interpreting the interview data. Second, the inter-
<<<PAGE=33>>>
Reliability 21
viewer needs to note his own thoughts which are stimulated by the re-
plies of the informant. Third, in the event of a malfunction of the tape re-
corder, the interviewer can fall back on his notes.
When notes are taken during the interview, the questions need be
noted only by a code or number if an interview guide is used. The inter-
viewer should use quotation marks whenever he reproduces the lan-
guage of the informant. Quotes are helpful for writing reports and mak-
ing verbal presentations to decisionmakers, but it is important that they
be accurate, and they should be used very sparingly. As far as possible,
the interviewer should develop a system for noting down his own ideas,
responses, and feelings. Fresh ideas and insights stimulated by the re-
spondent's replies may be lost unless noted at the time. It is advisable to
write such comments in brackets in order to distinguish the interviewer's
ideas from those of the respondent.
There is a universal agreement among practitioners that the interview
should be written up as soon as possible-ideally, immediately following
the interview. Recall lapses are minimized in this way. Multiple inter-
views in one location should be spaced to allow the notes to be tran-
scribed after each one. Transcribing interviews from tapes is very tedious
and time-consuming. In any case, the real feel of an interview cannot be
captured without substantial editing and adding the interviewer's reac-
tions and impressions. We recommend that the interviewer listen to the
tape, supplement his notes on the basis of the verbatim recording, and
then prepare the summary of the interview, including a description of the
setting and the respondent's nonverbal behavior, credibility, and
knowledgeability.
Reliability of the Interview
How is the reliability of the information generated by a qualitative inter-
view to be assessed? How can we be sure that the respondent has pro-
vided accurate information? This problem, of course, is not unique to
qualitative interviewing; it is common in all types of interviews. But be-
cause of the subjective nature of the written summary, the issue of relia-
bility is particularly pertinent in this context. Because by definition there
is no totally objective test that can be applied in qualitative interview situ-
ations, judgment of reliability must be based on an assessment of
respondent-related factors. Some are described below.
Knowledge
Obviously, the first consideration is the knowledge that the respondent
may be expected to have (a particularly important point when interview-
ing key informants). Questions for a checklist include:
<<<PAGE=34>>>
22 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
* Is the respondent's knowledge of the matter direct and first-
hand?
* Is the respondent in a position to provide accurate information?
* If the respondent is relying on secondhand sources, are these sources
credible?
A respondent may be knowledgeable about some items and relatively
ignorant about others. For example, one trader may provide all pertinent
information about retail practices but not about the wholesale trade.
With another the reverse may be true. Therefore the interviewer should
ask himself the above questions with reference to each of the principal
subtopics in the interview.
Credibility
Some people have a tendency to boast; others have a fertile imagination
and unconsciously exaggerate; still others aim to enhance their self-
importance by giving misleading answers: the interviewer should there-
fore assess the respondent's credibility. Questions for a checklist include:
* Is the respondent eager to make strongly authoritative state-
ments?
* Does the respondent consider before replying and seem perceptive
about the issues?
. Are the respondent's answers based on practical considerations?
Ability and Willingness to Respond
Some respondents find it difficult to articulate their feelings, judgments,
and opinions to outsiders. This problem is compounded when the inter-
viewer comes from a higher socioeconomic stratum.
A slightly different problem is encountered with qualitative interviews
of senior officials who are pressed for time. Although they have the abil-
ity to express themselves, they have little time to go into details. Thus the
interviewer ends up with an incomplete picture, which can bias the
findings.
Ulterior Motives
Respondents may have an ulterior motive for providing inaccurate infor-
mation. Extension staff may exaggerate the performance and impact of
agricultural extension services. A health worker may magnify the prob-
lems encountered in reaching out to target populations. Staff directly in-
volved in project efforts have a professional stake in promoting their ac-
<<<PAGE=35>>>
Reliability 23
tivities and covering their shortcomings; often this bias is more
subconscious than a deliberate attempt to mislead. Questions for a
checklist include:
* Was the respondent trying to paint a positive picture?
* Was the respondent trying to rationalize a distasteful fact?
* Was the respondent dwelling excessively on problems and difficul-
ties in order to seek sympathy?
Bars to Spontaneity
The social context of the interview also affects the expression of ideas and
opinions by the respondents. For example, when a farmer is interviewed
in the presence of government officials or project staff, he might not re-
veal the truth because he is afraid to antagonize them.
Questions for a checklist on this include:
* Were there some people whose presence might have affected the re-
spondent's answers?
* Was he anxious that others might overhear him?
* Was the location private enough to ensure total confidentiality for
the interview?
Desire to Please
There is a tendency for respondents to give answers which they believe
the interviewer desires either from politeness or in the hope of shortening
the questioning. In such a case it is particularly important to avoid giving
the respondent clues regarding the interviewer's opinions. Questions for
a checklist include:
• Did the respondent show undue deference?
* Did the respondent seek the interviewer's opinion before reply-
ing?
* Did the interviewer say anything which silenced the respondent or
changed the thrust of his responses?
Other Factors
Finally, one should not forget that recent events might have influenced
the views expressed by the informant. Consider the case of a farmer
whose application for short-term loans has been turned down recently
by the project. Obviously his disappointment may be reflected in his as-
sessment of the project. The mental and physical states of the respondent
<<<PAGE=36>>>
24 Qualitative Interviewing of Individual Informants
also affect his responses. When he is tired, he can be irritable and react
negatively to questions. When he is in a good mood, he is likely to be
more patient with the interviewer.
General Respondents and Key Informants
Qualitative individual interviews can be conducted with both general
and key informants. The simple difference between them is that general
respondents primarily give information about themselves, whereas key
informants provide information about others or specific situations or
conditions existing in the area. The key informants are essentially knowl-
edgeable individuals who are in a position to provide relevant infor-
mation, ideas, and insights on a particular subject.
Experience has shown that village chiefs, teachers, traders, officials of
cooperatives, and local government officials make good key informants
in rural areas. They understand local customs, traditions, and social and
economic conditions and are able to express themselves well. At least
some of them can take an objective view of the issues. And even those
with a vested interest may prove to be useful if their allegiance and preju-
dices are taken into account in analyzing their observations.
Obviously, different studies necessitate key informants of different
backgrounds and experience recruited from varying occupational
groups, socioeconomic strata, and organizations. For example, for a
study of an agricultural extension service, extension staff, knowledge-
able farmers, agricultural specialists, and local government officials will
make excellent key informants.
Key informants should be carefully selected to reflect diverse view-
points and concerns. The ideal method is to identify various sources from
which the key informants for a study can be drawn and select a few from
each of them. If it is revealed during the course of the interviews that
there are persons who possess highly relevant information and ideas,
they can be added to the list of informants. Usually a key informant study
provides for interviews of fifteen to twenty-five respondents.
Limitations of Qualitative Interviews
We have referred to specific weaknesses of particular types of qualitative
interviews. But three general limitations of all qualitative interviews must
be borne in mind.
First, they do not generate quantitative data that can be summarized to
provide valid general estimates. Because the responses are so varied in
content and context (which is the strength of the method), it is difficult to
summarize the results in order to say, for example, that 60 percent of the
<<<PAGE=37>>>
Limitations 25
farmers are satisfied with the existing extension services or with the
credit institutions.
Second, it is rare for in-depth qualitative interviews to be used with
probability samples. By definition, key informants are a biased selection
from the general population. One common source of error in such inter-
views is that the investigators tend to have an elitist orientation and select
their informants on the basis of their social and economic status rather
than knowledge and experience. For example, it is not uncommon to rely
largely on village elites for understanding the problems of smallholders
or on government officials for understanding the problem of nonutiliza-
tion of credit by farmers.
Third, the findings are susceptible to biases which arise out of the inac-
curate or distorted judgments of the interviewers that result from their
shortcomings in cognitive processing. For example: the interviewer tends
to pick up information and ideas that confirm his preconceived notions;
he gives more importance to the views of the elites than to those infor-
mants of low socioeconomic status; and vivid descriptions and selective
data leave a greater imprint on him than do abstract ideas and explana-
tions.
Nevertheless, as we stated at the beginning of this chapter, qualitative
interviews are underused in most monitoring and evaluation systems.
When insight is needed on reasons for unexpected reactions by the target
population, such interviews can be extremely helpful.
<<<PAGE=38>>>
Conducting Group
3 Interviews
THE BASIC PRINCIPLES of qualitative interviews were introduced in the
previous chapter in the context of interviewing individuals, whether
general members of the population or key informants. Qualitative inter-
views can also be conducted with groups acting together and from indi-
viduals making up a group. Such interviews can be conducted by one or
more interviewers, with or without an interview guide, and with groups
of varying size and composition. Superficially, the difference between
individual and group interviews is the number of respondents participat-
ing in a single interview session; however, this basic difference leads to
major variations between them with regard to planning, the nature of in-
terview guides, probing techniques, and the control of discussions. We
discuss these variations in this chapter.'
There are two types of group interviews, community interviews (CIs),
to which all members of a community or village are invited, and focused
group interviews (FGIS), which are limited to a few selected individuals.
CIs are widely used by researchers in agriculture. They are conducted on
the basis of an interview guide and take the form of public meetings, usu-
ally called at short notice, with a large group (more than fifteen persons),
which limits the opportunity for discussion among all those present.
Only a small number of questions is asked, and each participant is not ex-
pected to answer all the questions individually. An interdisciplinary team
rather than a single interviewer is more effective in this situation.
An FGI, conversely, is conducted with a small group (six to ten partici-
pants). One of its distinguishing features is that the participants discuss
ideas, issues, insights, and experiences among themselves. Each member
is free to comment, criticize, or elaborate on the views expressed by the
previous speakers. The moderator (the word 'moderator' is more appro-
priate than "interviewer' in this case) guides the discussions using vari-
1. This chapter draws on a monograph by one of the authors, Krishna Kumar,
entitled Conducting Group Interviews in Developing Countries (Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Agency for International Development, 1987).
26
<<<PAGE=39>>>
Community Interviews 27
ous probing techniques. The participants are selected on the basis of cri-
teria, which vary depending on the objective of the inquiry (discussed
below).
There are three main reasons why group interviews may be preferable
to individual interviews for project monitoring and evaluation. First,
group interviews enable the investigator to gather information in a rapid
and economical manner. One can interview eight to ten persons in an
hour or two, whereas to interview them individually might take two or
three days. Although a group interview will not provide the same depth
of information that can be gained from individual interviews, a skilled in-
terviewer can obtain considerable information and understanding. Al-
though only a very small team is required, rather than a large enumerator
force, the team must possess interpersonal skills and often a range of pro-
fessional skills. The full collaboration of project staff may be needed to
make up this team.
Second, group participation sometimes reduces individual inhibitions
and thereby provides information which might not otherwise be re-
vealed. People often are willing to share feelings, emotions, and concerns
in groups which they are reluctant to do in more private settings. They
find a sense of security in the group, which is undoubtedly an important
consideration in rural areas where respondents suffer from a feeling of
inferiority in the presence of outsiders. If other farmers in a group state
their reservations about a recommended technical package, a cautious
farmer may be led to express his own doubts. Sometimes, however, the
opposite effect occurs-the individual may not wish to express his views
in a more public setting.
Third, information gathered in group interviews is sometimes more ac-
curate than that obtained in individual interviews because respondents
are reluctant to give inaccurate answers when they may be contradicted
by other participants. Or, if they do, they may well be corrected. In one
well-known example of group interviews in India, a large-scale land-
owner said that he owned only 30 acres of land-the maximum permit-
ted under law-but grudgingly conceded that he owned 300 acres when
the other participants humorously questioned him.2
Community Interviews
The disappointing fact about community interviews is that even when
they are conducted little if any mention is made of the information
gained from them in project reviews and evaluations. The reason often
lies in the way they are conducted. Most of the meetings are not carefully
2. Wolf Ladejinsky, 'The Green Revolution in Bihar: The Kosi Area." Economic
and Political Weekly 4, no. 39 (September 27, 1969).
<<<PAGE=40>>>
28 Conducting Group Interviews
planned, and structured interview guides are not followed. Interviewers
generally fail to involve the majority of participants in the process and do
not follow suitable probing techniques. Moreover, the discussions are not
systematically recorded; interviewers largely rely on limited notes and
memory. Under these conditions, it is not difficult to see that investiga-
tors find it prudent not to acknowledge the source of their information,
for serious questions can be raised about the validity and reliability of cis
conducted by them. We believe that cIs can generate useful, reliable in-
formation if the few simple steps outlined below are followed.
Structured Interview Guides
Some practitioners believe that CIs should not be conducted using a
structured interview guide which lists specific questions because it stifles
the creativity of the interviewer and reduces the interest of the partici-
pants by interfering with the flow of discussion. There are advantages,
however, in constructing structured guides. As discussed in the previous
chapter, such guides assist in the collection of comparable, systematic in-
formation and help to keep the discussions focused. One problem with
community interviews in the absence of a guide is that the discussions
tend to drift and interviewers get carried away by interesting, but irrele-
vant, topics.
Also, without the help of a guide, too much reliance is placed on the
ability of the interviewer to moderate the discussion and pose questions
in an understandable form. The difficulty is further compounded when
interviewers come from other cultures than the interviewees. In such sit-
uations, a structured guide is a great asset because interviewers can rely
on preformulated questions.
The guide should not be used to enforce a rigid course of action. Only a
limited number of questions should be included in it, usually not more
than fifteen. Some important rules for framing the questions are:
* The language should be simple; technical jargon and folksy expres-
sions should be avoided. The questions should be understandable by
the least-informed member of the community at the meeting.
* Politically or culturally sensitive questions should not be used. Socie-
ties and communities have their own taboos, inhibitions, and sensi-
bilities, which should be respected. Many questions that can be
asked in individual interviews cannot be raised in community meet-
ings.
* Questions on large, controversial issues should not be included.
They can generate strong emotions that contribute to overt conflicts
and tensions in a meeting.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
Community Interviews 29
Selecting Communities
Conducting interviews in all or even most of the communities covered by
a project or program is rarely feasible because of the constraints of time
and resources. Hence, a few communities should be selected carefully to
represent the general populations of interest.
In most cases, the investigator cannot use probability sampling to se-
lect the communities. Rather, he relies on two informal sampling tech-
niques. One technique involves classifying communities according to ob-
jectively verifiable criteria and selecting a number from each of them. For
example, for a study of the effectiveness of extension services, villages
can be categorized on the basis of their size, existence of a shop selling in-
puts, and accessibility by an all-weather road, and then one or two vil-
lages can be selected from each category for conducting community in-
terviews. The second widely used technique is to select communities on
the basis of expert advice. In the above case, the chief of the agricultural
extension services can be asked to identify the villages in which exten-
sion services have been effective and those in which they have not. How-
ever, to guard against bias (the extension chief may want to present only a
positive picture of the extension services and may deliberately misguide
the investigator) or a misinformed source, more than one expert should
be consulted.
Size and Timing of the Meeting
The interviewers have little control over the size of a community meet-
ing. Size depends not only on the population of the community but
also on such factors as time of day, convenience, adequate notice, and
local interest. There will always be uncertainty about the number who
will participate, but experience shows that if the meetings are well-
publicized the attendance will be large, even if curiosity is the main mo-
tivation.
Obviously, the cis should not be held at a time of day when people are
involved in their work. Unfortunately, this advice is not always followed
in remote villages which are difficult to reach by outsiders. The inter-
viewers often schedule a meeting in late morning or afternoon, which is
certainly not a convenient time for farmers. The result is that participants
are not representative of the community or are forced to attend against
their will. In either case, the reliability of the information and recommen-
dations generated become questionable. The prime consideration should
be the convenience of the participants and not of the interviewer. If the
size of the group exceeds thirty, consideration should be given to dividing
into smaller groups.
<<<PAGE=42>>>
30 Conducting Group Interviews
Interview Team and Protocols
Although CIs can be conducted by one interviewer, a team is preferable
for three reasons. First, if the group is large it is extremely taxing for one
interviewer to preside over the meeting, ask penetrating questions, probe
the respondents, and also take extensive notes. Second, the value of the
notes improves if several independent sets are taken and compared.
Third, team members, especially when they have different disciplinary
backgrounds, complement each other in probing respondents, which im-
proves the quality and depth of the information.
A few ground rules should be followed by the team so that the ci pro-
ceeds smoothly. Team members should coordinate their interventions,
making sure that the participants get a fair chance to respond on each
topic introduced by each team member. There should be prior agreement
on how a team member should pick up the probing role as another com-
pletes a probe on a specific point. Of course it is not necessary that each
team member ask questions on every topic. Interviewers should refrain
from interrupting each other. Even though a question springs to mind it
should be noted and brought up at the appropriate moment.
The temptation to help a colleague by trying to interpret a participant's
response should be resisted unless the other team member is really
misunderstanding the answer and thereby creating an embarrassing sit-
uation. And interviewers should avoid undue repetition of questions
which other team members have already posed.
Balancing Participation
One of the most difficult tasks for interviewers in CIs is to restrain a few
community elites from monopolizing meetings. Such prominent individ-
uals believe they speak on behalf of the others, who the elites consider
unable to express themselves. These leaders have their own interests to
promote and may not be reflecting the true views of the other partici-
pants. The result is that the very purpose of cIs is defeated, and the result
is not community interviews but interviews with a few elites which
would have been better conducted individually.
Restraining the leaders requires consummate acumen and interper-
sonal skills on the part of the interviewer. One strategy that has proved
effective is to meet with the leaders before the interview and seek their
views on some of the subtopics to be covered. This strategy has two mer-
its. First, the leaders will be less likely to repeat themselves in the large
meeting since they have been able to articulate their views and concerns
in private. Second, the interviewer has an excuse to say publicly that he
or she has discussed the subject with several leaders and has now come to
hear other members of the community.
All community members at the meeting cannot be expected to partici-
pate in discussions, but every effort should be made to secure the partici-
<<<PAGE=43>>>
Community Interviews 31
pation of the majority. The interviewer can seek to balance participation
in two ways. First, he can specifically address questions to reticent per-
sons. For this purpose, he can look in their direction and say, 'I would
very much like to hear from you. What have you to say about it?' Second,
he can take polls on selected questions by asking participants to give their
responses by raising their hands. Example 3 shows how an interviewer
was able to encourage participation by his humorous remarks.
EXAMPLE 3. Involving Participants in Community Interviews
A series of community interviews were being conducted in an East African
country for evaluating an area development project that had been extremely
successful in motivating farmers to establish farmers clubs. The team leader,
concerned about the domination of meetings by a few leaders and by the
nonparticipation of women, included the following remarks in his introduc-
tion.
When I was coming here, my boss called me and told me that he was inter-
ested in knowing the views of all the people in a meeting; he could not make
his decisions on the basis of the opinions of a few individuals. In fact, to tell
you the truth, he promised me a raise if I succeeded; otherwise he might
even fire me. So please promise me that all of you will participate in discus-
sions. If you don't, you will have to give me a piece of land so that I can join
you [laughter].
The team leader then turned to the women, who usually sat separately, and
added:
But this is not the only problem that I have. My wife has heard a lot about
you and your participation in farmers clubs. She wants to know more about
what you have been doing, what your experiences have been, and what can
be done to improve your participation. If my boss gets angry he can onlyfire
me, but if my wife gets upset I might be in greater trouble.
These remarks gave the team leader an excuse to humorously probe the par-
ticipants in the meetings. Whenever some people were not participating in the
discussions, he would simply say, 'Oh, my friends, you seem to be forgetting
my problem." Group members would laugh and respond to his questions.
Source: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
Generating Community Data
cis can (with certain limitations) generate aggregate and general data at
the community level. Participants, for example, can give approximately
the number of families in the village, available health services, the num-
ber of houses which have direct access to water, the number of local resi-
<<<PAGE=44>>>
32 Conducting Group Interviews
dents who work in nearby towns, and the number of children attending
school. They can also provide some aggregate data on farm inputs and
outputs, extent of mechanization, distances to markets, and even crop-
ping pattern and production levels. Example 4 gives some of the ques-
tions used in a project with a large number of group interviews.
EXAMPLE 4. Group Interviews for Generating Quantitative Data in
Costa Rica
In a research project in Costa Rica, a structured questionnaire was. used for
group interviewing in 860 communities for generating community-level sta-
tistics. Below are some examples of the questions.
(7) What is the daily wage of an agricultural worker in this area?
7-1 For how many hours
7-2 Does this include
Yes No
Food
Housing
Land for growing food
(9) What are the three main crops here?
9-1 Which is the most important?
the second most important?
the third most important?
9-2 How much is sold commercially?
Almost More than Less than
Crop all half half little
1
2
3
(14) Where do people generally go to buy the things they cannot buy here?
Community
District
County
14.1 How do they go there?
14.2 How long does it take?
(37) Is there a high school here? Yes
No
(38) Is there a grade school here? Yes
No
<<<PAGE=45>>>
Community Interviews 33
The authors complemented their information with direct participant observa-
tion and other sources of data. It should be mentioned here that in this study
group meetings comprised selected community leaders and key informants.
Source: Jeffery Ashe, Assessing Rural Needs: A Manual for Practitioners (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Volunteers in Technical Assistance, 1978).
When such data are gathered through cis, the interviewer should en-
courage different participants to verify the information. If one speaker
says that thirty persons from the village work in the neighboring town,
the interviewer can point to a few participants and ask, 'Do you agree
with this estimate?' The interviewer should also try to understand the
basis on which respondents have made their estimates-in some in-
stances they will know the individuals referred to by name.
Opinions on certain subtopics can be ascertained by polling the partici-
pants. In such cases, the questions should be able to be answered with a
simple yes or no. The interviewer asks a question and requests partici-
pants to answer it by raising their hands. The results of such polls should,
however, be treated cautiously; there is a real danger of superficiality in
such a technique.
The quantitative data generated through community interviews can be
aggregated and analyzed in two ways. First, individual respondents can
be treated as cases. For example, suppose ten group meetings are at-
tended by a total of 200 farmers. If 80 farmers say that they received
credit for the purchase of oxen, it can be reported that 40 percent of the
farmers interviewed received credit. Second, each group can be treated as
a case. In the above example, the investigation might report that in only
three villages out of ten did the majority of farmers receive credit.
One should be extremely careful in evaluating aggregate findings gen-
erated by Cis. They have some validity only if three essential conditions
are met. First, participants must be representative of the target popula-
tions. In the case of cis for ascertaining support for community centers, if
the meetings were held at noon when most of the adults were working on
their farms, the findings would give a distorted picture to the extent the
decisionmakers would not be represented adequately in them. Second,
group processes must not inhibit free expression of views or preferences.
For example, many respondents might not like to acknowledge in public
that they will not contribute toward the construction on a community
center in their village. Third, the questions must not be politically or cul-
turally sensitive. If sensitive questions are asked, participants are unlikely
to provide candid answers.
Postmeeting Conversations
Providing opportunity and time for individual conversations after the
meeting should be regarded as an integral part of the process. Some shy
<<<PAGE=46>>>
34 Conducting Group Interviews
participants prefer to bide their time and approach the interviewer at the
end of the meeting. Others might regard it as impolite to contradict previ-
ous speakers during the meeting. Still others may have failed to catch the
eye of the interviewer at the time.
Before terminating a meeting, the interviewer should indicate that
there is time to discuss any relevant issue after the meeting with individ-
uals who wish to stay on. In a ci session in a South Asian country, the in-
terviewer had the impression that certain people were eager to speak but
did not. At the end of the meeting, he engaged them in conversation and
found that they were in fact the smallholders, who felt that the village
leaders were misusing project resources to further their own interests.
Further inquiries revealed that they were right. Postmeeting conversa-
tions can be extremely rewarding, and time (up to an hour) should be al-
lowed for them.
Focused Group Interviews
The procedures for focused group interviews are similar to those for com-
munity interviews, but there are some differences because of the smaller
number of participants, the fact that the participants have been selected
according to some contribution they are expected to make, and the stress
on spontaneous interaction between the participants.
Interview Guide
The only type of interview guide that is recommended for FGIs is a short
checklist to remind the moderator of the main subtopics to be covered. It
is thus much less structured than guides used in cls and does not detail
the questions nor provide detailed instructions to the moderator.
One of the primary objectives of FGIs is to explore subtopics in depth
by interviewing a small, carefully selected group. Therefore the number
of subtopics should be limited. Moreover, the few subtopics are likely to
generate discussions that raise issues not anticipated by the investigator.
In an FGI on the use of a specific variety of fertilizer, for example, one of
the farmers may mention that although smallholders would like to use
them, they encounter problems in bringing them from the town because
of the long distance they have to walk. This casual remark can lead to an
interesting discussion of the mechanisms for the distribution of fertiliz-
ers. Participants are likely to propose different ideas and suggestions
which can be further examined by the group.
Size and Composition of the Group
The optimal number of participants in an FGI can range from six to ten.
Within this range smooth conversation is possible and the moderator can
<<<PAGE=47>>>
Focused Group Interviews 35
steer the discussion without depriving individuals of a chance to air their
views.
Smaller groups-three or four persons-make participants feel pres-
sured to constantly comment whether or not they have something rele-
vant to say. Moreover, the discussions are vulnerable to domination by
one influential participant. Large groups-more than twelve persons-
leave little time for individuals to respond spontaneously or to have a
chance to fully present their points of view. Participants often lose inter-
est entirely or form subgroups which engage in fragmented conversa-
tions outside the moderator's control.
It may be necessary for the focused group to be homogeneous in social
composition. In the stratified societies of the developing world, partici-
pants drawn from different social and economic strata may be unwilling
to interact on the basis of equality. Status differences impinge on inter-
personal communication. Persons of lower status generally are reluctant
to talk in the presence of their perceived superiors.
Members of a group usually should not know each other, for anonym-
ity minimizes status barriers. This requirement often cannot be met,
however, in a rural community. People tend to know about each other
even if they are not acquaintances.
Selection of the Participants
The best approach to identifying participants is to consult key informants
who are knowledgeable about local conditions. It is always prudent to
consult several informants to minimize the biases arising out of individ-
ual preferences. Once the list is prepared, the investigator can select the
required number from it.
Efforts should be made to include diverse participants. One can
achieve this by classifying the target population on the basis of carefully
selected criteria relevant to the study and then selecting participants from
each category.
This can be explained with a simple illustration. Consider the owners
of tractors in an area development project. They can be classified on the
basis of variables such as age (young or old), gender, size of holdings
(small or large holder), and literacy. They can also be categorized accord-
ing to the use of tractors (those who use tractors for their own farms and
those who hire them to others) and source of financing (those who got
loans from the project and those who raised the credit elsewhere). If cost-
effectiveness is the topic of debate, the participants should include a
range based on size of landholding, source of financing, and the mechan-
ical skills of the owners-all factors that affect the cost-effectiveness of
tractor operations. By contrast, if the purpose of the focused group inter-
view is to identify gender-based differences in the use of tractors by
<<<PAGE=48>>>
36 Conducting Group Interviews
farmers, such elaborate categories are unnecessary-a simple classifica-
tion based on gender may be sufficient.
Location, Seating Arrangements, and Duration
FGIs can be conducted in any place where eight to ten persons can be
comfortably seated and assured of some privacy. The most easily avail-
able sites in rural areas are primary school buildings, health centers, and
community centers.
Seating arrangements should facilitate maximum interaction among
participants. The best course is to have a table around which all the par-
ticipants can face each other, or alternatively to arrange chairs in a semi-
circle. If group members prefer to sit on the floor, they can do so. The im-
portant thing is that all participants be physically and psychologically
comfortable. If possible, FGIs should not be held in the open, where intru-
sions from outsiders can scarcely be avoided. An FGI can be an interesting
social event in a remote village; people whose curiosity has been aroused
want to know what is going on, and village officials may insist on partici-
pating.
The duration of an FGI should not exceed two hours unless the discus-
sions are of such interest that the group wishes to continue. If only one or
two participants wish to continue, the moderator can arrange for post-
meeting conversations, as in the case of Cis.
Opening of the Interview
The moderator should explain the purpose and scope of inquiry after the
group members introduce themselves. A brief explanation should serve
the purpose. Persons recruited for an FGI may have little idea of what is
expected of them. It is therefore important that the moderator make the
following four points. First, an FGI is not a question and answer session. It
is an informal discussion, and a point made by one can be commented on
by others. Second, the group is organized to hear the views and experi-
ences of all the participants. Third, the moderator is interested in the en-
tire range of ideas and explanations; if one has a divergent view on any
item, he should express it freely. Fourth, because of the constraints of
time, each should be as succinct as possible. Example 5 shows how an ap-
propriate introduction to an FGI may be done.
EXAMPLE 5. Introductory Remarks for a Focused Group Interview
My colleague and I are grateful that you were kind enough to come to help
us. Let me mention the purpose of our meeting here. As you probably know,
this project in your area is being funded by AID to try to popularize an im-
proved variety of maize, which should significantly increase yields. The proj-
<<<PAGE=49>>>
Focused Group Interviews 37
ect is also providing interestedfarmers with seed,fertilizers, insecticides, and
pesticides, which are necessary for the cultivation of the improved variety.
However, most of the farmers are not using it. Why? We have some ideas and
explanations for this, but we are not sure about them and so we want to hear
your views. I stress that we want to know your real views; the best help you
can give us is to be candid. Why are so few farmers using the new maize vari-
ety? Is the improved variety profitable to the farmers? Do the farmers experi-
ence difficulty procuring the needed inputs? Do they need credit? What are the
general impressions about the improved variety? Do the people like the taste
of the new variety of maize?
I have a few requests. Because all of us must participate in the discussions,
we must be brief and to the point. Please remember that each of us can make
comments or raise questions about what others say. This is an informal dis-
cussion among friends. So do not hold back any ideas or information. Even if
you disagree with the rest, state your views.
We will be taking notes so that we can rememberyour comments. (We would
also like to have your permission to record the discussions on a tape recorder.)
Before opening the main discussion, the moderator should establish
some rapport with and among participants by using a warm-up period to
chat about general matters. He can exchange a few words with farmers
about crop prospects during the current agricultural season. The modera-
tor can ask participants to explain the significance of any impending so-
cial or cultural event, such as a fair. The moderator should not allow de-
tailed discussion on such generalities; the purpose is simply to break the
ice. Too immediate a formal start prevents the group from settling down
to a comfortable, relaxed discussion. During the warm-up period, the in-
terviewer should identify the participants who are reticent as well as
those who love to talk and should make a mental note of which ones will
need encouragement to express themselves or gently need to be con-
trolled.
Slides, films, or pictures can be shown to stimulate discussion on a spe-
cific subtopic. The moderator can, for example, show a documentary
about a farmer planting a new variety of maize and then ask the group
members to give their views about the actual operations involved, and
the advantages and limitations of the maize variety.
Probing and Pacing of Questions
The probing strategies used in individual interviews can also be em-
ployed in FGIS. In group sessions, however, the moderator should adopt a
posture of "sophisticated naivete.' He should convey the impression that
although he understands the subject, he does not know the details as
they do. Such an approach usually works because people are generally
willing to help. Thus the moderator can ask specific details, saying, for
<<<PAGE=50>>>
38 Conducting Group Interviews
example, 'You know that I am not a farmer, so you will have to explain it
to me in greater detail," or 'I wish I knew more about the sources of credit
in the community. Will you kindly tell us about it?' Such probing induces
participants to think more deeply on the subject and to verbalize their
feelings and thoughts.
The moderator should seek specifics. Experience shows that if the
moderator asks specific questions, others follow his example, making his
task a little easier.
To cover several subtopics within the stipulated time is obviously not
an easy task given the vagaries of group discussions. Some items may be
more interesting than others to the participants but less relevant to the
objective of the inquiry. For example, in a focused group discussion on
the adaptation of a new variety of wheat seed in an area development
project, the young, educated participants might like to dwell on the resis-
tance that they encounter from their elders, but the moderator would like
to know whether the necessary inputs are available at convenient loca-
tions, whether they are being used, and what suggestions the partici-
pants may have for promoting them. It is important that the moderator
budgets time for each topic.
Controlling Discussions
One common problem faced in FGIs, as in ci, is that a few articulate per-
sons tend to dominate discussions. They have an opinion on every sub-
ject, and some go to an unusual length to make a superficial and often ir-
relevant point. The moderator has to be careful in dealing with them.
Any attempt to interrupt their long-winded remarks might be construed
as an offense undermining the spontaneity of the discussion. The three
strategies used in qualitative interviews discussed in the previous chap-
ter, also are relevant in this context.
The first is to give nonverbal cues to the participant that the moderator
expects him to stop. He can look away or stop taking notes. The second is
for the moderator to intervene, saying, for example, that he would like to
summarize what has been said so that the group does not misunderstand
or misinterpret the comments. The moderator can then refocus the dis-
cussion. Third, as soon as there is a pause, he can say, 'You have made
many useful points which need to be pursued in more depth in another
group. I would, however, like to explore another item with this group.'
This leaves the participant no option but to stop.
Controlling Group Pressures
In FGIS the moderator must be able to minimize group pressure, which in-
hibits the dissenting participants from expressing their views or encour-
<<<PAGE=51>>>
Focused Group Interviews 39
ages them to agree to positions to which they do not subscribe. The un-
derlying reasons for group pressure are complex and varied. Sometimes
the idea or explanation proposed is new and most of the participants are
momentarily captivated by it. In other cases, the majority has little to add
and gets out of this uncomfortable situation by fully endorsing the posi-
tion put forward. As stated earlier, there may also be the dominance of
the articulate and influential.
The moderator can minimize group pressure by encouraging partici-
pants to express diverse views and perspectives. As soon as he sees that
an idea is catching on without sufficient examination of the alternative
positions, he should try to hold back a premature conclusion. He can ask
for other ideas, explanations, or recommendations. For instance, if an FGI
discussing farmers' views on different modes of delivering fertilizers is
taken by the notion that village cooperatives should be the only mecha-
nism for their distribution, the moderator should interject, 'But what
about other methods? Can we suggest alternatives?" This will lead the
group to at least consider other approaches. Or the moderator can put
forward an alternative. In the above case, the moderator can say, "What
about the local store? Why can't fertilizer be made available there?" The
problem with this strategy is that the participants may get the impression
that the investigator is pressing for a particular option and may reverse
themselves in order to please him. It is therefore necessary to stress that
the idea is mentioned not to encourage them to accept it but to generate
discussion on the subject.
Finally the participants who seem skeptical to the position taken by the
group can be encouraged to express their views. When conducting a dis-
cussion, one often gets the feeling that some members are not convinced
of a particular position, and yet they remain silent. Often what they need
is encouragement by the moderator. In such situations, the moderator
can look at one of the reluctant participants and say, "What about you?
You might have a different view?" Such a remark can reassure him and he
might present his views on the subject.
Recording of Discussions
As with all qualitative interviewing, the ultimate value of an FGI depends
on the nature and the quality of the record made. In developed-country
market research, video recorders are being increasingly used for filming
the discussion, but this is generally out of the question in rural areas. The
use of a tape recorder should be seriously considered. With due regard to
the cautionary comments in the previous chapter, a selected small group
may not be unduly disturbed by a recorder.
Another possibility that is more likely to be practical with an FGI as
compared with a ci is to use a rapporteur to record the discussions. It
<<<PAGE=52>>>
40 Conducting Group Interviews
eases the burden on the moderator and enables him to concentrate on
conducting the discussions. Such a role fits well in the format because it is
known by most to be standard practice in more formal meetings.
Limitations
Group interviews have well-recognized limitations. Many topics cannot
be examined in them. Many people are reluctant to share their views on
sensitive issues in public. Individuals tend to dominate the discussions.
Moreover, group interviews are highly susceptible to interviewers' bi-
ases, which can undermine the reliability and validity of the responses.
Three reasons for this can be mentioned. First, interviewers tend to pick
up information and ideas that confirm their preconceived notions and
hypotheses-they hear what they want to hear and ignore what they
want to ignore. Second, there is a normal human search for coherence in
disparate, irreconcilable remarks of various respondents; this quest for
consistency can lead to oversimplifying the complex reality by overlook-
ing evidence that is not consistent with the findings of earlier interviews.
Third, there is a tendency for interviewers to give more credence to views
expressed by elites than by others. We take the view that both the quality
and credibility of the findings can be improved if proper procedures are
followed and if the information generated is cross-checked with that
gathered through other means.
<<<PAGE=53>>>
4 Participant Observation
PARTICIPANT OBSERVATION is a type of qualitative data-gathering
method that requires direct observation of an activity, behavior, relation-
ship, phenomenon, network, or process in the field. This observation is
supplemented both by information gathered through qualitative inter-
views with key informants and by data from analysis of documents, re-
cords, and other sources. The participant observer seeks to go beyond
outward appearances and probe the perceptions, motives, beliefs, val-
ues, and attitudes of the people involved.
The central concept in participant observation is that the investigator
participates in the social reality experienced by the community under ob-
servation. For instance, in studying the economic behavior of small farm-
ers, the investigator becomes a part of the rural community to the degree
required in order to understand the farmers' perceptions of the con-
straints and opportunities open to them, their calculation of profits and
loss from the adoption of the technical packages promoted by the project,
and their attitudes and feelings toward the implementing agency. The
participant observer tries to become an insider without losing his or her
status as an objective outsider.'
There are several advantages to using participant observation in moni-
toring and evaluation. Obviously, the most important is that a phenome-
non or process is observed in its most natural setting: the way that deci-
sions are made in village cooperatives, the technical advice actually
communicated to farmers by the extension worker, and the daily opera-
tions of credit institutions in rural settings. The resulting depth of insight
is not easily obtained in any other way.
Moreover, participant observation helps reveal a phenomenon or pro-
cess in its totality, as opposed to the partial reconstruction provided by in-
terviews after the fact. For example, in an interview an extension worker
1. Strictly defined, a participant observer participates in the activities that are
the subject of his study. Increasingly, however, the definition is used to embrace a
lengthy residential observation with only incidental actual participation.
41
<<<PAGE=54>>>
42 Participant Observation
will describe the extension service from his vantage point; his description
represents perceptions of his own motives, roles, activities, and experi-
ences, or those of the farmers he deals with. But participant observers see
a fuller picture; in addition to conducting interviews, they observe the ac-
tual behavior of extension agents, the reactions of client farmers when
the extension agent has left, and the social and economic setting of the
interactions.
Finally, participant observation reveals behavior patterns, social and
economic processes, and environmental factors which the informants
themselves may not be aware of or are unable to adequately describe.
Participant observation thus is particularly useful in gaining insights
about the conditions, needs, and behavior patterns of the rural poor and
other vulnerable groups who are usually not able to articulate their prob-
lems and predicaments. An illiterate, old, widowed woman farmer in Le-
sotho does not find it easy to explain her problems and needs to an enu-
merator unknown to her, but a perceptive observer may see them clearly
after spending a few days in the field.
The discussion of this method here is confined to those aspects which
have special relevance to monitoring and evaluation. In this context, time
is definitely limited; studies must be completed within weeks rather than
months. Also, multisite studies may be needed to cover adequately the
types of communities and organizations in a project area. More academi-
cally oriented studies are likely to involve longer residence at a single site.
Conceptual Framework and Data Requirements
The conventional wisdom in participant observation is that observers
should not enter into the field with a preconceived conceptual frame-
work because they tend to focus on the variables included in it and ignore
other factors and conditions. Observers, it is said, should go to the field
with an open mind and develop their frameworks purely on the basis of
their field experience.
Such a posture is not justified in monitoring and evaluation studies for
three reasons. First, there are the time constraints already mentioned. If
fieldwork is conducted without even an embryonic framework, consider-
able time may be wasted in gathering an eclectic range of mostly irrele-
vant data. This is one of the reasons why project social analyses that rely
on participant observation have often been disappointing.
Second, if several observers cover several sites, they must share an
agreed framework. In its absence, they are likely to move their hypothe-
ses in different directions and to generate information and explanations
that are not comparable.
The third and probably most compelling reason is that monitoring and
evaluation staff are not in the business of theory construction. Their ob-
<<<PAGE=55>>>
Conceptual Framework and Data Requirements 43
jective is to point the way to the solution of implementation problems or
to gain knowledge that can be used to plan future interventions. A con-
ceptual framework is an aid and not a hindrance in this context.
The framework developed by the observers before entering the field
should list principal issues and indicate the hypothesized relationships
among them. In some cases, the main concepts should be defined so as to
avoid later confusion. However, the conceptual framework for partici-
pant observation should not be as elaborate as that used in quantitative
investigations.
Three general suggestions can be given. First, the number of variables
should be limited; only those variables which are most pertinent should
be included. The very purpose of a framework is defeated if an attempt is
made to make it all-inclusive, and it is then of limited use as a guide in the
field. Second, a careful review of the literature, and possibly qualitative
interviews with key informants, should be undertaken before the frame-
work is formulated. In a multisite study, the observers for different sites
should be involved jointly in developing the framework. Third, a graphic
representation of the framework facilitates the mapping of interrelations
among the variables.2 Example 6 provides an illustration.
EXAMPLE 6. Developing a Conceptual Framework for a Participant-
Observation Study
Farmers' clubs, organized as part of a project, secure short-term loans to
purchase agricultural inputs which they distribute among their members.
Dues are collected from members at the end of the harvesting season, and the
credit bank is repaid. The project managers require the monitoring staff to do a
study, using participant observation, to examine the overall performance of
the clubs and to determine the factors and conditions that seem to affect them.
The staff should follow three steps in this connection.
The first step is to construct a conceptual framework, as shown in figure 1,
which hypothesizes a set of internal, external, and project-related factors
which affect the performance of the clubs, which in turn influences the adop-
tion of agricultural innovations by farmers, which leads to increased produc-
tion and eventually to higher levels of living. This framework is only tenta-
tive, and the investigator will revise it as more information is accumulated
and a better understanding is obtained.
The second step is to define the main concepts in the framework. Take, for
example, the size of the club. Is the size to be determined by the number of sub-
scribed members, the working capital of the club, or a combination of both?
Consider leadership. Who should be regarded as leaders? Does the term refer
2. Matthew B. Miles and A. Michael Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis
(Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1984).
<<<PAGE=56>>>
Figure 1. A Conceptual Framework for a Study of Farmers' Clubs
Factors internal to clubs
Organizational structure
Size
Leadership
Nature of decisionmaking
Factors external to clubs
Size of village
Proximity to city
Village's land and
capital-resource
inequality - Performance b- Effects -- - Impact
Village's political Timely delivery Adoption of Income
leadership of inputs innovations Living
Repayment rates Production standards
Project-related assistance Economic viability changes
Volume of financial
assistance
Form of technical
assistance
Nature and frequency
of supervision
<<<PAGE=57>>>
Site Selection and Timing 45
to the elected officials or to persons who wield considerable influence on
decisionmaking within a club, even though they do not hold official positions?
In most instances these issues cannot be fully resolved until the investigator
goes into the field, but they need to be taken into account at the planning stage
so that they are kept in mind when in the field.
The third step is to identify the sources of information on each variable in
theframework. It is obvious from figure 1 that not all the required data will be
obtained by direct observation. Other sources will include club documents
and records; qualitative interviews to investigate the leadership factor; and
project records to obtain the data on input supply, repayments, and economic
viability.
Site Selection and Timing
The next stage in planning a participant-observation study is to decide
where the study is to be carried out, whether it will be based on one site or
several, and if there will be one or several observers. Although a single-
site participant-observation study has limited usefulness, it may serve
the required purpose. Sometimes one site can be treated as a typical case.
Consider a situation-perhaps extreme-in which all ten marketing co-
operatives initiated by a project are failing to provide the services for
which they were established; here even a single case study can generate
interesting information and insights. A single site study is also justified
when the case in question is unique, for instance a total success or total
failure. In the marketing-cooperative situation, suppose just one cooper-
ative society is operating efficiently, a bit of hope in an otherwise de-
pressing picture. Certainly close observation of this society is likely to
shed light on the factors and conditions responsible for its success.
As a general rule, however, single site studies should be avoided. The
major limitation of single site studies is obvious: the so-called typical or
unique case may not be so. The inclusion of at least two sites enables
some comparative analysis to be undertaken and gives an indication of
variations between sites. For example, participant observation of both
successful and unsuccessful marketing cooperatives is likely to provide a
better understanding of the diverse sets of factors affecting their per-
formance than that of either alone. The number of sites must be small,
however, because participant observation is costly, time-consuming, and
demands high skills; two or three sites will suffice for most projects.
Participant observation studies normally use informal sampling proce-
dures to select the sites. The rationale for this is given in the discussion of
evaluations based on case studies in chapter 8 of the companion volume.
For such a study to succeed, several site selection factors which are inde-
pendent of the desire for the sites to be 'representative' must be taken
into account:
<<<PAGE=58>>>
46 Participant Observation
* The phenomena to be observed must be occurring within the site and
on a sufficient scale to facilitate the observation process.
* The community or organization must be willing to accept the partici-
pant observer.
* The participant observer must be able to enter into the normal activi-
ties of the community or organization. This may limit the number of
possible sites because of language and custom considerations.
Timing is critical in participant observer studies, because by definition
the events are to be observed as they occur. Wrong timing may ruin the
study. This contrasts with interview surveys, for which there is some
flexibility in timing because the respondent can be asked to recall the re-
cent past as well as current events.
The importance of precise timing is accentuated in agriculture projects
because actions are determined by the season. Rural credit organizations
receive most loan applications during the planting season, when farmers
wish to purchase inputs. Labor inputs vary widely through the crop
growing season.
Farmers and farm organizations also follow daily routines that are as-
sociated with set times. For example, credit institutions may accept loan
applications only during morning hours. Farmers in tropical climates
may go to the fields early in the morning and return home at noon. Ob-
servation periods must be selected to reflect such rhythms in work.
Understanding Fieldwork
The need to establish sound initial contacts is obviously of particular im-
portance when the stay of the observer is to be of limited duration.
Extended field observations can afford to build slowly maturing re-
lationships, but with shorter studies first impressions will be crucial-
dress, manner, and conduct must be carefully considered. The observer
should function in a way that people "must come to see and accept the
evaluator as a person (more or less like themselves) rather than as
professionals."3
There are varying levels of participation implied by this type of study.
One extreme is for the observers to become integrated completely into
the community or organization acting, living, and behaving like its mem-
bers. Such a course is normally not possible in a project context. The
other extreme is for the participation of the observers to not go beyond
their physical presence. The obvious limitation of this approach is that
3. Lawrence E Salmen, Listen to the People (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1987), p. 115.
<<<PAGE=59>>>
Understanding Fieldwork 47
the investigator remains primarily an outsider. The members of the com-
munity or organization may not reveal their innermost feelings and opin-
ions; indeed, they may not function in a natural manner once they know
that they are being observed.
The desirable middle course requires the observers to be more than
passive observers but less than full-fledged members of the group. Al-
though the observer does not act like a member of the community or or-
ganization, he participates in its formal and informal activities. For exam-
ple, he might assist extension staff in organizing field demonstrations
and meetings, attend staff meetings, and offer suggestions. The advan-
tage of this course is that the observer is able to maintain his indepen-
dence and yet become useful to the community or organization he is
studying.
Practically all organizations and villages have cliques, subgroups, or
factions; thus there is always a risk that the observer will arouse suspicion
or antagonism among the members of a particular faction because he is
perceived as being friendly to those of another. A persistent problem
faced by many experienced observers is that they tend to be regarded as
close to the village elites, so that small farmers, women, and other de-
prived groups are not candid in expressing their genuine concerns and
views.
An observer has three choices about relationships with various fac-
tions and social groups. First, he can form a close association with the
group considered best able to provide the required information. For ex-
ample, if the observer is studying extension services, he closely interacts
with extension staff, who become his primary source of information. The
drawback of this approach is that his findings may be biased because of
his reliance on a single group. Although he comes to understand the
problems and perspectives of extension workers, he may remain un-
aware of the views, concerns, and difficulties of the farmers.
Second, the observer can spend time with different groups in the com-
munity or organization. In the above example, he first stays with the ex-
tension staff, then with the client farmers, and finally with the village
leaders. The practical problem with this strategy is that the switch may
not be easy if the observer has become identified with the first group to
which he attached himself.
Third, he maintains an independent status from the beginning of the
fieldwork. He meets freely with the members of the various groups, is
friendly to all and intimate with none, and thus presents the image of an
unbiased observer. This strategy makes it possible for the observer to ob-
serve a wide range of phenomena and interview members of different
groups without arousing suspicion and misunderstandings. Example 7 il-
lustrates some of the steps required for conducting an evaluation of a de-
velopment project using participant observation.
<<<PAGE=60>>>
48 Participant Observation
EXAMPLE 7. Steps in Conducting Participant-Observer Evaluation
1. Become familiar with the background of the project. What are the
project's objectives? Why and how was the site or the target population cho-
sen? How did the executing agency and beneficiary population come together?
Sources for this information are documents and interviews with key represen-
tatives of funding and executing agencies and with beneficiary leaders at the
time of the project's initiation.
2. Learn the general characteristics of the population group benefiting
from the project. Determine the history of the area and of the people-their
places of origin, reasons for coming to the area or project site, and length of
residence.
3. Choose a place of residence with care. Live in afairly central location; in
an area that is being upgraded rent a place somewhat better than average, one
that offers the basic comforts and a separate entry. For a single person it is best
to live in association with a family, yet clearly independent of it, so as to blend
more easily into and become a part of the community.
4. Get to know the leading actors in the project well. The important con-
tacts will be with the beneficiaries in general, theirformal and informal lead-
ers, and the main administrators of the implementing agency. Attempt to keep
relations with each of thesegroups somewhat discrete. The manner of relating
should be adapted to each-more professional with project administrators,
less so with community leaders, and more informal with beneficiaries. Al-
though everyone will know the reason for the observer's stay in the neighbor-
hood, the official nature of that stay should be most apparent to the project
personnel, with whom a certain degree of personal distance must be main-
tained to avoid bias, real or alleged, intentional or unconscious. The leaders
will also be aware of the motive for the observer's presence, especially at the
outset but less so over time. In some cases it may help credibility to have a let-
ter signed by a government authority-not the executing agency but a more
distant, neutral body. The people, however, should view the participant ob-
server primarily as a neighbor and, to varying degrees, as a friend. At this
level the relationship is far more personal than professional, although the
people should be duly informed of why the observer is living among them.
Cultivate a few close contacts in diverse segments of the population repre-
senting various income groups, political factions, or other significant entities
(such as youths, female heads of households, owners, and renters). Never be
overly identified with any one group, but remain open and accessible to all:
diplomacy at the neighborhood level.
Attempt to participate in community organizations and activities but with-
out becoming overly committed. The observer's goal should be to demonstrate
his involvement and have his efforts and interest appreciated, but to retain his
independence.
<<<PAGE=61>>>
Study Instruments 49
5. Inject issues of concern into discussions with residents after winning
their confidence. These issues will have been identified with funding and exe-
cuting institutions before the observer's entry into the community and will be
refined by the participant observer in conjunction with the executing agency
while at the project site. These issues should be introduced into conversation,
or spontaneous discussion of them encouraged, and the talk should be guided
tofocus on the project-all in as unobtrusive a manner as possible. The aim is
always to serve as catalyst and to provide the most honest response possible.
Source: Lawrence E Salmen, Listen to the People (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1987), pp. 130-31.
Study Instruments
Written aids will be required in gathering and recording the results of ob-
servations and interviews so that important facts are not omitted or for-
gotten and so that the insights are noted and ordered to facilitate the
preparation of reports. The observer may use the following.
* Interview guides are widely used in participant observation studies in
a similar manner to that discussed in the two previous chapters.
• Observation record forms are similar in purpose to interview guides
but are used to guide the eye and ear rather than the tongue; that is,
they help the observer focus on events and existing conditions. One
- such form will be needed for each type of activity and situation in-
cluded in the study. Example 8 shows a record form used in observ-
ing the proceedings of a cooperative society meeting. These forms
usually should be filled in after the observation on the basis of notes
taken at the time.
* Document summary sheets are prepared for reports and other docu-
ments that need to be condensed and recorded for reference at the
stage of data analysis. A summary sheet should contain a brief de-
scription of the document, a summary of relevant points, and follow-
up, if required; see example 9.
EXAMPLE 8. Observation Record Form for General Meetings of a Mul-
tipurpose Cooperative Society
Seating arrangements What were the seating arrangements in the meet-
ing? How were the seats arranged? Were women
sitting separately from men?
Attendance What was the attendance? How many and what
proportion of members attended the meeting?
<<<PAGE=62>>>
50 Participant Observation
Conducting the Meeting Who conducted the meeting? What format was
used?
Agenda What items were on the agenda? Were all of them
covered in the meeting?
Discussions Were there free and frank discussions? Which
questions were discussed extensively?
Participation Did the majority of those present participate in
discussions? Did a few individuals dominate the
meeting? If so, who? Did women participate in
deliberations?
Interest Was there keen interest in the proceedings? Were
some members bored or indifferent?
Decisionmaking Were the decisions unanimous? Were votes taken
on some items? If so, which?
Factions Did members appear to be divided into various
cliques and factions?
Record keeping Did anyone take minutes of the meeting?
Other items Additional items which struck the observer as
relevant.
EXAMPLE 9. Document Summary Form
Date received: August 24, 1986
Source: President of the multipurpose cooperative society in
Arzunig
Description: Minutes of the meeting held on July 12, 1986
Summary of relevant The minutes list the agenda and the specific deci-
information: sions made in the meeting. Items 4 and 5 are quite
revealing.
Item 4 shows that there was opposition to the chair-
man of the society. The incumbent won by a narrow
margin of two votes. It also indicates that the presi-
dent of the society supported another candidate.
Item 5 indicates that charges of financial misman-
agement were levied against the manager of the
marketing unit.
<<<PAGE=63>>>
Minimizing Biases 51
Follow-up: Should get more information about the cliques and
divisions in the society. Should interview some
members.
Should find out if any action was taken to investi-
gate the charges.
Should get copies of all the minutes for the last two
years.
The notes taken with the aid of the above instruments will vary in form
according to the observer's own style. But the record should cover each of
the following three categories. First, the description of a phenomenon
should be based on direct observation. The conventional wisdom in par-
ticipant observation is that one should be as comprehensive as possible.
Every detail should be noted, for an item which might at first appear to
be trivial and insignificant may provide important clues to the under-
standing of phenomena or open new paths for further inquiry. Too many
notes, however, will result in an accumulation of massive amounts of ir-
relevant data. With time constraints always in mind, it is important to
focus on the important issues even if some interesting details are missed.
Second, the investigator should record his own reactions, ideas, and in-
sights that occur during the observation process. Third, any implications
and tentative conclusions from the accumulated data should be noted as
they occur to the observer. In participant observation, analysis and inter-
pretation start during the field stage of the study. The observer's notes
thus should examine the implications of his findings in terms of the hy-
pothesized relationships. In many cases, revised hypotheses will be tak-
ing shape in the observer's mind as his observations continue, and this
constant revision adds power to this type of study.
Minimizing Biases
The participant observer should be careful about two major sources of
bias: the effects of the investigator on the observed situation and the ef-
fects of the observed situation on the investigator. The presence of an
outside observer may disturb the situation in a community or organiza-
tion. Leading people may become cautious in their remarks and behavior.
For example, extension workers may become more patient and painstak-
ing in their dealings with farmers, or the loan processing clerk may make
an extra effort to help clients when an observer is present. In technical
language, such changes are known as 'reactive effects': they are com-
pounded in project situations because the findings of a study can affect
the fortunes of the people and organizations involved. Thus the project
staff and actual (not necessarily intended) beneficiaries try to present a
very positive picture of their activities.
<<<PAGE=64>>>
52 Participant Observation
Three steps should be taken to minimize reactive effects. First, the ob-
servers should stay in the field as long as possible so that they come to be
perceived as a part of the setting and people become accustomed to their
presence.
Second, some of the interviews with key informants should be con-
ducted in informal settings, where people are usually more relaxed. The
observer, for example, can interview respondents in cafes, houses, or
over dinner, where they will be less self-conscious and hence more can-
did in their answers.
Third, the observer should constantly compare the accounts he is get-
ting with the descriptions obtained from other sources. For instance, he
can check with farmers to find out if officials are normally as conscien-
tious in dealing with them as they were in the presence of the observer.
The observed situation also affects the observer, who may be unduly
influenced by isolated cases or may begin to identify so strongly with the
group that his objectivity is lost. To minimize these effects, the following
four steps are recommended.
First, to provide a wider perspective on an activity, the observer should
interview not only the persons who are central to the activity but also
those who are peripheral to it. For example, when examining the working
of an input supply agency, the observer should interview, in addition to
current staff and beneficiaries, former employees, farmers who do not
purchase inputs from the agency, and other well-informed persons not
connected with it.
Second, the observer should not think in terms of specific personalities
but at an abstract level. For example, he should consider what a manager
of the credit union does, and not what Mr. X, whose commitment has im-
pressed him, does as the manager.
Third, the observer should keep his main focus of study in mind and
not be distracted by isolated events or interesting personalities.
Fourth, continuous reexamination and retrospection is most impor-
tant. An observer should reflect on the changes in his views, judgments,
and feelings over time. For this purpose, the observer should keep a re-
cord of his own impressions, and in a multisite study he should compare
these impressions with those of other observers.
Limitations
Three limitations on the use of participant observation in the monitoring
and evaluation of agriculture projects should be recognized. First, partic-
ipant observation requires a high degree of skill and expertise on the part
of the observers. It is a mistake to assume that persons without formal
training and field experience can successfully engage in such studies.
<<<PAGE=65>>>
Limitations 53
Ideally, the observers should possess the following:
* Familiarity with the social, economic, and cultural milieu of the area
* Background in social science research methodology
• The capacity to learn from listening to the people, which means both
patience and openness to the ideas and views of others
* Sufficient maturity to discern the relevance of what is being ob-
served
* The capacity to relate to the people.
Some of these skills can be acquired from formal training. But others can
come only through working with accomplished observers.
The second limitation is that properly conducted participant observa-
tion is very time-consuming. Typically, it takes an observer four to five
weeks in the field before he is able to settle down and start systematic
data collection. Another eight to twelve weeks may be necessary to ob-
tain the full insight required and draw the appropriate conclusion.
The time is reduced if the staff who will be observing are stationed in
the field already and are familiar with the local social and economic con-
ditions, cultural landscape, and-above all-the people with whom they
will interact. Thus they do not have to spend months to establish rapport
and understand the prevailing conditions. There is, however, a negative
side to this involvement. Because they are part of the project team, al-
though the community accepts them, it may never regard them as true
'insiders."
Third, participant observation cannot be used to study highly hetero-
geneous populations. If, for instance, a project covers areas that have dif-
ferent cropping patterns, land tenure systems, and ethnic groups, it
would be extremely difficult to identify a few sites which could represent
the population.
These limitations need to be considered carefully before a participant-
observation study is embarked on. When well done, it provides a valu-
able depth of insight; when badly done, it can seriously mislead.
<<<PAGE=66>>>
5 | Structured Surveys
A STRUCTURED SURVEY, broadly speaking, is a method of interviewing
people to collect information in which a formal questionnaire is used to
structure interviews. There are two principal differences between this
type of survey and qualitative interviews (which were discussed in detail
in chapters 2 and 3). First, structured surveys are designed to generate
quantitative data. When information is supplied in an open-ended for-
mat, it is converted into one of a limited set of coded options for the pur-
pose of statistical analysis and presentation. Second, the coverage of the
interview is decided upon and standardized before the survey begins; no
changes can be made by the interviewer during the course of the inter-
view. The interviews for such a survey also are commonly conducted
with a sample of respondents selected according to randomization proce-
dures, although this is not always the case (the role of probability sam-
pling is discussed in chapter 6).
Structured surveys are almost indispensable in monitoring and evalu-
ating agriculture and rural development projects. They are used to study
a wide range of subjects ranging from the composition of the target pop-
ulation, to its reactions to project stimuli, to its more general attitudes to-
ward and perceptions of changes in production activities, incomes, and
standards of living.
The companion volume stresses the value of simple surveys of benefi-
ciaries which record in quantitative terms the penetration of the project
and the response of those reached. This chapter concentrates on how to
design and conduct such surveys. The logical follow-up, namely
problem-diagnostic surveys, will likely use the qualitative methods de-
scribed earlier or a mixture of these and structured surveys. One remain-
ing main type of structured survey, the socioeconomic baseline survey of
the project population, is briefly discussed first.
Socioeconomic Surveys: Baseline and Follow-up
A socioeconomic baseline survey of the target population is a necessary
source of information for the appraisal of a project. Many agriculture and
54
<<<PAGE=67>>>
Socioeconomic Surveys 55
rural development projects have been designed without adequate data
on the economic and social characteristics of their target populations.
Project designers are forced therefore to make many assumptions and
construct many hypotheses, which frequently prove to be false or erro-
neous. A baseline survey designed to yield reliable data on those eco-
nomic and social characteristics that a project is expected to affect can
therefore help improve the design of the project considerably. It can
improve the odds for successful implementation of the project by pro-
viding managers with more detailed information on which to base their
activities.
A socioeconomic baseline survey can also provide benchmark data on
economic and social variables that can be used to measure the effects and
impact of a project during and after its implementation. The survey
therefore should ideally be undertaken before the implementation of the
project and needs to be funded before the project starts.'
A baseline survey will be similar in coverage and questionnaire con-
struction to what is termed a general household survey: household mem-
bers will be listed by demographic characteristics; the types of farming
and nonfarming activities undertaken by household members may be re-
corded; sources of income from on-farm agricultural production may be
enumerated in some detail; nonfarm labor earnings by each member, or
alternatively expenditures, may be recorded; data on the social or ethnic
status of the household may be collected; information on selected indica-
tors of the quality of life-such as access to clean water, number of
school-age children attending school, and months of self-provisioning
with staples crops-may be gathered; and, if appropriate, some health
and nutrition measures may be included. A baseline survey will, how-
ever, differ from most household surveys in one important aspect: it will
be project oriented and so will focus largely on those characteristics of the
target population that the project is expected to change in some manner.
Extreme caution is necessary in designing and conducting baseline
surveys; they demand special skills and can be both time-consuming and
expensive, especially when conducted in rural areas. Unless carefully
constructed and limited in scope, they may fail to provide needed data on
the main economic and social variables in time to be useful to the project.
Experience from many countries indicates that critical bottlenecks in the
processing and analysis of data often hinder the timely completion of
baseline surveys. Such delays occur even when computer facilities for
data processing are available. It is thus important to collect only the abso-
1. Whenever it is possible to include potential members of project monitoring
and evaluation (M&E) units in the conduct of baseline surveys, the survey can also
serve as a useful training exercise and help speed up the establishment of M&E
units when the project is initiated.
<<<PAGE=68>>>
56 Structured Surveys
lute rninimum of data and to construct questionnaires that simplify the
processing of data as much as possible.
In order to measure-both during and after the project-the changes
in social and economic variables that the project is expected to bring
about, the baseline survey needs to be easily replicable. For some varia-
bles, the survey may need to be repeated annually (for example, the sec-
tion on crop production), at the midpoint of the project (for example, the
section on farm practices), and at its completion (for example, the section
on assets). The design of the baseline survey will thus have to take
replicability as an important consideration in order not to impose undue
strain on monitoring and evaluation units.2
In most of the literature on evaluation, baseline surveys refer to a
major socioeconomic survey. But the term can be applied to the first
round of a survey of any type, if it is conducted before project-induced
change occurs. If the intended beneficiaries are to be monitored over time
in terms of, say, adoption rates, the first round of interviews may well in-
clude supplementary questions on such topics as farm size, crops grown,
and household size so that the rates may be monitored against the back-
ground of these explanatory variables. Such surveys are discussed in the
remainder of this chapter.
Planning a Structured Survey
Stages in the planning of a structured survey include:
a. Identification of the precise data expected from the survey
b. Design of the survey in terms of the analytical method that will
be used, for example, time-series or cross-sectional analysis, and
the method to be used in selecting survey respondents
c. Choice of the concepts and definitions to be used
d. Definition of eligible respondents-which types of members of
the population are to be included and which are to be omitted
from the survey frame before sample selection
e. Construction of questionnaire, including pretesting
f. Selection of the sample
g. Choice of interviewing method
h. Establishment of data processing and analysis requirements
i. Preparation of reporting formats.
2. For a more extensive treatment of how to design baseline surveys, see the
U.N. household survey manuals, which consider in book-length treatments the
topics needed to be covered. An example: U.N. Department of International Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs, Statistical Office, Handbook of Household Surveys (New
York: United Nations, 1984).
<<<PAGE=69>>>
Survey Design 57
Items d, f, h, and i are treated at some length in succeeding chapters.
We take up the other items here.
Data Requirements
The questions to be addressed in the survey must be clearly specified
through discussions with the data users. For beneficiary contact monitor-
ing, such questions may include: Are project services reaching the speci-
fied target groups? Does acceptance of project recommendations vary by
type of farmer? Are adoption rates moving according to design expecta-
tions? Are production benefits beginning to appear? Too many surveys
have been launched within a project and repeated throughout its life
without any clear agreement between the managers and the monitoring
staff on how the data emerging from the survey will be used.
Once there is agreement on data requirements, a careful review of
other data sources within and outside the project should be made. We
once accompanied a survey team to the field armed with a questionnaire
on use of credit only to find at the first project office that detailed files on
each credit recipient were maintained by project staff during regular vis-
its to the farmers. Collation and analysis of existing data was the need,
not a supplementary sample survey. A review of other surveys, even if
they do not provide the required data, may help in making the method-
ological and design decisions necessary for the new survey.
Survey Design
One of the commonest needs in project monitoring is for a survey that is
repeated seasonally to measure response and adoption rates. This is
termed a longitudinal survey-one that provides a time series of the mea-
sured variables and rates. It is obviously essential for the definition of
variables and mode of interview or measurement to remain constant over
time, but there are two options for sample selection: draw a new sample
of respondents for each round or maintain the same sample over time
(sometimes termed a panel survey).
If the purpose is to estimate change over time, the optimal design is the
panel survey because the error variance of the change from one season to
the next is reduced by a factor of 1 -R, where R is the correlation between
the behavior of the same farmer in two seasons, as measured over all
farmers. If the purpose is to obtain the best possible estimate each season,
any sample properly chosen is as good as any other chosen in the same
way, so that mathematically it makes no difference whether the sample is
maintained or replaced. But in practice both the monitoring staff and the
manager will be concerned that if the sample is to be maintained over
many seasons and if an unlucky random draw is obtained for the first
<<<PAGE=70>>>
58 Structured Surveys
round, resulting in a wrong estimate, then the error will be perpetuated
throughout the life of the project. With independent annual samples, one
may argue that if one of them is unusual it will be evident because of the
unusual result, and the chance of a serious bias being present in all values
will be reduced.
There are also practical considerations. Respondents in a panel survey
may become resistant to the recurrent demands on their time. This has
not, however, been a serious difficulty in developing countries, where
rural people, particularly project participants, tend to be more coopera-
tive than those in industrial countries. Indeed, once the panel members'
collaboration has been obtained, reinterviewing the same panel may be
easier than seeking the approval of a new sample. Some surveys, how-
ever, such as objective yield measurements, may cause real inconven-
ience to the farmer, in which case imposing on his good will for too long
may be asking too much. Another practical consideration is the effect of
repeated interviews on the respondent's behavior-the contamination
effect. In the context of project monitoring, such effects are often weaker
than expected. Experiments show that people remember little of the de-
tail of an interview. Certainly they do not readily change their behavior
just because someone asks them a few questions; if they were that easily
influenced, the extension worker's task would be much easier! Neverthe-
less, questions testing knowledge which are expressed in the form 'Have
you heard of X" cannot reasonably be asked a second time because 'X"
was mentioned by name on the first occasion.
No firm recommendation can be given in the light of the above, but a
popular compromise is to partially rotate the panel from one survey
round to the next. If a proportion p is repeated, the factor reducing the
error variance of the estimate of change becomes 1-pR. A typical value of
R for project participants might be 0.5, so if half the sample is rotated
each round the reduction in error variance will be 25 percent. Rotating a
third or half of the sample in each successive round is a reasonable
choice.
The main alternative to the longitudinal survey is the cross-sectional
design, which involves data collection in only one survey round. Respon-
dents are chosen from each of two or more groups, and the same infor-
mation is obtained for each group. The analysis will then involve com-
parisons of the means or rates of the various groups.
A common example of a cross-sectional survey is one that compares
the performance of the target group with that of a control group (a group
that has not been influenced by the project) according to a set of agreed
indicators. Selecting a valid control group may be rather difficult (dis-
cussed in some detail in chapter 8 of the companion volume).
Another type of single-round survey is one that compares the per-
formance of various subsets of the target group according to some se-
lected classifying variable. For example, we may wish to determine
<<<PAGE=71>>>
Concepts and Definitions 59
whether the likelihood of adopting a technical innovation is affected by
farm size. Adoption rates will be calculated for a set of samples drawn
from each of an agreed set of size groups. The relationship between
adoption rate and farm size can be tested by using analysis of variance or
regression techniques. Of course, the sample may be drawn without ad-
vance knowledge of farm sizes. If the sample is of sufficient size, a rea-
sonable distribution of farm sizes should result, and a regression analysis
of the whole distribution can be undertaken without arbitrary stratifica-
tion into fixed size groups. However, if the distribution of farm sizes is
highly skewed, such a sample may result in too few selections of large
farms to allow a sound determination of the relationship to be under-
taken. Prior stratification, when feasible, is therefore an advantage. More
is said on this in chapter 6.
Concepts and Definitions
Some of the concepts used in surveys are simple and do not require clari-
fication. All of us know the meaning of age and sex. In most instances,
however, even when we use simple concepts, there is a need to define
them precisely in order to avoid ambiguity at the stage of data collection.
Other concepts do not have precise meanings: rich and poor or large and
small when applied to farmers can have different connotations for differ-
ent people. One enumerator may regard any farm under 5 hectares as
small, whereas another may regard one of 3 hectares as large. Income is a
notoriously difficult concept to define with regard to small farmers. Dif-
ferences in the valuation of home consumption and family labor and in
the treatment of changes in herd composition of livestock make it diffi-
cult to obtain agreement on the meaning of income, let alone clearly com-
municate its definition to enumerators and, through them, to respon-
dents.
There is an important difference in the degree to which technical terms
are used if we use a structured survey with junior enumerators rather
than the qualitative modes of information gathering described in the pre-
vious chapters. One of the virtues and requirements of the qualitative ap-
proach is that the interviewer, moderator, or participant-observer allows
the respondents freedom of expression. Because the respondents there-
fore will use colloquial terms, any attempt to impose rigidly standard
technical terms would defeat the purpose of the qualitative methods of
data collection.
When using enumerators to conduct a dispersed-sample inquiry, how-
ever, it is clearly necessary to impose standard terms (with unambiguous
definitions) and methods so that all enumerators are following a com-
mon set of instructions in which they have been trained. This is a much
more important issue than many survey designers realize. For example, if
the household is the reporting unit, it matters a great deal that a sensible
and acceptable definition of household is adopted. This importance is ac-
<<<PAGE=72>>>
60 Structured Surveys
centuated further when a holding is identified through its links with a
household. The number of holdings covered and reported on will largely
depend on the household definition. In an African country, the findings
of a longitudinal survey that was repeated annually showed a major de-
cline in household size in two successive rounds because in the second
round, for some reason, enumerators treated many wives of male heads
of family as having their own household if they lived in a hut separate
from their husband. This change in definition by the enumerators,
whether intended or not, in turn produced a large increase in the number
of holdings and a reduction in their average size, because the plots culti-
vated by the wife were now treated as a holding separate from that of the
usual head of family. Such terms as these, and others of particular rele-
vance in the project context, are discussed below in order to remind the
reader of the accepted definitions (if they exist) and to make suggestions
regarding their adoption in monitoring and evaluation systems.
Household
Popular though it is as a unit of selection for contacting respondents in a
survey, there is no agreed definition of a household. The simplest defini-
tion, adopted by many with U.N. sanction, is 'a household is a group of
people who live and eat together.' Some international experts have gone
further, or in a sense less far, and said that a household is whatever the
community believes it to be. We suggest, however, that this will not do in
the context of agricultural project monitoring, where most households
are operating a single holding. We need to define unambiguously the
holding via the selected household. We propose the following:
A household comprises a person or group of persons generally bound
by ties of kinship who live together under a single roof or within a sin-
gle compound and who share a community of life in that they are an-
swerable to the same head and share a common source of food.3
Actually, unlike many national surveys, project surveys do not so com-
monly involve the selection of households. It is more likely that the
farmer or project participant is selected directly and his farm and house-
hold identified accordingly.
Holder
Holder is the technical term for what we call in common parlance a
farmer. This word is widely preceded by the word 'small,' that is,
3. Dennis J. Casley and Denis A. Lury, Data Collection in Developing Countries,
2d ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1987).
<<<PAGE=73>>>
Concepts and Definitions 61
"smallholder," to indicate a farmer with a small farm. The word
smallholder, despite its popularity in development literature, has no defi-
nition at all, other than the one just stated. A small farmer in one country
such as the pampas of Argentina would be a very large farmer in Malawi.
Ten hectares may be a minimum to eke out a living in arid areas of north-
eastern Brazil, but it puts one among the most productive in the Punjab
of India.
"Holder,' however, has an internationally agreed definition which
states that the holder is the person who exercises control over the opera-
tions of a holding and is responsible for the utilization of available re-
sources. This, of course, begs the question, for we now have to define
"holding' (see below). Before we leave the holder, however, we can say
that in a project context in addition to being the person we normally de-
scribe as the farmer, he will also be described as the project participant
and intended beneficiary. He is the person who gets the project's credit,
buys the project's recommended hybrid seed and fertilizer, and so forth.
Holding
The holding is defined as a unit of agricultural production comprising all
the land used completely or partly for agricultural purposes and all live-
stock kept and operated, without regard to legal ownership. The land
should be in use for agricultural purposes, or having once been in use, be
lying fallow with the intention of being used again at a later date. Com-
munal land, land never used for agricultural purposes, and natural forest
are not part of an agricultural holding. Although communal land is not
part of the holding, livestock owned by the holder but grazed on such
land is.
Note particularly that legal ownership is not the issue. The cultivation
of the land or management of the livestock with utilization of the product
is the determining feature.
Parcel
The holding is made up of one or more parcels. The number of parcels is
an indicator of the degree of the fragmentation of the holding, for a par-
cel is defined as a piece of land operated as part of a holding that is com-
pletely surrounded by land belonging to other people's lands or commu-
nal lands. If a holding has three parcels, the farmer has three pieces of
land that he operates that are separated from each other, sometimes by
considerable distances. The existence of multiple parcels is a bane to the
surveyor, who can never be sure that the farmer has revealed all his par-
cels. Moreover, if the physical measurement of crops is involved, remote
parcels can present real difficulties.
<<<PAGE=74>>>
62 Structured Surveys
Plot
There is no term more beloved of surveyors that has so little meaning to
the person who is cultivating it than 'plot.' The common approximation
is the concept of a field, which in many countries is more or less unam-
biguously definable because it is a part of a holding that is surrounded by
a hedge, fence, or some other boundary marking. But in other countries
such boundary markings are not used, even though the word or its local
translation may still be used. The trouble with the concept of a field is
that different cultivation practices may exist within it, and because many
agricultural inquiries are going to be crop-specific, the field, even if it is
unambiguous in definition, may not serve as the unit that we wish to re-
cord. So the plot is defined as a piece of cultivated land containing a sin-
gle crop or single homogeneous mixture of crops. There is no necessity
for plots to be defined by identifiable boundaries; the dividing line be-
tween two growing crops is the boundary of the two individual plots. Ad-
herence to this definition can produce remarkable complications. Take,
for example, a field planted with sorghum in which millet has been
mixed in one portion and cowpeas further added in a subportion so that
we have, despite the absence of identifiable markings, three plots: (a) sor-
ghum, millet, and cowpeas; (b) sorghum and millet; and (c) sorghum.
The plots denote, respectively, the portions of the field that contain each
particular composition of crops. If physical measurements are to be taken
for precise comparative yield studies, the plot must be strictly defined. In
interviews with farmers, adherence to the definition will be impossible;
the farmer will use his concept of a plot, which is likely to approximate a
field.
Mixed Cropping
No issue complicates crop measurement more than that caused by mixed
cropping. In common parlance, this term covers all situations in which a
single plot contains more than one crop at some point during the growing
season. Many distinct forms of mixed cropping occur, such as associated
crops, which consist of an annual crop growing under a perennial; relay
cropping, in which crops are added in a time sequence within a plot with
some overlapping time periods when particular combinations are in the
field at the same time; and the simple form of mixed cropping, in which
two crops are interplanted throughout a roughly equivalent season. The
measurement problems are discussed in chapter 7.
Project Participant
Project participant is a term we have used frequently and almost inter-
changeably with project beneficiary, thus expressing the hope that any-
<<<PAGE=75>>>
Concepts and Definitions 63
one who participates in a project may obtain some benefit from partici-
pation.
Because many monitoring surveys focus on this group, it requires a
careful definition. This is not always a simple task, as the following ex-
ample illustrates. A popular form of extension service, known as Training
and Visit, uses a set of contact farmers as the focal point for regular visits
from an extension agent. The neighbors of the contact farmer, however,
are also meant to be informed of the date and location of the agent's visit
and are free to attend. Furthermore, it is hoped that the contact farmer
will disseminate the messages delivered to his neighbors during normal
social exchanges. Clearly, the contact farmer is a project participant in the
sense that he participates in a regular dialog with the extension agent,
whose services are funded by the project. But suppose the contact farmer
finds the messages delivered irrelevant and does not adopt them. Is he
still a participant? What about the noncontact neighbor of the contact
who does hear the message and does adopt it? Is he a participant? In both
cases the answer is yes, although for the former we have a nonadopting
participant. The neighbor of the contact who shows no sign of adopting
recommended practices is a difficult case, for ideally we need to deter-
mine whether his nonadoption is caused by rejection of the service or a
lack of knowledge of it. One could expand these possibilities to even
greater levels of potential confusion. In practice, however, we would de-
scribe all farmers who have some access to the messages or services as
participants. In other projects, there is less ambiguity. A credit project
provides credit to a listed number of approved applicants; these are the
project participants. In practical survey terms, we will of course need to
classify the general participants by type and level of participation, for ex-
ample, by amount of credit used.
Recall and Reference Periods
In most interview situations the respondent is expected to recall certain
events that occurred during a specified period that has already passed.
The recall period is the elapsed time between the event recalled and the
time of the interview. To interview a farmer at one harvest period, but
also to ask him about his harvest in the previous year, is of course to ask
him to recall an event that is one year old.
The reference period is that between defined "opening' and 'closing'
times for the event that is being recalled. The reference period should be
closed; that is, its starting and finishing points should be clear to the
respondent-for example, 'yesterday.' To inquire about labor in the last
season's planting period, conversely, is to use an open reference period,
for the respondent has not been given a precise definition of the opening
and closing dates of the period, which in any case is likely to vary from
farmer to farmer.
<<<PAGE=76>>>
64 Structured Surveys
One end of the reference period is certainly closed if it is the moment of
the interview. The problem usually is to define the start of the period in a
way that is logical for the respondent. Open-ended reference periods are
a principal source of bias in obtaining quantitative responses to questions
requiring memory recall.
The other thing to remember is that, except for the most important
events in life, memory fades with time. This issue is often glossed over by
those who wish to conduct 'before" and 'after' surveys on the basis of
one interview when it is already long "after.' Memories of the 'before"
state of affairs are likely to be poor, and this often results in understated
events and quantities.
Questionnaire Construction
The questionnaire is the most important element of a structured survey; it
must be standardized, well tested, and list in a systematic manner all the
questions which are to be put to the respondent. Several well-established
rules and regulations for constructing a questionnaire are mentioned
briefly below.
Open-ended versus Closed Questions
Questions in an interview can be posed in an open-ended or closed man-
ner. Open-ended questions allow the respondent to give answers using
his own language and categories. Closed questions confront the respon-
dent with a set of predetermined responses, and he has to identify one or
more of those that are applicable.
The main advantage of open-ended questions, as discussed in chapter
2, is that the answers are spontaneous. The respondent is free to speak his
mind. He can suggest new categories or ideas that might not have oc-
curred to the designer of the questionnaire. The main drawback of open-
ended questions in structured surveys is that they create large problems
for quantitative analysis. It is extremely difficult to code them. The coder
has to read carefully all the responses, develop new categories, and code
each case accordingly. Even then, he is not sure if he has interpreted the
answer correctly. There is often a great deal of variation in the answers.
The responses might range from one sentence to a lengthy explanation.
Moreover, the recording of the interviews is more susceptible to the
framework and judgment of the enumerator, who is likely to stress the
points which in his opinion are important. And because many enumera-
tors are involved in a typical survey, the reliability of the data suffers.
Some enumerators might probe more deeply than others. Finally, the
open-ended format is very time-consuming.
Closed questions help to clarify for the respondent the type of re-
sponse sought-the listing of alternatives clarifies the question itself.
<<<PAGE=77>>>
Questionnaire Construction 65
Moreover, closed responses can easily be coded and analyzed, and be-
cause interviewing takes less time, more items can be covered during a
reasonable interview time. But closed categories may restrict the re-
sponse. Sometimes respondents are not willing to reveal their ignorance
regarding a topic, and they will arbitrarily select one of the response cate-
gories; others who have a viewpoint that does not fit within the listed op-
tions may opt for one of the stated ones to shorten the dialog.
Simple, matter-of-fact questions and questions that can be answered
quantitatively can be adequately covered by closed responses. This is also
true when the behavioral choices are limited. For example, it is very likely
that most farmers borrow from a limited number of sources-relatives,
friends, cooperatives, moneylenders, banks, and so on. Therefore prede-
termined categories can serve the purpose. Open-ended questions may
be needed, however, if we want to understand why farmers prefer a
moneylender to the village cooperative bank. In order to propose a list of
offered responses for a closed question for which the choices are not ob-
vious, an open-ended question can be used in a pilot set of interviews to
determine the types of responses obtained.
One type of questionnaire that is often used-the tabular format-
needs to be mentioned before the sequence of questions is discussed.
When a series of numbers on a specific topic is required from the respon-
dent, the enumerator may be provided with a two-way table in which to
insert the appropriate numbers. Example 10 shows such a table for a live-
stock survey. A variation of this is the format used for enumerating
households in which one row of the table is used for each individual and
the columns refer to specific details about the individual such as age, sex,
relationship to head of household, and occupation.
EXAMPLE 10. A Two-Way Table for Livestock Numbers
Breed Calves Heifers Cows Bulls Steers Oxen
Indigenous
Exotic
Crossbreed
Total
Tabular layouts are convenient for both the questionnaire designer and
the enumerator, but the considerable latitude that is allowed to the enu-
merator must be realized and accepted. With such a layout, neither the
form nor sequence of questions is specified, and the style of interrogation
is very much at the enumerator's discretion.
For most surveys of the beneficiary-contact monitoring type, the ques-
tionnaire format is likely to be based on questions in a series, with per-
haps an occasional small tabular insert among the questions. One com-
<<<PAGE=78>>>
66 Structured Surveys
mon example is used in monitoring the penetration of an extension
service-with local variants it opens in the manner shown in the extract
in example 11.
EXAMPLE 11. Agricultural Research and Extension Project
MONITORING SURVEY: QUESTIONNAIRE
Form 1
Date
Zone
Number
Contact/Noncontact (1) Contact (2) Noncontact
Sex (1) Male (2) Female
A. CONTACT FARMERS
1. How many times did the ex-
tension agent visit you in the last
four weeks? (0) (1) (2) (3)
2. During the last visit, how
many farmers participated? (0) 0 persons (1) 1-5
(2) 6-10 (3) 11-15 (4) 15+
3. Have you told other farmers
about the visits? (1) yes (2) no
4. Would you like to be visited? (1) more frequently (2) less fre-
quently (3) same
5. Do you wish to remain a con-
tact farmer? (1) yes (2) no
B. NONCONTACT FARMERS
6. Are you aware that an exten-
sion agent comes regularly to the
village? (1) yes (2) no
7. Do you know where the ex-
tension agent conducts demon-
strations? (1) yes (2) no
8. Do you know on which day
he conducts demonstrations? (1) yes (2) no If yes, indicate
day:
9. Do contact farmers discuss
the extension agent's recommen-
dations with you? (1) on a regular basis
(2) rarely
(3) never
<<<PAGE=79>>>
Questionnaire Construction 67
10. Have you or a member of
your household attended a dem-
onstration in the last four weeks? (1) yes (2) no
11. If no, why not? (1) not interested
[End Interview] (2) too far
(3) don't know place or time
(4) not enough time
(5) other (specify)
12. If yes, who? (1) respondent
(2) spouse
(3) both
(4) other (specify)
Form 2
Date
Zone
Number
Contact/Noncontact (1) Contact (2) Noncontact
Sex (1) Male (2) Female
Crop
13. Total area under crop (hectares)
14. For each of the recommendations below, ask the following
questions.
Were you Had you
Extension aware of it applied it Have you
agent prior to prior to applied it
recommendation agent visit? agent visit? this year?
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
(1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no (1) yes (2) no
Source: World Bank. This form is adapted from one as taken from Josette Murphy
and Tim Marchant, 'Monitoring and Evaluation in Extension Agencies Using the
Training and Visit Approach" (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, forthcoming).
Wording of the Questions
As indicated earlier, in surveys using many enumerators it is necessary to
apply standard concepts and definitions. The enumerators should be
well trained in these, but the more technical terms should be avoided as
far as possible in the actual wording of questions to be put to the respon-
dent. For example, the question 'What constrains you from expanding
your holding?' involves not only the use of a technical word-
<<<PAGE=80>>>
68 Structured Surveys
'holding'-but a formal word-"constrains"-that may be unfamiliar to
the respondent. The interviewer must already have established the scope
of the holding that is under discussion; the question would be better
phrased: 'Why don't you increase your cultivation [or livestock]?'
It is very easy to word a question in an ambiguous way. Words such as
'here," 'new,' and 'currently" are open to various interpretations. When
using even such an apparently unambiguous word as 'you" it is neces-
sary to be clear as to whether the question refers specifically to the person
addressed or to any member of the household.
A question such as "What type of house do you live in?" is not clear, be-
cause there can be different interpretations of the meaning of "type of
house." It can be interpreted with reference to the size, location, facilities
provided, construcfion material used, and so forth. Indefinite words such
as "often," frequently," and 'many" lack precise definitions and must be
avoided. In the context of structured surveys (with limited follow-up
probing allowed), questions asking "why. .. rarely give useful results. It
is better to formulate possible reasons and frame specific questions on
each.
If a list of options is to be read to a respondent, it must be short (three or
four items) because the respondent has to group the individual choices.
The alternative is to seek a yes or no response to each of a list of options,
in which case the list can be longer and more than one yes is permissible.
When allowing multiple responses to a range of alternatives, enumera-
tors must be carefully instructed whether to conclude with a probe such
as "Any others?" If so, and an additional response is elicited, the probe
should be repeated until the respondent says no. Time spent on obtaining
the best, simplest, and clearest wording of questions will be well re-
warded in terms of quality of response.
Leading Questions
A question phrased so that it creates an impression that a certain answer
seems to be expected is known as a leading question. For example, "How
do you feel about the working of the village cooperative society?" is not a
leading question, but "Would you agree that the village cooperative soci-
ety is helpful to you?" is. The second question is likely to evoke a more
positive answer than the first.
The use of emotionally potent expressions also leads to certain an-
swers. Consider alternative questions for a survey in a Latin American
society. First, "The government is stressing that the agricultural land
should be redistributed among actual cultivators. How do you feel about
it?" Second, "Critics of the government are suggesting that all agricultural
land should be distributed among actual cultivators. How do you feel
about it? It is highly probable that we will get different answers from the
same respondents for these two questions. Neither is recommended.
<<<PAGE=81>>>
Questionnaire Construction 69
Double-Barreled Questions
Inadvertently, two or more questions are sometimes included in what is
presented to the respondent as one. A good illustration is, "Do you think
that the government should provide credit to farmers at affordable rates
and assist them in getting the improved variety of maize seed at a subsi-
dized price?" Obviously, there are several questions explicitly stated or
implied here that should be asked independently. The problem with such
questions is that they confuse the respondent, who happens to agree
with one part of the question but not another. In this instance, a respon-
dent who does not favor the idea of government providing credit but
wants seed at subsidized rates would not know how to answer. The ten-
dency with convoluted or double-barreled questions is for the respon-
dent to relate to the last part and answer that. One of the signals that indi-
cates the likelihood of a convoluted question is the inclusion of the words
"and' or 'or." The questionnaire designer should be on the lookout for
these words and reexamine his question when they appear.
Response Set
A response set occurs when a respondent answers a group of questions in
the same way regardless of the question content. It can occur when sev-
eral questions are presented together with the same response format. For
example, a questionnaire contains questions about technical packages,
input supply, and agricultural marketing. The respondent is supposed to
answer yes or no to all the questions. In such a situation, a farmer who is
well disposed toward the technical package is likely to say yes to all ques-
tions if the questionnaire begins with technical package statements with
which the respondent agrees. A response set can be avoided either by
varying the response categories for each question or by avoiding placing
together all questions referring to the same topic.
Question Sequence
Opening questions should be pleasant, interesting, and easy to answer.
They also should stimulate the interest of the respondents in the survey.
Dull or sensitive questions should not be posed at the beginning of the in-
terview.
The flow of questions should be logical and smooth. The respondent
should be able to see immediately the relationship between the questions
asked and the stated objective of the survey. If the interviewer has told
the respondent that the survey is being carried out to assess the credit
needs of the farmers in the project area, and then asks questions about
his family, the respondent might become suspicious about the ultimate
objective. Inserting explanations within a questionnaire can help to
smooth a transition from one topic to another. For example, after asking
several questions about farming practices, the enumerator can say, "So
<<<PAGE=82>>>
70 Structured Surveys
far we have talked about your farming experience and practices. I would
like now to ask a few questions about your family.'
The location of sensitive questions in a questionnaire is an important
issue over which experts differ. Some believe that they should be put at
the end. The obvious advantage of this course is that even if they cause a
breakdown in respondent cooperation, answers on other matters have al-
ready been secured. Some survey specialists argue, however, that at the
end of an interview the respondent is usually tired and bored and may
give superficial answers because he does not want to prolong the inter-
view.
We suggest the following two rules of thumb. First, sensitive questions
should be introduced only when rapport has been established between
the enumerator and the respondent; so they cannot be located at the very
beginning. Second, they should be put where they are most relevant in
reference to other questions. For example, questions about the
nonrepayment of loans from a credit society should be placed where
other questions about credit are asked and not with the section on farm
practices or family size.
Verbatim or Shorthand Questions
If it is vital that the questions be delivered to the respondent in a particu-
lar form using precise terminology, then the wording must be given in the
questionnaire as it is intended to be delivered-a verbatim questionnaire.
If it is thought to be necessary to restrict the interview format in this way,
then it follows that the questionnaires must be translated into all the lan-
guages that will be used during the interviews in various locations; other-
wise the purpose is defeated. Such a questionnaire must also incorporate
all possible sequences of answers so that the enumerator has a precisely
worded follow-up depending on the response to a previous question. An
excerpt from a verbatim questionnaire is shown in example 12.
EXAMPLE 12. A Verbatim Survey
4-0. Attitudes
4-1. Did you or any other member of your household use the land now cov-
ered by the woodlot before the woodlot was started?
(1) Yes (2) No m1
I I
Go to 4-2 Go to 4-4
4-2. Has the closure of the woodlot created any difficulties for your
household?
<<<PAGE=83>>>
Questionnaire Construction 71
(1) Yes (2) No El
I I
Go to 4-3 Go to 4-4
4-3. In what way(s)?
(1) Further distance to travel for grazing / collection of grass El
(2) Now purchasing grass and fodder to make up deficiency LI
(3) No grounds for cattle to stand El
(4) Only some sections of the village population now allowed to use
woodlot Ol
(5) Other (specify) Ol
4-4. Do you agree with the use of this land for the woodlot?
(1) Yes (2) No Ol
I I
Go to 4-5 Go to 4-6
Source. Roger H. Slade and J. Gabriel Campbell, An Operational Guide to the
Monitoring and Evaluation of Social Forestry in India (Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, 1987). Used by permission.
We prefer, when possible, to allow the enumerator some flexibility in
the question and answer sequence even within the framework of a struc-
tured interview. The questionnaire then acts as a memory aid for the enu-
merator (as well as the means of recording replies), and the questions can
be summarized neatly in almost shorthand form. It is advisable to avoid
mixing verbatim and summarized questions in one questionnaire, for the
enumerator will then tend to deliver the shorthand questions as if they
were expressed in full. If flexibility is allowed, there is a danger that some
questions will be missed.
Provision for Recording
If the reply to a question is a number or quantity, a precisely defined
space for recording the answer is required. If the survey is to be processed
with a computer, it is recommended that boxed spaces be provided so
that one digit is entered into each box. Item specification that needs to be
coded can be similarly provided for, as in the example below.
Number of units
Crop Crop code Harvested Sold
_ WI WI E11I
_ WI WI W1 I
<<<PAGE=84>>>
72 Structured Surveys
To classify the category of a response, the general format is to list the
agreed choices with an instruction to the enumerator to tick or circle a
number according to the response received. Two versions are shown
below.
How many times was the plot weeded?
Tick: Circle the number:
Once 1. Once
Twice 2. Twice
More than twice 3. More than twice
When probing the respondent's attitudes to a project-related issue, we
may ask the respondent to place his opinion within a scale ranging from
very positive to very negative. The question is posed, followed by the
supplementary:
Do you: Strongly agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly disagree
(No opinion)
We recommend providing an even number of options, say, four or six,
although an extra one may be needed to provide for those who genuinely
have no opinion on the issue. If an odd number is used, there is a ten-
dency for responses to bunch on the middle one of the series. This is less
likely when the choices are delivered verbally but occurs when the ques-
tionnaire is completed by the respondent personally.
When more than one response may be ticked for an individual ques-
tion, it may be possible-and if so, useful-to ask the respondent to rank
his choices in order of importance. For example, a question on farmer's
clubs might appear as follows, together with the instructions to the enu-
merator.
What are the most important activities that your farmer's club should
undertake?
Supply credit Ol
Supply fertilizers EO
Supply seeds Ol
Arrange for combined marketing ED
Arrange discussions C1
Other (specify) E
_
(Note: If the respondent gives two or more responses, ask him to say
which is the most important to him, the next most important, and so
on, and enter 1, 2, 3, etcetera, in the appropriate boxes.)
In general, the questionnaire designer should strive for a printed ques-
tionnaire with a neat, uncluttered appearance. The enumerator often is
<<<PAGE=85>>>
Questionnaire Construction 73
required to complete the entries in far from ideal conditions for writing. A
neatly laid out, well-spaced questionnaire is less likely to cause recording
errors. Such a questionnaire also facilitates the entry of the data onto a
computer file. Errors at this stage can be numerous if the questionnaire
does not have neat boxes and all answers recorded on the right-hand side
of the page.
Pretesting a Questionnaire
A newly prepared questionnaire should be pretested on a few pilot re-
spondents in order to identify weaknesses, ambiguities, and omissions
before it is finalized for the survey itself. Unfortunately, this stage is often
neglected. Many questionnaires that have been used in surveys would
have received further badly needed attention even if they had been
tested on an office colleague. The test should detect the following prob-
lems:
* Wording of questions. Was the wording of the questions clear to the re-
spondents? Did all respondents derive the same meaning from the
questions?
* Construction of sentence. Were the sentences appropriate? Were they
too short or too long? Did they give unnecessary details which con-
fused the recipients?
* Question format. Was the question format suitable? If there were
open-ended questions, was there a great variation in responses
which would make them difficult to code? Were the existing re-
sponse categories for the closed questions adequate in range?
a Difficult questions. Were there questions which the respondents
found it difficult to answer?
* Same answer. Were there questions for which all the respondents gave
the same answers? (This indicates that the questions were nondis-
criminating.)
* Refusal rate. Was there a tendency for respondents to refuse to an-
swer particular questions? (Fortunately, in general refusal is not a ser-
ious problem in rural areas, but a particular question may be disturb-
ing.)
* Time requirement. What was the approximate time needed to com-
plete the questionnaire? Did the respondent seem to tire at the end?
* Interviewer's convenience. Did the enumerators find it difficult to ad-
minister some parts of the questionnaire? Were additional instruc-
tions needed? Were the probes appropriate?
* Coding. Were there problems in coding the data?
* Usefulness of the data. Was the questionnaire able to generate the type
of information which was expected of it?
<<<PAGE=86>>>
74 Structured Surveys
Pretesting the questionnaire is a vital stage in preparing for a survey. Sur-
vey designers neglect it at their peril.
Interviewing the Respondents
Questionnaires need not be administered individually in face-to-face in-
terviews; they can be mailed or, in industrial nations, where the majority
of the populace has a telephone, conducted by telephone. But such
methods are out of the question in most rural societies, and individual in-
terviews undoubtedly remain the most practical mode of data collection.
Even when the respondents are literate, this method has several advan-
tages over other methods. Experience shows that a personal interview
maximizes the chance of obtaining the respondent's full cooperation.
When an item is not understood, the interviewer can repeat it and probe
for details if necessary. The main limitation of the interview method is
that it is expensive. A relatively large proportion of the budget is spent in
providing the salaries and the traveling and daily expenses of the enu-
merators.
The role of the enumerator in a structured survey is quite different
from that of his counterpart in a qualitative survey. In the case of the lat-
ter, the interviewer exercises considerable independence and initiative
about the nature, form, sequencing, and types of questions. He is not in
any way restricted by the interview guidelines he uses; it provides at best
helpful hints and not detailed instructions. Enumerators in a structured
survey must adhere to the questionnaire and the guidelines provided.
The enumerator should cultivate a neutral attitude toward the subject
and keep his own feelings, opinions, and judgments to himself. In no
case should he engage in any verbal argument with the respondent. If the
enumerator has reason to believe that the respondent is not telling the
truth, he should make note of it in the questionnaire so that his supervi-
sor can take any necessary follow-up action.
Rural people seldom refuse to be interviewed, but sometimes they are
unavailable when the enumerator pays his visit. Whenever possible, the
enumerator should inform potential respondents of the date and time of
his arrival and of the interviews. The convenience of the respondent
must be considered. During the peak of the agricultural season, when
farmers are extremely busy in the fields, long interviews should be
avoided as far as possible.
The enumerator should identify himself and provide a short introduc-
tion regarding the project and the purpose of the survey. Many projects,
however, have permanent enumerators who reside in local areas and are
known to the respondents. Obviously, in such instances little self-
introduction is required.
<<<PAGE=87>>>
Interviewing the Respondents 75
Although the enumerator should explain the purpose of the survey, he
need not be very specific about it. Lengthy descriptions often confuse
rather than enlighten the respondents. Moreover, long introductions can
generate biases in the interview by predisposing a respondent to answer
in a particular way. Brief noncommittal statements such as 'We are trying
to find out about the working of the extension service" or 'We want to
know about the availability of agricultural credit' are usually enough.
The general principles of interviewing given in chapter 2 apply to
structured surveys, except that the interviewer is not allowed great dis-
cretion in developing the interview.
The enumerator should avoid asking those questions on the question-
naire which it is clear from earlier answers do not apply. For example,
"How old is your wife?" should not be asked of a respondent who has in-
dicated that he is single, nor "Did you use fertilizers for the wheat crop
during the last agricultural season?" of a respondent who has indicated
that he does not grow wheat. Inapplicable questions can irritate the re-
spondent and undermine the credibility of the enumerator in his eyes. If
the questionnaire designer has done his job properly, the risk of the enu-
merator making this mistake is minimized because the questions will be
in a logical sequence and appropriate skip instructions will be provided.
Nevertheless, the enumerator should stay alert to the possibility of ask-
ing an irrelevant question.
<<<PAGE=88>>>
6 Sampling for Monitoringand Evaluation
THE PURPOSE OF SAMPLING is to economize on the resources that are
needed to collect and analyze statistical data. Instead of using informa-
tion from all members of the population, one collects it from only a part
of the population; this part is taken as representative of the whole. Sam-
pling theory allows one to calculate potential errors and maximize effi-
ciency in selecting the respondents of the study. The use of samples can
also improve the quality of data because of improved management of
surveys made possible by using a limited number of respondents, and
hence enumerators.
To limit the length of this chapter, the examples given are based on esti-
mates of rates and percentages.' Readers of the companion volume will
know that we regard such estimates as fundamental to project monitor-
ing. For treatment of more complex examples dealing with continuous
variables such as income or yields, the reader is referred to standard text-
books.
Several terms that refer to various aspects of sampling need to be de-
fined. The population of concern is called the universe, and the part stud-
ied is called the sample. Inference from the sample to the universe is
made in practice through the application of an estimation formula which
gives the estimated universe figure in terms of the sample observations.
A formula of this kind is called an estimator.
In this chapter, notation for a quantity in the universe is indicated by a
capital letter and for a quantity in the sample by a lower-case letter. Esti-
mators are distinguished with a circumflex. Means (averages) are de-
noted by a bar above the symbol. Thus Yis the universe mean, y is the
sample mean, and the equation Y= y states that the sample mean y is
used as an estimator of the universe mean Y-in other words, that the
1. This chapter is based on a previously published monograph: Christopher
Scott, Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1985). It includes revisions by the author.
76
<<<PAGE=89>>>
Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation 77
mean for the universe will be estimated, in the simplest possible way, as
equal to the mean for the sample. Many estimators are as simple as this,
but sometimes more complex estimators are chosen, notably if one
wishes to bring in information from outside the sample.
Sampling error represents the uncertainty attributable to sampling be-
cause estimates are being made from a sample rather than the universe.
For a given sample design and estimator, sampling error is defined as a
combination of two components: sampling bias and sampling variance.
Imagine that the process of selecting the sample is repeated many times
and yields many independent samples, all of the same size and design.
For a given variable Y, any particular sample s will provide an estimate Ys,
and these estimates will vary from one sample to another. If the mean of
the estimates Y5 over all the possible samples is equal to the universe
value of Y, the estimate is said to be unbiased; any difference from the
universe value is called the sampling bias. The variance of the set of esti-
mates Ys obtained from the set of all possible samples is called the sam-
pling variance.
In practice, sample designs and estimation formulas are chosen in such
a way that the sampling bias is set at zero. Sampling variance is mini-
mized to the extent possible within a given set of cost constraints. There
are, of course, errors which would arise even if the whole universe were
studied-nonsampling errors. These are survey errors: the respondent
gives an incorrect answer or misunderstands the question, the inter-
viewer makes a mistake in recording the response, an error is made when
the data are transcribed, and so on. Such errors may have a random com-
ponent similar to sampling error; but more important, they are likely to
introduce an unknown bias.
Sampling theory allows the sampling variance to be estimated from
the sample data generated by the survey. Formulas can be found in text-
books, and there are many computer software packages which perform
the required computations. It is also possible to predict sampling variance
if one knows the way the sample is to be selected, the sample size, and the
variance of the variable in the universe. This allows one to choose the
most efficient sample design.
Samples are obtained by repeatedly selecting sampling units. Such
units may be districts, villages, holdings, persons, fields, plots, subplots,
or other things. The selection process requires a complete list of units;
such a list is called a sampling frame. A map may be a sampling frame, in-
sofar as it is equivalent to a list.
One method of selection is to assign numbers to the units and then use
a random-number generator (or a table of random numbers which has
been produced by a random-number generator) to identify sample mem-
bers one by one until the required number of units is selected. This proce-
dure is called random selection. For a more common method of sampling
<<<PAGE=90>>>
78 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
from a list known as systematic selection, units are selected at fixed inter-
vals throughout the list, starting from a randomly determined point.
These methods give equal probability of selection to every unit in the
list. This selection probability, also called the sampling fraction, is simply
the ratio:
number selected number in sample
f number in list number in universe
Suppose that the list (the universe) consists of project participants and
suppose that, after selecting a sample with probabilityf and interviewing
its members, we find that the number of adopters of some technique in
the sample is y. We can estimate the number of adopters among all the
program participants as y/f. More formally, we select as the estimator, Y
= y/f. If the percentage of participants in the sample adopting, namely,
the adoption rate, is r, we can estimate the adoption rate R among program
participants as r. Thus R = r. Both Y and R are examples of unbiased esti-
mators.
Inference from the sample to the universe, estimation of sampling
error, and optimization of sampling efficiency all depend on sampling
theory. This mathematical theory is based on the assumption that every
member of the sample has a known and nonzero probability of selection.
Sampling which satisfies this requirement is called probability sampling,
or sometimes scientific sampling.2
Probability versus Informal Sampling
Besides its defining property-known and nonzero selection probabili-
ties for all units-probability sampling is characterized in practice by
several other features:
a Clearly defined selection procedures
• The use of lists (or their equivalent) as sampling frames
* The applicability of sampling theory
* The possibility of estimating sampling error.
Informal sampling is simply the complement: any sampling procedure
that does not give specified values to the selection probabilities. There are
many such methods, including quota sampling and purposive sampling.3
2. The term random sampling is sometimes used in this sense, but such usage
can lead to confusion because the same term can be used to characterize what we
have called "random selection' (in contrast to "systematic selection").
3. Terminology in this area has become fluid in recent years. Purposive sam-
pling once had a highly specific meaning (the sample was adjusted to yield a
specified value of the mean of some important parameter), but it now seems to
be used as a catchall term for any method in which the selection of units is sub-
ject to conscious purpose.
<<<PAGE=91>>>
Probability versus Informal Sampling 79
Most of these methods abandon the features mentioned above, although
some retain the first one. Controversy over probability as opposed to in-
formal sampling is usually the result of misinformation.
In the companion volume and in the earlier chapters of this volume, we
have described specific project information requirements; some of these
can best be met by probability sampling and some by informal sampling
methods. It is the specific information requirement that determines the
method, not the scale or complexity of the survey. This has been misun-
derstood by many who advocate rapid, informal methods. It is true that
large-scale population surveys generally make use of probability sam-
pling schemes, but this does not mean that large samples and full popula-
tion coverage are necessary requirements for such sampling. Consider
the following example.
A project manager believes that a particular message is achieving an
adoption rate of 60 percent among project participants. He wishes to test
this belief by interviewing a simple random sample of participants. To fix
a lower limit of error and a confidence limit, he asserts that he will be
satisified if he can demonstrate with 90 percent confidence that the
adoption rate is not below 50 percent. If the adoption rate is indeed 60
percent, a sample of 39 is needed to yield the desired confidence. (Simple
random sampling is assumed, with P = 0.6.)
This example demonstrates two things. First, probabilty sampling in
no way implies large samples; the sample size may be large or small, de-
pending on the objectives. Second, probability sampling does not have to
cover the whole population. In the example, the sample represents only
the project participants. Probability sampling requires that a universe be
identified, but the survey designer is free to choose the universe before
starting sampling, and it does not have to be all-inclusive.
When a very small sample is contemplated, it can be argued that blind,
random selection may produce an obviously unrepresentative sample
whereas purposive selection can avoid this risk. Imagine, for the sake of
simplicity, that the zone to be studied consists of a long stretch of terrain
and that the average rainfall is high at one end, very low at the other end,
and intermediate in the middle; imagine further that each of these three
areas contains one-third of the population. If random sampling were
used, it could happen that the entire sample would be made up of units
from the area of high rainfall; a purposive selection would avoid this.
This is precisely the type of situation for which stratified sampling was
devised. With the technique of stratification, the zone is divided before
sampling into three strata according to the three levels of rainfall, and a
separate sample is drawn from each stratum. In this way the objectives of
purposive sampling can be achieved while the advantages of probability
sampling are retained.
Yet another frequently encountered misunderstanding is the belief
that formal sampling is impossible unless one possesses certain statistical
<<<PAGE=92>>>
80 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
information about the population. It is sometimes supposed, for exam-
ple, that one cannot use a sample to compare the performance of large
farms with that of small farms unless one knows how many farms there
are of each size; or that one cannot select a two-stage sample, first of vil-
lages and then of farmers, without knowing from the start the number of
farmers in each village. These views are mistaken. It is entirely possible to
select a probability sample without having prior statistical knowledge of
the universe; the only requirement is that a sampling frame exist or that
such a list can be made. For example, from a list of villages one could,
with no knowledge of their sizes, select a systematic sample of one in ten,
then list the holdings in each selected village and select a systematic sam-
ple of one in twenty. This would give a formal probability sample of hold-
ings with a uniform probability of one in 200. It is true that lack of statisti-
cal knowledge of the universe would bring certain disadvantages,
notably that the sample size would be unpredictable and the sampling
error would be relatively high. But these disadvantages, though real, do
not compromise the probabilistic nature of the sample.
As we have seen, many objections to probability sampling are based in
large part on misunderstandings. There is, however, one unmistakable
disadvantage of formal sampling: the need for a list or sampling frame.
Even here there may be misunderstanding: one sometimes hears it ar-
gued that because no list exists, or because the existing lists are seriously
incomplete, probability sampling is impossible. This argument overlooks
the fact that the sampler can arrange to make a list. Indeed, a listing oper-
ation is a typical component of most developing-country surveys, simply
to provide the missing sampling frame. It is often unnecessary to list the
whole universe of study; the technique known as cluster sampling allows
one to limit the listing of holdings, for example, to a sample of villages.
Similarly, if there is no list of villages, one may select a sample of com-
munes or districts and make a list of the villages within that sample only.
Despite these possibilities for economy, it remains true that the construc-
tion of lists will require time and resources, and this is a serious drawback
of probability sampling.
It is important at this point to distinguish between constraints on time
and on resources. It no list is available and there is such an urgent need
for data that not enough time is available to carry out a listing operation,
the time constraint is overriding. There is then no alternative to some
kind of informal sampling. If the problem is one of available funds, how-
ever, the solution is less clear. It may be that greater economy would be
achieved by diverting money from the main enumeration to the listing
operation than by abandoning the listing operation altogether. A study
conducted by the World Fertility Survey (WFS) found that if listing was
omitted and the census was used to determine the selection of areas and
the number of households to be selected in each area, the error involved
<<<PAGE=93>>>
Probability versus Informal Sampling 81
would be equivalent to a drop of 20 percent in the size of the total sam-
ple.4 It follows that if the listing could be done within a budget of 20 per-
cent of the originally planned field cost, it would be more economical to
reduce the sample than to abolish listing. The WFS study is based on con-
servative assumptions, and a figure higher than 20 percent might be
more realistic in most situations. A suggested rule of thumb might be: if
no list is available and if the creation of a list is limited only by cost con-
straints, it would be worthwhile to sacrifice a quarter to a third of the
planned sample size in order to release funds to carry out the listing.
The cost of listing often will exceed this limit, particularly if the option
of cluster sampling is not available and the overall sampling fraction is
very low (making the ratio of listing costs to survey costs very high). In
such cases the argument for informal sampling becomes strong.
What exactly are the disadvantages of informal sampling? Inability to
estimate the sampling error is perhaps the best-known drawback, but it is
far from the most important. The most serious disadvantage is the high
risk of biased selection. If no list of the eligible units (universe) is made in
advance, experience shows that certain categories of household or hold-
ing are systematically less likely to be selected: those that are inaccessible
or remote, those with members who are frequently absent (seasonal mi-
grants, for example), those that have been newly created, those that com-
prise a single person, those with members who belong to an ethnic mi-
nority (who are often regarded as not belonging to the village), and those
with members who are socially or politically prominent (the enumerator
may feel intimidated). Such biases occur in listing and enumeration even
with formal surveys, but they are greatly augmented when no firm rules
are given for selection. To some degree they arise because the enumera-
tor, given a free hand, selects the respondents that present the least
amount of trouble. To avoid this, some informal samples have been con-
trolled by firm rules which seek to tie down the enumerator's choice. For
example, the following instruction could be given: 'Start at the village
center (or chief's house, or mosque, or whatever). Walk east and inter-
view at the tenth house. Continue, turning left and then right alternately
every time an opportunity arises, always interviewing at the tenth house.
Continue thus until the desired (specified) quota is achieved.' Such
methods work best in small towns. They may remove the bias caused by
the enumerator's preferences, but they will certainly do nothing to en-
4. C. Scott and T. Harpham, Sample Design" in The World Fertility Survey:An
Assessment, ed. J. Cleland and C. Scott (New York: Oxford University Press,
1987). This study was based on ten countries (urban and rural sectors were ana-
lyzed separately) drawn from all continents. The finding takes account of the in-
crease in sampling variance only; in practice there is likely to be a bias as well if
the sample is selected without proper listing.
<<<PAGE=94>>>
82 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
sure that dwellings in remote areas or in outlying hamlets are given the
same chances of selection as dwellings in the main village.
Although these risks of bias are serious in every informal sample, they
are only risks, not certainties. There is always a good chance that an in-
formal sample will give a reliable answer. Moreover, every sample is a
gamble-even a probability sample. The difference is that a probability
sample runs a known risk, which can be reduced as low as one may wish,
assuming the necessary resources are allocated. With informal sampling
the risk is much greater and at the same time difficult to assess.
In chapter 8 of the companion volume we summarized the situations
in which purposive sampling is appropriate. We have just referred to one:
the excessive cost of preparing a list from which to sample with known
probabilities. Two other situations need to be mentioned here to round
off this discussion.
Exploratory diagnostic studies often need to be mounted quickly with
no practical possibility of designing a formal survey within the short time
allotted. Such a study may well be undertaken with informal selection
methods when the diagnostic team reaches the field. Out of the study
may emerge a clearer definition of the problem, a hypothesis regarding
its cause, and even a suggested solution. The power of such a study is
much augmented if a more formal survey can then be undertaken with
the use of probability sampling methods to confirm the diagnosis for a
larger population. Such a strategy is ideal for combining the flexibility of
an unstructured search for ideas with the need for scientific confirma-
tion.
The other situation in which purposive sampling is appropriate is the
one discussed at length in chapter 8 of the companion volume-the case
study to disprove a hypothesis or to describe the behavior of an excep-
tional performer. We quote from that section:
Case studies based on nonrandomized selections .. .cannot be used
for valid inferences about the incidence of a phenomenon in the popu-
lation or the average value of a variable in the population. But they can
be used to disprove a null hypothesis that a particular constraint does
not exist or a particular activity is open to all members of the popula-
tion.5
In other words, when we wish to demonstrate that an assumption inher-
ent in the project strategy is wrong, it is sufficient to identify cases in
which it fails to hold. When we wish to show that benefits do ensue when
the interventions are adopted fully and all conditions are met, it is appro-
priate to seek out a sample of such full, enthusiastic adopters.
5. Dennis J. Casley and Krishna Kumar, Project Monitoring and Evaluation in
Agriculture (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987), p. 128.
<<<PAGE=95>>>
Sample Size 83
In sum, purposive sampling has a role when we are describing a phe-
nomenon rather than wishing to infer its incidence in the population.
Sample Size
The first question likely to asked when a sample survey is contemplated
is "How large should the sample be?' In this section we examine the logic
of this choice. Later sections will discuss how the sampler can make a
specific decision in varying circumstances.
It is obvious that the larger the sample the smaller the sampling error.
What is less obvious is the fact that the sampling error depends on the ac-
tual size of the sample rather than on the sampling fraction.6 The sample
size needed to estimate the birth rate (at a given level of precision) in
Gambia would be the same as that needed to estimate the birth rate in
India. Roughly speaking, the relationship is a square-root law: to halve
the sampling error, we must quadruple the sample size.
Sampling error depends not only on the sample size but also on the
sample design. A multistage design increases the sampling error; stratifi-
cation reduces it. These and other effects are described in later sections.
Sampling error also depends on the estimator used. By bringing exter-
nal information into the estimate, we can generally reduce the sampling
variance.7 In our discussions, it is assumed that the estimator for any
mean, percentage, or rate in the universe is simply the same mean, per-
centage, or rate found in the sample, whereas if we wish to use the sam-
ple to estimate a total, we scale up the sample total in proportion to the
sampling fraction. For such estimators, the sampling bias is zero, and
therefore the only sampling error is the random error component.
Finally, sampling error depends not only on the sample but also on the
universe sampled. In particular, if there is wide variation in the universe,
sampling error will be high for a given sample size and design; if all units
in the universe were equal, there would be zero sampling error and a
sample of a single unit would suffice to give perfect precision.
In designing a sample, the investigator starts with a requirement for a
certain degree of sampling precision. In other fields of study, one can
usually specify the amount of precision needed by laying down accepta-
ble margins of error. For example, an engineer will say 'I need this com-
ponent to be accurate to within 0.1 millimeter,' implying 100 percent
confidence that this limit will not be exceeded. But statistical distribu-
6. Strictly speaking, this is true only for sampling with replacement. In the
more common sampling without replacement, the sampling variance is multi-
plied by a further factor, 1 -f, where f is the sampling fraction. This causes a sig-
nificant reduction only if f is substantial; usually it is negligible.
7. For treatment of this topic, the reader is referred to any sampling textbook.
See, for example, Leslie Kish, Survey Sampling (New York: Wiley, 1965).
<<<PAGE=96>>>
84 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
tions are not of this kind; they do not normally show a sharp cutoff.
There is always a chance, however small, that the acceptable limit will be
exceeded. One can never demand 100 percent confidence; the investiga-
tor can, however, specify the degree of confidence required. The closer
this is to 100 percent, the larger the sample will have to be.
Thus the required precision in sampling has to be specified with two
parameters instead of one-the margin of error and the confidence level.
A typical specification would be, "The estimate must be correct to within
plus or minus 10 percent with 95 percent confidence, .meaning that an
error greater than 10 percent would occur not more than 5 times in every
100 trials. Typically, a confidence level of 95 percent is regarded as a stan-
dard requirement. But as we have argued in the companion volume, in
the context of information to facilitate decisionmaking by project manag-
ers it is often appropriate to set a much lower confidence level, such as 80
percent. Relaxing the required confidence level brings down the required
sample size substantially, as we will see below.
Obviously, the choice of the allowable margin of error will depend on
the objectives of the inquiry. But it will also depend on the level of
nonsampling error. In any data collection operation, some important
sources of error are quite separate from sampling error. Grouped together
under the term nonsampling error, these include a wide variety of aberra-
tions: listing errors and omissions, interview nonresponse, response and
measurement errors, interview recording errors, errors of coding and
data entry, and programming or data processing errors. In the context of
small-scale monitoring and evaluation inquiries, the most important of
these are almost certainly the errors of response and measurement. Re-
sponse errors arise primarily through memory failure, through uncer-
tainties about units and dates, and through misunderstanding of ques-
tions. Measurement errors, in particular those of area and yield
measurement, arise from the ambiguities inherent in the measurement
task and the complexity of the operations. In practice, response and mea-
surement errors can be considerably greater than most people imagine.
For example, studies of bias in yield measurements have shown errors of
10-20 percent to be typical (see chapter 7). Reinterview studies have re-
peatedly shown the presence of alarmingly high levels of response error
even on the simplest of survey questions.
The relevance of all this to sample design lies in the obvious considera-
tion that one gains little by reducing sampling error if nonsampling error
dominates the picture. Total error is obtained by summing the squares of
the sampling and nonsampling errors. For example, if the uncertainty at-
tributable to nonsampling error is measured by a standard deviation a,,
= 10 percent and if the sampling error is a, = 5 percent, then the total
error is a = 
2
+ 2 = 11.2 percent. Doubling the sample would re-
duce cT from 5 percent to 5/ F2 percent. If a,, stays fixed, the total error
<<<PAGE=97>>>
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques 85
falls from 11.2 percent to 10.6 percent, an almost negligible gain. But
such a doubling of the sample might well reduce the quality of supervi-
sion, which would result in an increase in the nonsampling error that
could easily swamp this small reduction.
Although nonsampling error is difficult to predict and has no simple
relationship to sample design, it is clear from the above that small sam-
ples often may be preferable to large ones. In general, once the sample
size rises into the hundreds it is likely that efforts toward more thorough
training and supervision of enumerators will pay off better than equiva-
lent expenditures to enlarge the sample.
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques
In this section we give a formula connecting the margin of error, the level
of confidence, and the sample size for the simplest types of sample de-
sign. The same chain of reasoning can be used in reverse. We may start
with a given sample size determined by the available resources and use
the same formula to determine the attainable margin of error for a given
confidence level.
Many surveys need separate estimates for a number of distinct do-
mains of study, such as individual project zones. The calculation for de-
termining sample size that we describe has to be carried out for each do-
main for which an estimate is required, and the total sample will be the
sum of these domain samples.
Consider the simplest type of monitoring problem involving sampling.
It is assumed that a complete list of the universe elements-holdings,
project participants, plots, or whatever-is available and that the pur-
pose of the inquiry is to estimate the value of a simple indicator, which is
defined as the percentage of the listed units that have a specified charac-
teristic. For example, we may have a list of project participants and wish
to estimate the adoption rate for some recommended technique, or we
may have a list of all holdings in the area and wish to estimate the per-
centage that used a certain fertilizer.
We begin by assuming random sampling and then consider refine-
ments. This method involves numbering the list and using random num-
bers to select a sample. Many handheld statistical calculators have a
random-number generator. If the list runs to a three-digit number, every
unit must be given a three-digit identification number (for example, the
fifth unit will be 005, the fifteenth will be 015, and so on). Three random
digits are then run off, and these are read as one number; the number de-
termines the unit selected. If the random number exceeds the highest
number on the list, or if it selects a unit that has already been selected,
this particular three-digit number is rejected entirely (not modified). The
process is repeated until the desired number of units is reached.
<<<PAGE=98>>>
86 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
The procedure for fixing the desired sample size has been outlined in
an earlier section. The investigator must decide on two things: first, the
margin of error; and second, the percentage confidence with which it is
required to know that this margin will not be exceeded.
The margin of error D, which is expressed in absolute percentage
points, represents the largest acceptable error in the estimate. The margin
may be two-sided or one-sided. If it is two-sided, one generally adopts
equal values on either side so that the margins are ± D. For example, if D
= 10, then an estimate such as 37 percent will imply a confidence range
of 27-47 percent. It may be decided that only gross overestimation need
be guarded against. In that case, D will be one-sided, and if again we as-
sume D= 10, an estimate such as 37 percent will now imply a confidence
range of 27 percent and up.
Next, one has to fix the percentage confidence level for asserting that
the margin will not be exceeded. It is here that the distinction between
one-sided and two-sided margins needs attention. A figure of 90 percent
confidence for a two-sided margin ± D implies a 10 percent probability
that the error will exceed one or the other margin. This 10 percent divides
into a 5 percent probability of going below the lower margin-D and a 5
percent probability of exceeding the upper margin +D. Thus if the user is
interested in one margin only, say the lower one, the requirement of 95
percent confidence that this will not be breached corresponds to a 90 per-
cent confidence that the same two-sided margin D will not be breached.
Confidence limits expressed in percentage terms have to be converted
into a quantity K based on the normal distribution (see table 2).
To determine the required sample size, we still need one more parame-
ter, namely, the variance V2 of the variable of interest among the popula-
tion. For a percentage rate R, assuming simple random sampling, this is
R(100 - R). We can now obtain the required sample size from the well-
known formula n = K2V2/D2 , which becomes, for a percentage rate R, n =
K 2 R(100 - R)/D2 .The only unknown quantity here is R, the actual rate
we plan to estimate. The formula is insensitive to the exact value of R,
however, and a rough guess will suffice. In fact, R(100 - R) reaches a
Table 2. Conversion of Confidence Interval to Normal Deviate
Confidence level (percent)
Two-sided interval One-sided interval Normnal deviate (K)
75.0 87.5 1.15
80.0 90.0 1.28
85.0 92.5 1.44
90.0 95.0 1.64
95.0 97.5 1.96
<<<PAGE=99>>>
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques 87
maximum value of 2,500 when R = 50; if no better guess can be made,
this value may be adopted as a safe upper limit.
For example, using a simple random sample, we wish to estimate the
adoption rate of a certain practice among the listed holders. We also want
to know with 90 percent confidence that the rate will not be overesti-
mated by more than 10 percentage points. We believe that the rate may
be about 40 percent. We have a one-sided, 90 percent confidence limit.
The conversion table shows that this corresponds to K = 1.28. D, the ac-
ceptable margin of error, is 10. The guessed value of R is 40. Thus, n =
1.282 X 40(100 -40)/102= 39. Even if our guessed value of R is way off,
the worse value (R = 50) would give n = 41, which is negligibly larger. In
practice one might adopt a sample size of 50 to allow a margin for nonre-
sponse and other mishaps.
A method that is both simpler than random selection and in general
more statistically efficient (that is, it has a reduced sampling error) is sys-
tematic selection. The reduction in sampling error depends on the extent
to which the list is classified in such an order that the study variable
(here, the adoption rate) shows a steady trend as one goes down the list.
This might happen if, for example, the farmers who joined the program
first are listed first, or if the holdings are listed in order of their distance
from the program headquarters, or perhaps even if the holdings are listed
in order of size. The extent of the reduction in sampling error cannot be
estimated in advance, but it would be reasonable to allow a somewhat
smaller sample, say 45 instead of 50 in the above example, if the ordering
of the list is known to be related to a factor which is likely to affect the
study variable. If the list is not so ordered, there will be no reduction in
sampling error but no increase either; so nothing is lost, and there is still
the advantage that the systematic selection is marginally easier to per-
form (and to check) than random.
To carry out a systematic selection, number all the units in the list as
before. Let N be the number of units in the list and n the number desired
in the sample. Compute N/ n to the nearest whole number. This will be
the selection interval I .Select a random number A between 1 and I. The
first selection is the unit numbered A; the second is that numbered A + I;
the nextA + 21 .Continue thus, selecting every Ith until the end of the list.
Check that the number selected is close to the predicted n .
If the list, or sampling frame, is not naturally ordered in any useful
way, one could of course reorder it before starting the sampling. If it is a
long list, this could be a tedious process. An alternative is provided by
stratification.
Stratification
In stratified sampling, one begins by dividing the sampling frame into
subsets called strata. Sampling is then carried out separately in each stra-
<<<PAGE=100>>>
88 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
tum. This procedure tends to reduce the sampling error to the extent that
each stratum is homogeneous with regard to the variable of interest. We
therefore seek to create strata in such a way that the study variable (the
adoption rate in our example) varies less within each stratum than be-
tween the strata. For example, one might classify farmers into those near
the program headquarters, those at a medium distance from it, and those
far away from it. One expects that the adoption rates will be high, me-
dium, and low, respectively, in these three strata. If so, the amount of var-
iation within strata is reduced; if not, nothing is lost. Like systematic sam-
pling, stratification reduces error by ensuring that the sample is well
spread out among the relevant subclasses of the population being stud-
ied. Stratification has several advantages over systematic selection. Per-
haps the most important advantage is that stratification makes it easy to
bring in many different stratifying criteria simultaneously. For example,
one might make a three-way cross-stratification as follows:
Distance Large farms Small farms
from project Enrolled Enrolled Enrolled Enrolled
headquarters early late early late
Near A B C D
Medium E F G H
Far I J K L
Here twelve strata based on three criteria are cross-classified. In general
when stratifying, more is gained by using many criteria than by using
many levels of one criterion. For example, if the above scheme were mod-
ified so that farm size was divided into six categories instead of two and
the "distance from project headquarters' variable were dropped, there
would still be twelve strata, but it is unlikely that this scheme would be as
effective as the original in reducing the sampling error.
It is important that at least one unit be selected in each stratum. With a
multiple classification such as the one diagrammed, it may be that the
number of units in some cells will be too few to meet this requirement. If
so, there is no objection to combining some of the strata. For example, in
the light of the numbers existing in the sampling frame, we might decide
to combine strata A and E into a single stratum and similarly to combine
strata K and L, thus reducing the total number of strata from twelve to
ten. We are free to make any such groupings before sampling begins.
Sample selection in each stratum must be carried out independently.
The survey designer is therefore at liberty to use different sampling frac-
tions in different strata. In sampling for adoption rates, deliberate use of
different sampling fractions is unlikely to be worth the trouble (unless the
main objective is to compare the rates for different strata; see below). Be-
cause the process of rounding off will produce some variation, however,
and there may be significant variations in response rates among the
strata, it is important to consider how the separate stratum results are put
<<<PAGE=101>>>
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques 89
together in an overall estimate. The simplest procedure is to compute the
adoption rate for each stratum from the sample for that stratum; multiply
this by the number of units existing in the stratum-that is, the number
in the sampling frame-to obtain the total estimated number of adopt-
ers; sum these over all strata; and divide by the universe total to get the
overall adoption rate. In symbols, this procedure would be R = XNhrh /
INh, where Nh is the number of units existing in the frame in stratum h,
and rh is the adoption rate found in the sample in stratum h.
The reduction in sampling variance achieved by stratification (assum-
ing that approximately equal sampling fractions are used in all strata) is
in essence equal to the ratio of the between-strata variance to total vari-
ance. It is unlikely that this can be estimated in advance. In examples of
the kind we have cited, it would be reasonable to expect a gain equivalent
to 10-20 percent-that is, the planned sample size could be reduced by
this amount.
With stratified sampling, we can choose. in each stratum whether to
use random or systematic selection. The arguments in favor of systematic
selection still apply.
Before we leave the topic of stratification, three common misunder-
standings need to be cleared up. First, strata are not the same as domains
of study. Domains of study are parts of the universe for which separate
estimates are required. For example, one may wish to provide separate
data for large farms and small, or for the northern and southern parts of
the project area. Such domains are determined by the survey objectives;
strata are determined by the need to optimize sampling efficiency. Typi-
cally, strata will be smaller than geographical domains of study. Often
they are chosen in such a way that they do not cut across the geographi-
cal domains, but this is not essential.
Second, common belief is that scientific sampling requires that stratifi-
cation be used. Third, another belief is that where the purpose is to com-
pare two groups, these groups have to be made into two strata. Neither of
these beliefs is correct. Stratification is not an essential feature of proba-
bility sampling, and two groups in the sample can easily be compared
without prior stratification. Stratification is simply a device for improv-
ing sampling efficiency-that is, for allowing the same sampling error to
be obtained with a smaller total sample. It achieves this by providing
control over the size of the sample in each stratum; without stratification
these sizes would be left to chance.
The Exit Poll: An Implicit List
One method of sampling, although probabilistic and formal, does not re-
quire any prior listing of the members of the universe. In certain circum-
stances, units belonging to a specific universe arrange themselves in
<<<PAGE=102>>>
90 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
what amounts to a single file-for example, vehicles passing a given
point on a narrow road or people coming through a door. In such cases
the units are arranged in an implicit list. It is clear that a systematic sam-
ple may be selected by choosing every nth unit which goes by.
For a monitoring service, the most likely application of this principle is
the exit poll conducted on persons visiting a service center. For example,
one might interview every tenth farmer leaving the center in a given
week, starting on the first day with a random number between 1 and 10.
The resulting sample may be taken as representative of the center's cus-
tomers for that week.
Though simple, the method is slightly less simple than it appears, and
four precautions are needed. First, it is necessary to decide who exactly is
to be counted as a member of the universe. If the farmer comes with a
friend or with his son, are they also to be counted as clients of the center?
The answer will depend on the objectives of the survey. A decision has to
be made and communicated in advance to the enumerator. Second, care
is needed on the question of time coverage. It is unlikely that an inquiry
based on a single day will be representative. Those who come on market
day, for example, will have characteristics different from those who come
another day. Even the most informal study should cover no less than
three days. Similarly, it should not be assumed that morning and after-
noon customers are equivalent: both should be covered. Third, if there is
more than one exit, all exits should be covered. If the center provides a
number of services, people using different services may leave by differ-
ent exits. Sometimes exit polls from a market are attempted: here, the
problem of covering all exits is even more crucial-and is likely to prove
even more difficult. Fourth, there is the problem of fixing an appropriate
selection interval. Ideally, the interval should be such that at the most
crowded period the number of people coming through during one inter-
view is equal to the selection interval. That way no one will be kept wait-
ing for an interview and the enumerator will be kept as busy as possible.
In practice this cannot be achieved with any accuracy; a guess will have to
be made, and someone is likely to be kept waiting. Organization of the
work will be easier if some person other than the enumerator can take re-
sponsibility for counting those passing and for informing the selected
respondents-and if necessary for asking them to wait. It is possible to
use more than one selection interval-say 1/10 on market day, when
there are more customers, and 1/5 on other days-but if this is done, the
market-day interviews must be given double weight in the analysis to
correct the bias. If selection intervals are varied, this must be done in a
systematic, preplanned manner so that the actual interval is known in re-
lation to every interview. A method that is not legitimate is to have the
enumerator select the next person to come through after each interview is
completed. This would bias the sample in favor of times when visitors are
few.
<<<PAGE=103>>>
Single-Stage Sampling Techniques 91
Sampling for Comparison of Two Rates
Project monitoring often involves comparing two groups, such as partici-
pants and nonparticipants or farmers in each of two locations or two cat-
egories. We assume below that the purpose is to compare two such
groups in terms of a specified indicator, which is a percentage frequency
among the units in each group. We also assume simple random sampling
in each group (which implies that a list, or perhaps two separate lists, of
units is available). If systematic sampling is used, a small reduction in
sampling error can be guessed. If stratification is used, the formulas given
should be applied within each stratum.
Let R, and R2 be the actual rates in the two groups. The universe vari-
ance in each group, as we stated earlier, is given by Vi2 = Ri(100 -R),
where i = 1 or 2. We also saw that this variance is insensitive to the exact
value of R. To a good approximation, unless R I and R2 differ widely or are
close to 0 or 100, we can take V, and V 2 as equal. On this assumption, it is
easily shown that, for a given total sample size, the sampling error for the
difference R ,-R 2 minimized when the sample is allocated equally be-
tween the two groups. We can now obtain a formula linking the sample
size to the confidence interval. Assuming the two groups are equal in
population variance and are sampled independently with equal sample
sizes, the relationship is n = 4K2 R(100 - R)/D2 , where n is the total sam-
ple size (n1 + n2 ); R is the guessed average rate for the two groups; D is the
margin of error for the difference (R - R2); and K is the normal deviate
corresponding to the confidence level, as discussed above. It will be seen
that this is simply four times the value of n given by the previous formula.
(To detect differences, one has to contend with sampling errors in both
the rates, and these add up; this doubles the variance, which quadruples
the n required.)
For example, it is desired to compare the adoption rates for a certain
practice between project participants and nonparticipants with a sample
sufficient to detect, with 90 percent confidence, a difference of 10 per-
centage points in favor of participants. It is believed that the rates may be
about 30 percent. What should be the sample size? Because we are inter-
ested only in a difference in favor of the participants, we use, say, a one-
sided, 90 percent confidence limit. Referring to the conversion figures in
table 2, we find that this corresponds to K = 1.28. The acceptable margin
of error D is 10. The guessed value of R is 30. Thus n = 4 X 1.282 X
30 (100 -30)/102 = 138. Allowing a small margin for mishaps, we
should therefore interview about 75 participants and 75 nonpartici-
pants.
As stated, for minimum sampling error the sample size should be ap-
proximately equal in the two groups. It is unlikely, however, that the two
groups will be equal in the universe. It follows that the sampling fractions
in the two groups will probably have to differ.
<<<PAGE=104>>>
92 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
It may happen that the cost of data collection is much higher in one
group than in the other. Calculation shows that, if the same assumptions
as before are maintained, minimum sampling error for a given cost will
be achieved when n,/n2 = Vc 2 /, where c, and c2 are the costs per unit
selected in the two groups. Thus if, for example, unit costs of surveying
are four times higher in group 2 than in group 1, instead of dividing the
sample equally one should select twice as many units from group 1 as
from group 2.
Sampling with unequal sampling fractions in the two groups will pre-
sent no problem if the groups are listed separately. If they are listed to-
gether but with an indication against each unit showing which group it
belongs to, an easy method of proceeding is to number all members of
group 1 in blue, from 001 upward, and all members of group 2 in red, also
from 001 upward, and to carry out two separate sampling operations. It
may happen that one does not know to which group the units belong
until the interview. In that case it will almost always be best to use a single
fixed sampling fraction throughout, sorting out the two groups only at
the analysis stage. The reason is that nearly all the data collection cost
arises from the time spent getting to the household, identifying the re-
spondent, and launching the interview; much less time is spent asking
the questions. If one has to interview a household anyway to find out to
which group it belongs, little is saved by not asking the remaining ques-
tions.
When the sampling inquiry has been completed and the data are in,
the formula given above can be used in reverse to compute the percent-
age of confidence attaching to the difference found. Let d be the differ-
ence between the adoption rates observed in the two groups. Replace D
by d, and R by r (r = average rate observed) and use the formula to com-
pute K. Look up this value in a table of the normal curve to obtain the
confidence level. (If the samples in the two groups were not equal in size,
replace n by 4 n,n2 /[n1 +n2 ].)
Two-Stage Sampling Techniques
In a typical two-stage sample design, a sample of area units is first se-
lected. A sample of households or holdings or project participants within
each area, often called a cluster sample, is then selected.
Provided more than one unit is selected in each cluster, the use of two
stages tends to cluster the sample, reducing the amount of traveling for
interviews. This is the first advantage of two-stage designs. Second, if no
prior list of units exists, the two-stage design reduces the work of listing:
one has only to list units in the selected clusters.
The calculation of the optimal number of units to be selected within
each sample cluster depends on the calculation of the intraclass correla-
<<<PAGE=105>>>
Two-Stage Sampling Techniques 93
tion 6, which is the correlation between responses given by members of
the same cluster. This causes a loss in sampling efficiency expressed by
the formula z = 1 + 6 (mn- 1), where z is the relative efficiency of a simple
random sample compared with a clustered sample and mn is the mean
number of units selected per cluster. For example, a value of z= 1.3 would
mean that the clustered sample would have to be 30 percent larger than
the simple random sample to achieve the same sampling error.
Despite its sampling inefficiency, cluster sampling brings a cost advan-
tage, and this must be set off against the increased sampling error. For
this purpose a cost function is required. The following model is usually
adopted.
We divide the cost into three components. First, C0 is a fixed overhead
not affected by the sample design. Second, there are costs which are pro-
portional to the number of clusters selected: costs of transport between
clusters, of mapping, of listing, and so on. These are added together and
represented by Cl per selected cluster. Third, there are the costs incurred
within each cluster which are proportional to the number of units se-
lected in the cluster (the cluster take). These are C2 per sample unit se-
lected.
If n is the number of clusters selected and ,n is the mean cluster take,
then the total cost C is given by C=CO+C,n+C 2 niin. Putting this together
with the efficiency formula above, we can compute the optimum Fn using
differential calculus. We obtain 4n2 opt==(C 1 /C 2) X (1-6)/6.
Typical field experience suggests a value of about 7 or 8 for the ratio
C 1/C2 when a listing of holdings has to be carried out, or about 5 when
the list is already available. The value of 6 varies according to the variable
considered. For an adoption rate in an agricultural program, values of
about 0.1 to 0.3 seems to be typical. Accepting 6=0.2, and CI/C2 =7.5,
this gives fip, = /7.5 X 0.8/0.2 = 5 or 6. At this level, the inefficiency
factor z becomes 1.9. In the example cited earlier, the required sample of
50 will thus need to be raised to about 95, so with an average cluster take
of 6 we will need 16 clusters in the sample.
Because the purpose of clustering is to save transportation and listing
costs, the smaller the area adopted as a cluster the better, at least until we
come down to the village unit. Within the village, clustering would save
almost nothing on transport and would involve extra work (because there
are likely to be no within-village addresses).
In the discussion of single-stage sampling, we showed how the needed
sample size can be calculated when comparing two groups. The formula
was introduced with the proviso that the samples in the two groups be se-
lected independently. If the samples are selected using a two-stage de-
sign and if both use the same area sample, the assumption breaks down.
The usual clustering effect is likely to produce a positive correlation be-
tween the two groups, which will lower the variance of the difference
<<<PAGE=106>>>
94 Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation
and hence lower the needed sample size. There do not appear to be any
available data on the size of this effect for agricultural variables. If one
extrapolates, precariously, from available data on social and demo-
graphic variables, one would expect a savings of perhaps 20-30 percent
in the sample size. This will offset to some degree the usual increase in
sampling error attributable to the inefficiency of cluster sampling: the
latter increases the needed n by the factor 1 ±S(Fn-1), where m is now the
average cluster take for either one of the groups.
For example, returning to the example used in the single-stage design,
what changes would be involved if one decided to use a two-stage sam-
ple, with both groups selected from within the same clusters? For this ex-
ample let us assume that 8 is estimated at 0.1 and that 5 members of each
group (10 in all) are to be selected from each cluster.
The previously computed n of 138 now has to be adjusted by two
factors. First, for the clustering effect, multiply n by the factor z = 1 +
(mi-1)6, where mn- = 5 and 8 = 0.1, giving z = 1.4. Second, for the vari-
ance reduction effect between the groups within clusters, multiply n by
the factor 0.75 (a very uncertain estimate). Altogether, we obtain for the
new sample size: 138 X 1.4 X 0.75 = 145 approximately, a figure which
might be raised to, say, 160, for safety. This implies 16 clusters with an
average cluster take of five from group 1 and five from group 2.
Sampling for Rare Events
One sometimes hears it said that when sampling for rare events one
needs a larger sample to achieve the same precision. But the situation is a
little more complex than this.
Returning to the basic formula for computing sample size of a pro-
portion, namely n = K 2 R(100-R)/D2 , suppose we aimed for a two-
sided margin of error of D= ± 5 percent. If R = 50 percent, this implies a
range of 45-55 percent. Putting the values into the formula, we obtain
n = K 2 (50)(100-50)/52 = 10OK2.Now if the events being counted are rare,
R will be small. As an example, suppose R=10 percent. Keeping
the same value of D, we have an interval of 5-15 percent, giving n =
K 2 (10)(100-10)/52 = 36K2 , a much smaller sample for the same precision.
Here, however, the precision is measured in absolute terms: D is the num-
ber of percentage points. If we wish to maintain the same relative preci-
sion, then a '5 percent margin' would mean 5 percent of the rate of 10
percent, so that D=0.5 percent. For this precision a much larger sample
would be needed: n = K 2 (10)(100-10)/0.52 = 3,600K2 .
In summary, compared with sampling for common events, when sam-
pling to estimate the frequency of rare events one needs a smaller sample
to maintain the same absolute precision, but a larger sample to maintain
the same relative precision.
<<<PAGE=107>>>
Sampling for Rare Events 95
A common situation encountered by the monitoring and evaluation
worker is that in which an event is expected to be rare or nonexistent and
assurance is sought from a sample inquiry to confirm this. For example,
there may be rumors of a crop disease, or there may be concern over a
possible misuse by certain farmers of a new technique. Often the sample
study has been set up for some other purpose, but by adding one or two
simple questions a check can be made on the matter of special concern.
Let us suppose that the sample yields not a single case of the event in
question. Obviously, as long as the study is limited to a sample we cannot
be completely confident that the event is not occurring. Let the true prev-
alence rate be R percent. How can we relate the confidence level to the
value of R and the sample size, given that no cases are found in the
sample?
Assuming a simple random sample, the probability of obtaining not a
single case among a sample of size n is Po=(1-R/100)n. The larger the
value of R, the smaller this probability. If we compute the smallest R for
which the probability is below 0.05, we can say with 95 percent confi-
dence that R is not greater than that value. The calculation has been made
for selected values of n in table 3. Also shown is the value obtained if just
one case is found in the sample. This is based on the probability PO + PI'
where P1 = n(l-R/100)n-, x R/100. As an example of the use of the
table, suppose we have a simple random sample of 100 cases and that not
a single case is found of the event in question; then we can assert with 95
percent confidence that the prevalence rate of this event is not greater
than 3 percent. If one such case is found in the sample, we can assert with
95 percent confidence that the true rate is not greater than 4.7 percent.
Table 3. Upper Limit for R, at 95 Percent Confidence
Assuming no cases Assuming one case
Sample size (n) found in sample found in sample
40 7.2 11.3
60 4.9 7.7
80 3.7 5.8
100 3.0 4.7
150 2.0 3.1
200 1.5 2.3
250 1.2 1.9
300 1.0 1.6
<<<PAGE=108>>>
7 | Measurement of Crop
7 Production and Yields
IMPORTANT TECHNICAL AND OPERATIONAL ISSUES are involved in
designing and implementing surveys to measure crop areas, yields, and
production.' These surveys can be time consuming and cumbersome,
and the 'objective measurement techniques" which they use-such as
crop cutting-frequently have had disappointing results. This chapter
considers alternatives that involve the farmer in estimating production
levels.
The appropriate system for obtaining data on the production of a proj-
ect will depend on the precise use to which production estimates are to be
put by project managers. These can differ from those needed by a central
statistical agency, which has the responsibility to obtain aggregate statis-
tics at the national and regional levels. The primary statistical need of a
project is usually to compare specific subgroups of direct interest to the
project. The subgroups could be those who receive different inputs,
groups of beneficiaries who respond differently to those inputs, or con-
trol groups outside the project with which the project participants may
be compared. In addition, the information on production that may be
most useful to a project manager relates to the holding rather than spe-
cific plots.
As the companion volume emphasizes, beneficiary contacts are essen-
tial to implementing a project. Respondents should see themselves as
participants in the activities of a project with a common interest in its
processes. This opens the possibility at the level of the project of under-
taking complex and repeated interviews, close observation and measure-
ment, and in-depth inquiries about the reactions and responses of bene-
ficiaries. None of these may be possible at the level of a national survey.
But because of limited resources and constraints on the capability of the
1. This chapter draws on a monograph previously published in this series on
monitoring and evaluation: C. D. Poate and Dennis J. Casley, Estimating Crop
Production in Development Projects: Methods and Limitations (Baltimore, Md.:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).
96
<<<PAGE=109>>>
Area, Production, and Yield 97
monitoring and evaluation staff, detailed inquiries should be restricted to
a very modest scale, and the beneficiaries themselves should be seen as a
source of information. This is the case whether or not, for example, ob-
jective methods based on direct measurement give more or less accurate
results than subjective methods. In many project contexts, the farmer's
impression of what is taking place or has occurred is important in deter-
mining his reactions. His subjective estimates therefore are of real, objec-
tive value.
As is detailed in chapter 8 of the companion volume, the resources and
time available for a project are often insufficient to measure production
trends and hence to assess the impact of the project with any degree of
confidence. Moreover, it is extremely difficult to determine the causality
of any change in a rigorous manner.
A related special feature of project-specific evaluation of production
changes is the use which can be made of carefully conducted case studies
in conjunction with the distributional information generated through the
routine monitoring system. The latter may provide information on the
relative sizes of subgroups in the population according to their adoption
and application of project inputs and recommendations. The objective of
the case studies, as detailed in chapter 8 of the companion volume, would
be to measure as accurately as possible production changes for each of
these groups. To the extent that the groups are internally homogeneous
and the differences between them are relatively pronounced, an assess-
ment of the impact of the project on production levels may be made on
the basis of a small number of cases. And if the number of observations is
kept small, it may be feasible with available resources to adopt elaborate
methodologies for crop area, yield, and production measurement which
involve close observation, physical measurement, and repeated visits to
farming households. By contrast, much simpler methods will have to be
employed when it is necessary to obtain data on production for large,
more representative samples of project participants.
Area, Production, and Yield
Areas under particular crops, production during a specified period, and
yield are three basic variables, each of which may be of interest in its own
right. Since yield (Y) refers to production (P) per unit area (A) during a
cropping cycle or agricultural year, they have this simple relation: P =
A X Y, or Y = P/A. Consequently, production can be estimated by mea-
suring directly, and then multiplying, area and yield. Or total production
and crop areas can be measured directly, with yield estimated as their
ratio. Simple though this point is, it is often overlooked. Yields need not
be estimated directly if production and area estimates can be obtained
more easily. Moreover, if the total production of a holding is the impor-
<<<PAGE=110>>>
98 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
tant indicator of project performance, and it can be obtained directly, in-
dividual area and yield measurements are not needed.
Many conditions can complicate the measurement of A, Y, and P when
a crop is not grown solely in pure stand or is cultivated and harvested
more than once during the agricultural year. For example:
* Planting of a crop may occur within a short, specified period, but its
harvesting may be spread out over a long period.
* Production from tree crops which are irregularly spaced within a
holding may have to be expressed in terms of production during a stated
reference period per tree.
* Occasionally, a crop is incompletely harvested. A well-known exam-
ple is cassava, which is sometimes grown as a reserve crop to be har-
vested and used only if needed in an emergency. Or a cash crop may be
abandoned because of unfavorable market conditions.
* The basis for estimating crop production is the harvested area. This
may differ from the area that is cleared or planted. Strictly, therefore,
crop areas should be measured at the time of harvest rather than imme-
diately after planting. But because this is often impractical, measurement
at the time of planting is used instead.
* The yield (or production) to be measured needs to be based on an
agreed definition. A distinction can be made between biological or gross
yield, harvested yield, and economic yield. Biological yield is that ob-
tained before any losses during and after harvest. Subtracting losses in
harvesting from this gives the harvested yield. Deducting losses during
such postharvest processes as cleaning, winnowing, and drying gives the
economic yield.
* If the same or different crops are planted successively on the same
land more than once during a given agricultural year, agreed procedures
are required to present estimates of cultivated areas (and thus to estimate
yields or production) because the total area cultivated includes some land
which is used two or three times.
* Mixed cropping potentially can cause great confusion in measuring
and reporting crop areas, yields, and production. There are three basic
types of mixed cropping: (a) Two or more crops are planted within a plot
with each crop planted at a lower density than would occur if it was
planted alone. (b) One crop is added between the rows of another crop,
which was planted at its normal density (also referred to as interplanted
crops). (c) One seasonal crop is grown under a permanent crop (referred
to as associated cropping). Clearly, the production of crops is a function
not simply of plot area but also of plant densities in the mixture and the
detrimental or beneficial interaction between the mixed crops. If areas
for each crop are presented simply as an aggregate of the areas over
which that particular crop appears, irrespective of mixture, the resulting
<<<PAGE=111>>>
Area Measurement 99
figures will appear misleading unless supported by other information.
There are three alternative possible solutions in such situations:
* Allocate the total area to different crops according to criteria such as
the relative density in that mixture, which ensures that the sum of
areas allocated to individual crops is the same as the total cultivated
area.
* Allocate to each crop an 'imputed area' which it would have occu-
pied in pure stand to give the same production or yield-as a result,
the sum of areas allocated to crops will not add up to the total physi-
cal area cultivated.
* Concentrate on only one or a few principal crops, and for each give
separate area and production figures for pure stand and a few com-
mon mixtures-for example: maize in pure stand; maize with other
cereals, with beans and pulses, and with permanent crops; and
maize in all other mixtures. This solution is selective but avoids the
complexity and arbitrariness inherent in the first two.
Area Measurement
Estimates of areas allocated to particular crops are required for various
purposes. For situations in which little prior information is available, ap-
proximate area estimates by cropping pattern can greatly facilitate the
planning and implementation of project activities. More careful assess-
ment, especially of areas newly brought under specified crops, may be
required when expansion of the cultivated area itself is an objective of a
project. Accurate measurement of area by crop is needed when yields
have to be estimated from measured production, or when total produc-
tion has to be estimated from measured yields.
The choice of an appropriate measurement technique will depend
upon both the objectives of the project and various operational factors,
such as configuration of land, shape of fields, types of crops and crop-
ping pattern, available maps and materials, and available skills and re-
sources. The most common techniques are briefly reviewed below.
Air or Ground Transects; Area, Grid, and Point Sampling
In most circumstances in developing countries, the holding is the basic
unit of study for surveys of crop production carried out in the context of
monitoring and evaluation. But for some purposes, such as a rapid as-
sessment study of a new project area, an estimate of the overall spatial
distribution of the crops without reference to individual holdings may
suffice. Possibilities will depend upon the quality and scale of the avail-
able mapping material.
<<<PAGE=112>>>
100 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
Air or ground transects, a simple method of rapid assessment, involve
dividing the study area into a grid framework derived from maps or aerial
photographs. The choice of grid size will depend upon the size of the
study area, whether sampling or complete coverage is intended, the de-
gree of homogeneity in land use patterns, the resources available, and
the degree of accuracy necessary. The procedure is to locate a predeter-
mined point in each square of the grid and then traverse a fixed distance
in a random direction. Along this transect, observations concerning land
use, cropping pattern, and so on are made at regular intervals, and the
proportions of observation points falling under specified land use and
cropping categories are calculated. The methodology can involve low-
level aerial photography or ground enumerators walking the tran-
sects.
Grid sampling differs from transects in that after the study areas are di-
vided into squares with an approximate grid size, a sample of squares is
selected and areas by crop and land use are measured or estimated within
it. This can provide more accurate information, but considerably in-
creases the work load. A variant called area sampling involves dividing
the study area into natural geographic segments delineated by identifia-
ble natural borders (ridges, roads, waterways, and so on), rather than into
simple squares of equal size. When these segments are numbered and
any available ancillary information is recorded, we obtain a frame of area
sampling units from which samples of segments to be investigated can be
selected. Where such segments cut across fields, simple procedures can
be used to associate whole fields with individual segments. Area sam-
pling methods are commonly used in surveys in developed countries, but
holdings generally provide much more suitable units for production sur-
veys in the small farming communities of developing countries, espe-
cially for monitoring and evaluation purposes.
Point sampling involves selecting a number of points on a map or grid
and recording the cultivation practice at each point. This method is open
to large biases because great reliance is placed on enumerators locating
and adhering to the precise selected points.
Area Measurement within Holdings
In some cases good records may be available on the size of holdings,
fields, and plots from either administrative sources or past surveys. In
others, farmers are able to provide sufficiently accurate information in ei-
ther traditional or modern units. In many cases, however, it may be nec-
essary to undertake physical measurement of crop areas despite the com-
plex and time-consuming nature of the task.
Fields and plots often have irregular shapes and curvilinear bound-
aries. The first step in measuring an area is to transform it into an approx-
<<<PAGE=113>>>
Area Measurement 101
imate polygon with straight sides and to demarcate its vertices on the
ground. The more irregular the shape of the polygon, the larger the num-
ber of its sides. Little is gained, however, by increasing the number of
sides beyond, say, ten or so. The important thing when using a straight
line to approximate a real curving or irregular line is to balance the little
pieces of the plot left out by including other small areas which are not
part of the plot.
Two methods generally are used to estimate the area of the polygon.
The most popular and most accurate involves computing the area with a
trigonometric or graphical method after first measuring the length and
direction (bearing) of each side. The second procedure, called triangula-
tion, involves dividing the polygon with n sides into n -2 triangles, mea-
suring the three sides (or two sides and the enclosed angle) of each trian-
gle in order to calculate its area, and summing the areas of each triangle.
For either method, a certain degree of redundancy usually is intro-
duced into the measurements to ensure accuracy. When taking bearings
around the perimeter of the plot, two bearings are taken and averaged in
the forward direction, say from A to B, and then backward, from B to A.
All sides should be measured, even though theoretically the last side in a
closed polygon is fixed by determination of the other n - 1 sides. Because
of inaccuracies in measurement, the polygon as measured may not
"close'; that is, after starting from a point A and measuring the length and
bearings of all sides, we may not return to the same point but to a differ-
ent point A'. Vector AA' is the closing error. If AA' is greater than a certain
proportion of the perimeter of the polygon (say greater than 3 percent,
which still allows for errors in the area estimate much greater than this),
the entire measuring process should be repeated. Programmed pocket
calculators are now commonly used to calculate the plot areas; the stan-
dard programs also reveal the closing error in percentage terms.2 For the
triangulation method, the whole process should be repeated by con-
structing an alternative set of triangles.
When only approximate data are required, enumerators may measure
the boundaries of the plot by pacing. The average length of step should
be calibrated because it may vary from one enumerator to another. A
more accurate alternative is to use a measuring wheel, which is gradu-
ated and has a counter that registers the number of revolutions as it is
pushed along the line to be measured. Measuring tapes are also popular.
The most commonly used instrument for measuring angles or bearings
is the compass. Optical range finders such as the surveyor's dumpy level
usually include their own means to measure angular traverses.
2. See, for example, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Na-
tions, Estimation of Crop Areas and Yields in Agricultural Statistics, FAO Economic
and Social Development Paper 22 (Rome, 1982).
<<<PAGE=114>>>
102 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
Yield and Production Measurement
There are various ways to measure crop production and yield. The most
appropriate technique will depend upon the scale of measurement oper-
ation as well as on project objectives, conditions, and available resources.
This section describes the following methods:
* Harvesting and measuring total output of plots, fields, or holdings
* Crop cutting over samples of subplots
* Sampling of harvest units following crop gathering
* Interviewing farmers to obtain estimates
* Making use of eye estimates by agriculture extension agents.
These methods are listed according to the ascending scale on which
they can normally be applied. Those listed first generally are more ap-
propriate for intensive measurement on a relatively small scale; those
listed last are more suitable for extensive coverage on a relatively large
scale which involves dispersed samples. Crop cutting has become a pop-
ular method of yield estimation and has been used in a variety of circum-
stances, yet its comparative accuracy and efficiency have not been care-
fully evaluated (the technical details of this method are given in a section
below). Certainly the method is taxing and is widely recognized to result
in overestimates of yield. An important objective of the following discus-
sion is to provide some comparison of that method with other possible
ones. A general recommendation which emerges from the discussion is
that in small-scale, intensive diagnostic studies, complete harvesting,
which avoids many biases and random errors associated with crop cut-
ting, may be the best method. To estimate production with a high degree
of sampling precision requires fairly large dispersed samples, which may
be infeasible with any method that uses actual measurement. The most
appropriate method in many such circumstances will be an interview
survey of farmers; evidence is accumulating that under certain condi-
tions estimates by farmers will not result in a larger total error (including
sampling and nonsampling errors; see chapter 6) than that obtained
using the crop cutting method.
Harvesting Total Output
Harvesting of a complete plot is not commonly attempted because of the
volume of work. If there is a range of crops and a sample of even moder-
ate size, weighing the total harvest is unviable. But under some
circumstances-because of the variability and biases to which the vari-
ous sampling methods are subject-total harvesting may be suitable and
<<<PAGE=115>>>
Yield and Production Measurement 103
may indeed be the only method which provides the level of precision re-
quired.
In a small-scale, intensive study of yield differentials by farming prac-
tice, good cooperation can be expected from project participants for three
basic reasons:
* The participants are aware of the project and will not be unduly sus-
picious of a project-related inquiry.
• The field staff can assist the farmer in conducting the harvest-thus
in effect providing free labor.
* Farmers are interested in obtaining a full weighing of their harvest.
Complete harvesting is clearly superior to the crop cutting method in
statistical efficiency and accuracy of data for the following reasons.
* Crop cutting estimates are subject to much larger sampling variabil-
ity. This is because of yield variability within plots. For instance, in stud-
ies in Nigeria and Niger, yield variation within plots accounted for 40-60
percent of the total variation observed, that is, of the same order of mag-
nitude as between-plot variation:
Subplot Within-plot
size Variation
Country Crop (square meters) (percent)
Nigeria Sorghum 50 45
Yams 50 58
Niger Millet, 1982 30 40
Millet, 1983 30 48
If field-specific estimates are required it will be necessary, therefore, to
have several crop cuts per plot.
* It is well established that the crop cutting method is subject to overes-
timation biases which increase with decreasing subplot size.
* Crop cutting measures the biological yield but takes no account of
harvest and postharvest losses. What is often more relevant in the
project context is the economic yield as given by postharvest weigh-
ing which allows for losses that have occurred before.
Regarding the time required, although the work entailed in the crop
cutting method is likely to be substantially smaller than in helping the
farmer to harvest the whole plot and weigh the produce, the latter
method is not necessarily impractical if the whole plots average less than
0.5 hectares. In a field study in Nigeria, for example, one enumerator
during a given time was able to execute eighty subplot crop cuts or to
handle complete harvesting in thirty-two plots. The work rates in the two
cases are of the same order of magnitude if two to three subplot crop cuts
are involved per plot.
<<<PAGE=116>>>
104 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
Crop Cutting
The crop cutting method involves (a) identifying a plot, (b) demarcating
within it at random a specified number of subplots of predetermined size
and shape, (c) harvesting the crop within the subplots in accordance with
specified procedures, (d) drying the crop to standard conditions, (e)
weighing the output, and (f) computing the yield by dividing the product
obtained by subplot area. The accuracy of the method depends upon a
number of conditions. In the case of uniform dense cultivation the
method would be more accurate than under conditions of extensive culti-
vation with large intraplot variation. Errors (generally overestimation bi-
ases) are introduced because of difficulties in deciding exactly which
plants near the edge of the subplot are to be included or excluded from
the crop cut. This edge effect will depend upon the ratio of the perimeter
to the area of the subplot, that is, on its shape and size. Larger subplots
have a smaller relative edge effect; and for a given area, circles and
squares have a smaller edge effect than triangles. The following table
gives a portion of perhaps the most widely quoted figures in this context
(from experiments in India3 ). It shows overestimates with crop cutting for
triangular subplots of different size.
Size of crop cut Percentage overestimation in yield
subplot (square meters) Wheat irrigated Wheat unirrigated
43.80 0.0 0.0
10.95 4.8 11.0
2.74 15.7 23.4
The bias declines with increasing subplot size; for a given size, it is
smaller for more uniformly and densely cultivated irrigated wheat crops
and larger for nonirrigated crops. In either case, the bias is portrayed to be
negligible for subplot sizes of about 40-50 square meters. But this posi-
tive conclusion cannot be automatically generalized to other crops grown
under different conditions.
Another source of bias which tends to increase with increasing subplot
size arises because subplots must be selected so that they lie wholly
within the plot. This distorts the probabilities of inclusion of areas near
the plot border in the subplots. Insofar as the yield near the border is dif-
ferent from yields elsewhere, this introduces an error called the border
error.
Perhaps the most serious bias in crop cutting procedures arises from
the almost unavoidable tendency among enumerators to consciously or
unconsciously avoid empty or patchy areas within plots while locating
3. P. V. Sukhatme, Sampling Theory of Surveys with Applications (Ames: Iowa
State University Press, 1954).
<<<PAGE=117>>>
Yield and Production Measurement 105
subplots. If random coordinates result in choosing a subplot which is
clearly inferior to surrounding parts of the plot, a conscientious enumera-
tor feels it is unrepresentative and may alter the location. Unfortunately
they do not feel the same inclination when a particularly lush part of the
plot is selected.
Finally, as already mentioned, the method does not take into consider-
ation harvest and postharvest losses.
Conclusive empirical evidence of the magnitude of these biases and
their determining factors is hard to come by. But several studies are cur-
rently in hand because of the Nigeria results contained in the Poate and
Casley monograph (cited in footnote 1 of this chapter). These results
showed that the use- of 60-square-meter triangular subplots resulted in
biases of the order of 14 percent under well-supervised conditions-
biases that were of the same order of magnitude as farmers' estimates
made immediately before the harvest. Two recent examples, one from
Africa (Zimbabwe, example 13) and the other from Asia (Bangladesh, ex-
ample 14) give further indications of the problems involved.
EXAMPLE 13. Recent Study of Maize Yields in Zimbabwe
Crop farming in Zimbabwe can be divided into four distinct sectors: large-
scale commercial (Lsc), small-scale commercial, communal areas, and the
newly created resettlement sector. The first and third.sectors predominate.
The LSC sector includes some of the most advanced and productive crop farm-
ing in the world. For more than twenty-five years, the Central Statistical Of-
fice of Zimbabwe has been conducting full postal censuses of all farms in this
sector, and a reliable series of production statistics is available.
By contrast, the communal areas are characterized by small-scale farming.
There are 900,000 holdings with an average size of approximately 2 hectares.
Three-quarters of this land lies in regions with low and erratic rainfall. Be-
cause of technological, ecological, and management variations, therefore,
maize yields in the communal areas are expected to be lower than in the LSC
sector. Maize yields in the LSCsector varyfrom 3.7 tons perhectare infarms of
more than 100 hectares to 2.2 tons per hectare in farms under 10 hectares. In
the communal areas, yields can be expected to be even lower, perhaps no more
than 2.0 tons per hectare.
No reliable series of production and yield data is available for the commu-
nal sector. Recently, estimates from a national sample survey have been ob-
tained using these methods:
* Crop cutting from randomly selected portions of two randomly selected
rows
* Reporting by farmers in an interview survey
. Eye estimates by Agritex extension officers.
<<<PAGE=118>>>
Table 4. Maize Yields in the Small-Scale Communal Sector: Comparison of Various Methods and with the Large-Scale
Commercial Sector, Zimbabwe, 1984-85
Large-scale
commercial Crop Farmers' Agritex
Area sector cutting reporting assessment
Manicaland 2.4 3.4 1.8 1.9
Mashonaland Central 4.7 5.1 2.6 2.9
Mashonaland East 2.9 4.4 2.3 2.2
Mashonaland West 3.3 3.5 1.9 2.1
Midlands 1.6 3.3 2.5 2.7
Masvingo 1.6 3.4 1.7 1.8
Unweighted average 2.8 3.9 2.1 2.3
<<<PAGE=119>>>
Yield and Production Measurement 107
Table 5. Maize Yields in the Small-Scale Communal Sector:
Comparison of Two Methods, Zimbabwe, 1985-86
Area Crop cutting Farmer estimate
Manicaland 1.6 0.9
Mashonaland Central 4.0 2.8
Mashonaland East 2.8 2.1
Mashonaland West 3.0 2.2
Midlands 3.2 2.1
Masvingo 1.3 1.0
Unweighted average 2.6 1.9
Results for six regions are shown in table 4. For comparison, the large-scale
commercial sector is also shown. Though full experimental verification based
on complete harvesting and measurement is not currently available, it is quite
clear that yields obtainedfrom crop cutting are highly biased in the direction
of overestimation. Thosefrom farmers' interviews and extension agent reports
are close to each other (within 10 percent in all regions) and are generally
more plausible. A substantial margin of error or bias in these estimates them-
selves cannot of course be ruled out on the basis of the available information.
Because of the unlikely results given by the crop cutting method as shown
in table 4, the comparative study was repeated in 1985-86 with much tighter
supervision of the enumerators carrying out the harvesting. Once again esti-
mates by farmers agreed closely with those of the extension agents; the com-
parison with crop cutting gave the results shown in table 5. The crop cutting
method seems to have been implemented with much more care, but the results
are still typically more than one-third higher than the farmer's estimate.
Source: Central Statistical Office, Government of Zimbabwe.
EXAMPLE 14. Bangladesh Postharvest Project
The following is an illustration from a carefully conducted study to esti-
mate postharvest losses. Physical losses in the operation up to threshing are
the difference between the potential yield of the standing crop and the actual
yield obtained by thefarmer after winnowing the threshed crop. The latter can
be obtained directly by weighing thefarmer's produce. The former can be esti-
mated in various ways-standard crop cutting methods on subplots of differ-
ent shapes and sizes, or more laboriously, measuring yields per hill from a
sample of hills in the plot.
The work was carried out under close supervision by staff holding master's
degrees. Procedures were introduced to ensure standardization of moisture
content each time the grain was weighed, and of winnowing and cleaning
methods. It is believed that research procedures were controlled more closely
than would be possible under normal monitoring conditions.
<<<PAGE=120>>>
108 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
Table 6 shows that estimates derived from crop cuts exceeded actual yields
by approximately 20 percent. The overestimates from the hill-count method
were somewhat lower but more variable (6-19 percent). In either case, they
were too large to provide meaningful estimates of postharvest losses.
In the same context, comparisons were made between yield estimation ob-
tainedfrom farmers' interviews and crop cuts. Farmers' estimates tended to be
lower; in view of the results discussed above, this could indicate that the farm-
ers' estimates were closer to the actual yield.
The study included provisions for the direct measurement of losses. This in-
volved carefully gleaning and collecting scattered grain duringfield stacking
and transportation, rethreshing a portion of the farmers' straw, and so on.
This work yielded average loss figures for cutting (1.5 percent), field stacking
and transportation (each 0.5 percent), and threshing and winnowing (1.8 per-
cent), that is, a total of under 5 percent. The conclusion is that, apart from this
difference between biological and economic yield, crop cutting methods over-
estimated the yield by 15 percent or so because of other sources of error (bias),
and this in the best possible working conditions. The relatively large coeffi-
cients of variation, especially with the hill-count method, point to another
difficulty associated with large intraplot variability.
Source: Personal communication from Martin Greeley, Institute of Develop-
ment Studies, University of Sussex, England, 1986.
Sampling of Harvest Units
A method of measuring crop production that requires neither a total har-
vest weighing nor a crop cut involves a sampling of farmers' harvest after
it has been gathered, at the point where it is transported for storage or
disposal. At the time of harvest the farmer is left to collect the produce in
his normal harvest units such as sacks, baskets, bowls, bundles, or indi-
vidual roots and tubers. The enumerator visits the holding and inspects
these units, obtains an estimate of the total number of these units har-
vested and of the estimated harvest area, and selects a sample of the units
to measure the average unit weight. The total output is obtained by multi-
plying the estimated total number of units by average unit weight. Yield
is obtained by dividing the total estimated production by the area har-
vested under the crop.
Where applicable, this approach can be used on larger samples than is
possible with the more taxing procedures described above. For the
method to work, however, certain basic conditions have to be met: (a) the
crop must be gathered in identifiable and complete units; (b) the units
should not be too variable, so that the average unit weight can be esti-
mated with necessary precision with a reasonable sample size; (c) the
<<<PAGE=121>>>
Table 6. Percentage Overestimation of Yield Given by the Small Crop-Cut Sampling Method for Winter
(Aman) Rice Crop, Bangladesh
Ten subplots, each one square meter One subplot, ten square meters perfield
Region Crop cut Hill count Crop cut Hill count
Region 1
Percentage overestimate 21 13 21 19
Standard deviation 12 11 12 12
0
Region 2a
Percentage overestimate 20 n.a. 17 n.a.
Standard deviation 17 - 14
Region 2b
Percentage overestimate 19 9 12 6
Standard deviation 8 8 12 14
n.a. Not available.
<<<PAGE=122>>>
Table 7. Variation in Bundle Weights, Nigeria
Funtua project area Gusau project area Gombe project area
Bundle 1977 1978 1976 1977 1978 1982 1977 1978
Sorghum
Mean (kilograms) 46 49 26 30 32 31 27 26
Coefficient
of variation (percent) 50 n.a. n.a. 23 59 18 70 27
Number of plots 445 375 n.a. 400 462 55 474 317
Millet
Mean (kilograms) 42 31 26 29 31 n.a. 24 23
Coefficient
of variation (percent) 57 77 n.a. 21 52 n.a. 54 39
Number of plots 264 206 n.a. 347 346 n.a. 316 186
n.a. Not available.
Source: Agricultural Projects Monitoring, Evaluation, and Planning Unit, Federal Department of Rural Development, Nigeria.
<<<PAGE=123>>>
Yield and Production Measurement 111
crop should be gathered in its entirety so that the enumerator can esti-
mate reliably the total number of units by either inspection (counting) or
questioning the farmer; (d) the entire crop should also be accessible so
that the enumerator can select a representative sample for estimating
unit weights; and (e) when yield is required as well as production, it
should be possible to associate the crop or a part thereof with a specific
harvested area. There is no traditional harvest unit for root crops such as
yams and cassava, and because of their bulk their tubers are handled in-
dividually.
Because of inappropriate sampling procedures or the inherent varia-
bility in traditional units, the estimates of unit weights can vary greatly
from place to place and year to year. For instance, table 7 shows the varia-
tion in bundle weights for two crops at three locations over several years.
Although there is a measure of consistency within each site, there are
large variations between sites and in coefficients of variation over years.
Some traditional units (basket, metal pail) are sufficiently uniform for
this method, however, as is the ubiquitous jute sack. In that case, enumer-
ators should be told specifically how to draw sample units for weighing,
for example by selecting every tenth or fifteenth unit.
The uncertain timing of harvest complicates the enumerator's work as
well as its supervision. With many types of crops, the units are removed
from the field and transported to the granary or otherwise disposed of
quickly; once that happens the original group of units cannot be reassem-
bled for assessment of their total number and selection of an unbiased
sample for weighing. Further complications arise if the harvesting opera-
tion is spread over several days or longer, or if the crop requires multiple
harvesting. For these reasons in fact, the harvest unit method is not rec-
ommended for crops such as yams and cassava, and its utility for crops of
smaller bulk (cocoyam, potatoes) must be judged according to circum-
stances. It is applicable for cereals, however, especially when the harvest
is placed into the granaries all at the same time.
When the harvest is observed in a store it can no longer be subdivided
according to the plot or field from which each part came. In general,
therefore, it is recommended that the harvest unit method be used to esti-
mate production on a per-holding rather than on a per-field or -plot
basis.
Farmer Estimates of Output
In certain well-defined cropping situations, carefully obtained estimates
by farmers can provide valid indications of holding production and
yields. The method does not require laborious objective measurement
and hence can be cheap, quick, and applicable on a larger scale compared
with the procedures discussed so far. The farmer estimate method has
<<<PAGE=124>>>
112 Measurement of Crop Production and Yields
two special advantages in the context of monitoring and evaluation. First,
because of the beneficiary context, there are good reasons to expect coop-
eration from the farmer. Second, the measurement of production by this
method can be linked to and integrated with interview surveys of benefi-
ciary reactions, characteristics, and so on, which cover many other topics
relevant to assessing project performance. Care must be taken, however,
to explain that harvest estimates are not linked to any possible food aid in
order to avoid systematic underreporting. With a mobile team of enumer-
ators the need for a heavily clustered sample can be avoided.
The method involves asking a sample of farmers to estimate their pro-
duction in terms of either weight or the number of units they normally
use. The survey can be either preharvest (expected output) or post-
harvest. The preharvest estimate is best done plot by plot, with the enu-
merator and the farmer in visual contact with the growing crop. This way
the enumerator can judge the validity of the farmer's response and probe
for possible inconsistencies in the farmer's estimate. After harvest, the
approach may be somewhat different: the estimate should be made at the
farmer's house or where the crop is stored, so that where necessary the
enumerator can refer to the available storage capacity as a simple cross-
check.
The mean weight per unit must be estimated. In view of the variation
apparent in table 7, it is recommended that, to the extent possible, the
mean unit weight be determined separately for different geographic
areas, crops, and seasons. The units selected for determining the mean
weight should be inspected to ensure that they do not contain anything
but the crop in question and are filled as is customary (with the top either
leveled off or heaping to overflow). Ideally, their moisture content will be
measured.
The farmer's estimates may be subject to biases which cannot be re-
duced by decreasing the scale of the operation and increasing the level of
supervision. Inaccuracies may result from a desire to hide production
from project managers or from an inherent lack of knowledge on the part
of the respondent. In a well-defined situation, however, it may be possi-
ble to assess the magnitude of the biases involved by comparing farmers'
reports with an appropriately matched small sample on which accurate
measurements have been taken with, for example, the complete harvest
method.
The reliability of the method of course depends upon the particular sit-
uation and cropping pattern. Definitive evaluation studies are lacking. In
a number of countries, however, such as Bangladesh, India (Haryana
State), Nigeria, the Philippines, Thailand, and Zimbabwe, encouraging
results have been reported with this method. Example 13 illustrated that
reporting by farmers provided much more plausible estimates of yields
in the small-scale communal sector than was provided by the much
<<<PAGE=125>>>
Yield and Production Measurement 113
more complex crop cutting method. On the basis of such evidence and
because of obvious cost and statistical advantages, a much wider use of
the method is recommended. Early results from studies in five African
countries confirm the validity of using farmer estimates both pre- and
post-harvest.
Assessment
Information on crop production may be obtained from assessments by
agricultural extension agents on the basis of their eye estimates and their
general familiarity with the situation and individual farmers. The main
attraction of this method is that it can be applied on a relatively large
scale at only a marginal additional cost, without the need to establish a
new machinery for data collection. Consequently, in certain situations
with limited resources, this may be the only method available.
There are, however, two fundamental limitations to assessments. First,
it is often quite unreasonable to burden extension agents with substantial
responsibilities for data collection, particularly if intensive operations
such as crop cutting and weighing are involved. Second, extension agents
are clearly involved in the situation and cannot always be expected to ob-
serve and report the information objectively, especially when the infor-
mation pertains to the quality of their own work as extension agents.
Both estimates by farmers and assessments by extension agents can
also be evaluated by estimating the filled granaries' content. The grana-
ries can even be measured and their volumes calculated if their shapes
are sufficiently regular.
<<<PAGE=126>>>
8 Exploratory Analysis
ONCE A DATA SET has been assembled, whatever its size and complex-
ity, the monitoring and evaluation staff must attempt to analyze it in
order to disseminate information that managers can use. The scope of the
required analysis should have been identified when the specifications for
data collection were drawn up, and the required tabulations should have
been outlined. Now the data must be reviewed and necessary revisions to
the analysis program determined. Unfortunately, many monitoring and
evaluation units are ill equipped for this vital stage. Many staff have re-
ceived little formal training in analyzing data; others have learned to use
standard statistical software packages on computers but have little un-
derstanding of the assumptions built into the forms of analysis that they
select. As a result, managers often are presented either with tabulations
that they are unable to digest or with misleading statements regarding
significant differences revealed by the application of inappropriate sta-
tistical methods. Chapter 9 introduces some of the precautions that need
to be taken in using techniques of statistical analysis, but first the need for
exploratory analysis of the data must be stressed; this stage is useful in it-
self and provides an opportunity for those with limited training in statis-
tics to understand the data, which in turn improves their chance of inter-
preting them correctly.
For monitoring purposes, simple exploratory analysis may be all that is
needed. Evaluations may require more complex techniques, but explora-
tory analysis is still an essential first step.
Exploratory analysis seeks to reveal the simple structures and patterns
in the data. We need to qualify our use of the term more specifically. A
growing literature' on exploratory analysis of data takes this subject into
formal and robust analytical techniques, which are distinguished from
1. A. S. C. Ehrenberg, Data Reduction (London: Wiley, 1978); D. C. Hoaglin, E
Mosteller, and J. W. Tukey, eds., Exploring Data Tables, Trends and Shapes (New
York: Wiley, 1985); C. A. O'Muircheartaigh and C. Payne, eds., The Analysis of
Survey Data (London: Wiley, 1977).
114
<<<PAGE=127>>>
Simple Graphic Examination 115
classical statistical analyses by their nonreliance on formal, prespecified
probability models. This chapter stops short of taking the reader into the
full range of such techniques. Instead it introduces the most simple initial
aspects of exploratory analysis, and even then only on a selective basis, in
order to demonstrate a few of the possibilities open to the analyst.
One of the main purposes of such exploratory analysis is to detect
gross errors in the data which, if not dealt with before formal analysis,
might lead to incorrect conclusions regarding both the range and shape
of the distribution of a variable and the relation between variables. Most
data sets collected through the methods described earlier will contain
such errors.
Within our coverage of exploratory analysis, we include graphical in-
spection, ordering of data, calculation of measures of location and dis-
persion, detection and removal of outliers, simple transformation of the
data to facilitate analysis, and assessment of the likelihood of linear rela-
tions and seasonal patterns in time series.
Simple Graphic Examination
Graphs are drawn as part of exploratory analysis to detect possible pat-
terns that suggest lines of further analysis, not to present the results more
simply. Plotting the main variables in a data set against each other or
against time can give the analyst a first feel for possible relationships,
make possible an assessment of the 'noise' in the data, and, very impor-
tant, can warn of distributional problems that may invalidate more for-
mal analyses unless appropriate action is taken.
For example, consider a set of data on yields of hybrid and local maize
collected annually on a sample of fields over a period of, say, five years.
Figure 2 shows a scattergram of these data, a casual inspection of which
shows that:
* Over the covered period, the hybrid variety yields are quite distinct
from the local variety yields despite the variations within each set-
the two sets belong to different 'statistical populations."
- Local variety yields are essentially stable over time.
• Hybrid variety yields are much less stable, and surprisingly and
worryingly, seem to decline over time.
These preliminary findings already give some useful information, and
also guide analysts in deciding how to proceed. For example, it may be
important to further investigate the indicated decline in hybrid yields
and look for possible contributing causes.
Consider a second example, the data for which are given in table 8.
These data show the amount of credit by size of holding operated by
credit recipients. Is there a relation between amount of credit and size of
<<<PAGE=128>>>
116 Exploratory Analysis
Figure 2. Maize Yields
2,500 -
* * 0
:
S S 
2,000 - 0
* 0
* 0
1,500 -
1,000 _ 
j0 * U 
* Hybrid
* Local
OZ1 I I- - I
12 3 4 5
Project year
holding? Regression analysis will confirm that there is. But figure 3
shows the plotted data. For holdings up to five hectares there is no rela-
tion, and for holdings above twenty hectares there is little or no relation;
but a regression fine for the entire data set would be as shown by the
straight line. This apparent relation is misleading, for it does not hold true
within either of the two distinct statistical populations of interest. In
short, two distinct distributions should not be combined in one analysis.
A simple plot of the data will prevent this mistake from being made.
<<<PAGE=129>>>
Ordering the Data and Measures of Location 117
Table 8. Credit by Size of Holding
Holding Holding Holding
size (ha.) Credit (sh.) size (haJ Credit (sh.) size (ha.) Credit (sh.)
4.1 201 2.8 225 4.2 375
22.0 1,100 42.0 1,025 4.5 317
3.0 322 3.4 330 3.8 346
4.7 266 3.0 300 45.0 875
2.2 175 1.9 349 2.6 314
2.7 186 3.1 214 2.4 192
3.7 362 25.0 800 3.9 285
4.3 263 4.6 390 3.2 340
35.0 1,150
A final example, figure 4, shows milk sales by project year for a project
with the objective of expanding such sales. Can we therefore conclude
that the project veterinary and extension services were highly successful?
First, consider figure 5, which shows the same milk data plotted accord-
ing to the controlled price of milk as announced each year by the govern-
ment, without project influence or control. We see now that milk sales are
even more closely linked to price. Once again further lines of analysis are
suggested. We note in passing that false correlations between two vari-
ables are very common when both are linked or confounded with the
time dimension.
Ordering the Data and Measures of Location
A data set may be recorded within a data base with no easily assessable
characteristics because the order of the cases may be either random or
one that is not helpful in reviewing the characteristics of the distribution.
If the data base is computerized, all manner of measures of central ten-
dency and dispersion can be obtained relatively simply. But it is usually
helpful first to arrange the data set in order of magnitude of the value for
each important variable. The ordered distribution can be in the form of a
grouped frequency distribution if the data set is large, as shown in table 9.
Even a visual inspection can reveal certain important characteristics of a
distribution, such as whether it is unimodal or bimodal and whether it
has a long upper tail. But the ordered data also allow a quick assessment
of several useful measures of central tendency, such as the median,
mode, and quartiles. The arithmetic mean is the most commonly calcu-
lated measure of central tendency in a distribution, but for many of the
data sets encountered by monitoring and evaluation staff the mean can
be misleading-it is very sensitive to the existence of a few extreme val-
ues in the tail of the distribution. If nine households have incomes below
$200 and one household has an income of $1,600, the arithmetic mean
<<<PAGE=130>>>
118 Exploratory Analysis
Figure 3. Farm Credit Recipients
1,200
1,000 _
e 800 -
r 600 -
0
o 400 -
200 -
o l l l l l l
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Size of holding (hectares)
will be approximately $300, although all but one of the cases have values
substantially below this figure.
Given the popularity of the arithmetic mean, we consider first its cal-
culation from a grouped frequency distribution. The procedure is to take
the midpoint of each class interval and multiply it by the number of cases
within the class, sum the result of this calculation over all dasses, and di-
vide by the total number of cases. In algebraic notation we denote it as
N
Efi xi
N
fi
where N is the number of classes, xi the midpoint of class i, and fi the
number of cases in class i.
If we attempt to calculate the mean income from the data in table 9, we
see the problem of the lack of specified limits for the lowest class (100 or
<<<PAGE=131>>>
Ordering the Data and Measures of Location 119
Figure 4. Milk Sales by Year
100 0
80 -
60 -
40 -
20 -
0
1 2 3 4 5
Project year
Figure 5. Milk Sales by Price
100 0 4 Year 5
Year 4
0
Year 2
80 _
Year 3
0
Year I
60 -ao
40
20
O I I I I
50 75 80 90 98
Controlled price of milk
<<<PAGE=132>>>
120 Exploratory Analysis
Table 9. Distribution of Households by Nine Income Classes
Number of
Income class households
100 or less 32
101-200 81
201-300 119
301-400 143
401-500 162
501-600 67
601-1,000 86
1,001-2,000 42
More than 2,000 18
Total 750
less) and the highest class (more than 2,000). Because of this, the calcula-
tion of the midpoint of these classes will be approximate at best: we may
take 50 as the midpoint of the lower class (the real lower limit is zero) and
3,000 as the midpoint of the upper if examination of the data shows that
virtually no household incomes exceed 4,000. Then the estimate of the
mean is
(50 X 32) + (150 X 81) + (250 X 119) + ... + (3,000 X 18)
750
= 518.8
An open-ended upper class does not affect the median or mode, mea-
sures that are relatively unaffected by extreme values.
The mode is the value or frequency class that occurs most often. In
table 9 it is the frequency class 401-500. If there are two distinct peaks in
a distribution, it is said to be bimodal: this may be an important finding in
itself. For example, bimodality in monthly rainfall data reveals the exis-
tence of two wet seasons. When dealing with grouped frequency distri-
butions, the modal class depends on the choice of class boundaries. Table
10 presents the same data as table 9 but with different class intervals. The
modal class is now 201-400, very different from that identified in table 9.
Strictly, the mode is only useful when the distribution is given in narrow,
equal-class intervals.
The median-more useful than the mode, and often more useful than
the arithmetic mean-is the value in the middle of distribution. There are
as many cases with values below the median as cases with values above
it. If, say, 101 cases are listed in ascending order, the median will be the
value of case 51 (50 values are less than this and 50 values exceed it). In
percentage terms, the median is the value of the 50 percent point in the
distribution. If the number of cases is even, say, 100, the median lies half-
<<<PAGE=133>>>
Ordering the Data and Measures of Location 121
Table 10. Distribution of Households by Five Income Classes
Number of
Income class households
200 or less 113
201-400 262
401-600 229
601-1,000 86
More than 1,000 60
Total 750
way between the fiftieth and fifty-first ordered values. To generalize, if
the number of cases, n, is odd, the median is the value of the (n + 1)/2
case. If n is even, the median is the average of the values of the n/2 and
the (n/2) + 1 cases.
If we are dealing with a grouped frequency distribution, it is useful to
plot the graph of the cumulative frequency and read off the median as
the point where the cumulative frequency reaches 50 percent of the over-
all total. Table 11 presents the data of table 9 with the cumulative totals
added. Figure 6 shows the partial graph of this cumulative distribution
with the median identified. Using the same approach, the lower (25 per-
cent point) and upper (75 percent point) quartiles can be identified.
Most data sets examined in small farmer development projects are
likely to contain some major errors that were undetectable in the editing
and checking process. Misreporting or misobservation by one or more
enumerators is probable. In some cases misreportings result in values in
the data set which are 'outliers'-they are well above or below the values
observed for most of the cases. When dealing with such data sets, the me-
Table 11. Cummulative Distribution of Households by Nine Income
Classes
Cumulative
Number of number of
Income class households households
100 or less 32 32
101-200 81 113
201-300 119 232
301-400 143 375
401-500 162 537
501-600 67 604
601-1,000 86 690
1,001-2,000 42 732
More than 2,000 18 750
<<<PAGE=134>>>
Figure 6. Cumulative Frequency Distribution
800
700
600
- …- 563
Third quartile
500 -
400 -
2…____----375 
EM | / NedianE
zI
300i
200 -
188 IFirst quartile I
100 _
o> !, I , 11 , . .I .
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000
Income
122
<<<PAGE=135>>>
Trimming and Transforming Data 123
dian is more useful than the arithmetic mean at the stage of exploratory
analysis.
Trimming and Transforming Data
Following preliminary graphic and ordered distribution examination of
the data, some adjustments may be indicated to remove extreme outliers
and to facilitate further interpretation of the data. Although the median
can be used in place of the mean to reduce the disturbing influence of
outliers, the mean will likely retain its prominence with most analysts in
the more formal stages of analysis and in presentation of the results. Re-
moval of outliers may be a necessary step if such is the case. The decision
to remove an observation from the data set must be carried out according
to an agreed rule, for otherwise the analyst opens himself to charges of
improper manipulation of the data. The graphic review stage will have
revealed one type of outlier: values that do not belong to the same statis-
tical distribution as the others. The main body of the data lies within a
certain range, then there is a break, then there are the outliers. Figure 3
shows such a case, in which the credit values for the few larger holdings
are in a distinctly different range from the data's main body. This tech-
nique can also reveal the presence of values that have been recorded with
gross errors. Outliers in other data sets are harder to identify. A distribu-
tion of calorie intakes of households may be continuous but have a very
extended upper tail of the distribution, as shown in figure 7. Depending
on the variable, there may be a value such that any observation above it is
of dubious validity. It may be considered that any measured calorie in-
take above 5,000 is suspect and to trim the data set at this point will be
eliminating cases with higher values. Again we stress that such practices
must be done according to rules agreed on before the data are examined.
Transformation of the data can be very simple if it is to facilitate simple
review of the data or quite complex if it is to remove skewness in the data
and induce what is known as the normal distribution or promote a linear
relationship between two variables. Transforming temperature readings
from Fahrenheit scale to the Celsius (centigrade) scale so that zero corre-
sponds to the freezing point of water is an example of the first simple
type of transformation. Logarithmic and exponential transformations,
often used by econometricians when handling income data, are exam-
ples of the latter.
At the exploratory stage, we are interested in simple transformations,
such as the examples that follow.
Lateral Shift of the Scale
Sometimes a simple change of scale assists the analyst at the exploratory
stage to get a feel for the data set. Table 12 shows a set of data of the num-
<<<PAGE=136>>>
124 Exploratory Analysis
Figure 7. Distribution of Households by Individual Calorie Intake
50G
40-
30 -
0
0
20 -
10 ,
0
0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000 5,500 6,000
Calorie intake
her of credits approved by various credit branches. Column 2 shows the
data with 1,000 removed from each value. Alternatively, the scale can be
shifted by expressing each value as a difference from the mean of the
data set (1,265), as shown by column 3.
Conversion to Percentages
A set of data that reveals little may become very informative when the
values are converted into a percentage of some standard or target. Sup-
pose, for the data in table 12, that the respective branches of the credit
bank had each been set a target of 1,200 loans for the given period. The
data could be shown as in column 4.
Standardized Index
A percentage is one type of index. Another popular transformation is to
take the mean away from each value and divide the result by the mean,
producing a standardized value given by xi' = (xi - x) / x. This index is
useful for comparing two data sets with different means, as is shown in
<<<PAGE=137>>>
Trimming and Transforming Data 125
Table 12. Variations of Transformed Data
Percentage
Region A Number of Credits issued in of target
credit credits approved excess of 1,000 x - x of 1,200
branch (1) (2) (3) (4)
1 1,030 30 -235 86
2 1,250 250 -15 104
3 1,170 170 -95 98
4 1,330 330 +65 111
5 1,290 290 +25 108
6 1,480 480 +215 123
7 1,180 180 -85 98
8 1,320 320 +55 110
9 1,460 460 +195 122
10 1,140 140 -125 95
table 13. It clarifies the relative size and shape of the variation around the
mean in the two data sets.
A more sophisticated transformation of this type converts the data into
what are known as standardized normal deviates, where the denomina-
tor is a measure of the variability in the data set (which is explained
below): xi' = (xi - x) / sx.
The resulting distribution will have a mean of zero and a standard de-
viation of one. Its plot will show the shape of the variability around the
mean, removing the effect of the actual size of the mean and the magni-
tude of the overall variability. It can then be compared with a normal dis-
Table 13. Data Converted to Standardized Index
Credit branch Standardized index
Region Aa Region Bb Region A Region B
1 1,030 11 2,020 -19 -19
2 1,250 12 2,450 -1 -1
3 1,170 13 2,710 -8 +9
4 1,330 14 2,100 +5 -15
5 1,290 15 2,850 +2 +14
6 1,480 16 2,280 +17 -8
7 1,180 17 2,170 -7 -12
8 1,320 18 2,640 +4 +6
9 1,460 19 2,870 +15 +15
10 1,140 20 2,780 -10 +12
a. Mean of region A = 1,265.
b. Mean of region B = 2,487.
<<<PAGE=138>>>
126 Exploratory Analysis
tribution, which is an important standard that is assumed in a great deal
of statistical analysis.
Measures of Dispersion
The simplest measure of the extent of dispersion of the values in the data
set is the range, the difference between the highest and lowest values. It
is not a satisfactory measure for a skewed distribution with a long upper
tail because it is determined by the highest value-one extreme outlier
will dramatically increase the range.
The commonest measure of dispersion is the standard deviation of the
distribution. This is defined as the square root of the variance where
N
* z~ (Xj-X)2
Variance = N
Each case is expressed in terms of the deviation from the mean; these
deviations are squared and summed, and the results are divided by the
number of cases (N).
If the variance is to be estimated from a sample n drawn from a larger
population N, the divisor in the above equation is n - 1, not n, that is
N
Variance = (Xi-1)2
and the estimated standard deviation is then denoted by
sx= v (Xi=-T)2
n- 1
If the data are in the form of a grouped frequency distribution, we have
the weighted estimate of s., similar to the weighted arithmetic mean
given earlier:
sx = Yfi(xi Y)2
where fi is the number of cases in class i. The reader may care to try this
calculation using the data in table 9.
The arithmetic mean and the standard deviation are the first two mo-
ments of a distribution. One can compute the third and fourth moments
that describe the extent of skewness (distortion from the symmetrical)
and kurtosis (whether the distribution is flat or peaked), but these have
few practical applications in monitoring and evaluation. If a distribution
<<<PAGE=139>>>
Analysis of Residuals and First Differences 127
is normally distributed (the classic bell-shaped symmetrical curve, for
which mean= median, no skewness, no kurtosis, no extreme outliers),
the mean and standard deviation define the distribution.
Fitting Straight Lines
Preliminary graphical examination of the data may reveal the existence
of an approximately linear relationship between two variables. At the ex-
ploratory stage of the analysis this may be sufficient, but the analyst may
wish to quickly draw in the regression line, or to have an approximate
idea of the slope of the line. The fitting of a straight line of the form y =
a + bx to a data set (y,,xi), i = 1, . .., n, is one of the basic statistical calcula-
tions taught at an early stage of statistical tuition and uses the method
known as least-squares regression. There are quicker methods (and given
that both variables are subject to error some of these are more robust than
that of least squares), of which we recommend the following.
Having ordered the data according to the ascending values of x (see
above), calculate the means of the variables for the lower quartile and
upper quartile respectively. Plot these points, and draw the regression
line through them. In notational form, the estimate of the slope of this
line is given by b = (Y- YL) / (XH - XL)' where YH and XH are the means of
the upper quartile cases and YL and XL are the means of the lower quartile
cases. This is very quick to do and is a reliable estimator of the true linear
relationship. An example is shown in figure 8.
Analysis of Residuals and First Differences
At the exploratory analysis stage, the analyst forms some hypotheses
concerning the underlying relations in the data set. Let us assume that
one such hypothesis is that there is a linear relation between two varia-
bles in the data set. A study of the residuals, defined as the differences
between the original values and the estimates for them made on the basis
of the fitted relation, will enable the analyst to test the validity of the rela-
tion. An informal test of the validity of the relation is the absence of pat-
terns in the residuals. Alternatively, if a pattern emerges when the resid-
uals are plotted against the fitted value, the type of pattern may suggest
how the model of the relation can be improved.
Consider the example shown in table 14. The hypothesized linear rela-
tionship has been calculated by the quartile method described above.
The third column shows the residuals from the fitted line. Figure 9 shows
the plot of the residuals against x. The figure shows very clearly that the
spread of the residuals increases as x increases. This phenomenon is a
strong indicator that the variance of the dependent variable (y) increases
for higher values of the independent variable. This is important, for any
<<<PAGE=140>>>
128 Exploratory Analysis
Figure 8. Example of Regression Line Fitted by Quartile Method
80
70 -
60 - 0
50 (
40 _ / - - - *
30~~~~~~~~~~~
30 - / - 0 0 
20 I I I I 0 0
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
x
Table 14. Residuals from Fitted Linear Relationship
x y Residual
10 50 -5.5
11 65 +5.8
12 60 -3.0
13 70 +3.3
14 65 -5.5
15 70 -4.3
16 70 -8.0
17 85 +3.3
18 65 -20.5
19 90 +0.8
20 100 +7.0
21 120 +24.3
22 80 -20.5
23 95 +0.8
24 140 +32.0
25 110 -1.8
Note: Fitted line is of form y = a + bx; b = (YH YL) /(iH iL) 3.75,
a = y- 3.75i = 17.8.
<<<PAGE=141>>>
Moving Averages 129
Figure 9. Residuals Plotted against Their x-Value
(Demonstrating Variance Increasing with x)
40
.30 -
20 -
10 0
w 0 ~ S 
-10 _ _
-20
-30 I l I I I I I
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
x value
later application of formal least-squares linear regression analysis has as
one of its conditions the requirement that the variance of y is constant
across the range of x. Transformation of the data is indicated. The other
common result of plotting the residuals is that they form a curved band,
as shown in figure 10 for a hypothetical distribution. This is an indicator
that the true relation between x and y is nonlinear.
We have referred to the possibility of attributing a spurious relation be-
tween two variables because of the confounding effect of a third variable,
such as time. A high correlation between two variables when each pair of
observations has been made at successive time intervals (for example,
consecutive seasons) may be caused by the fact that both variables are
correlated with time. This can be tested by seeing if the relation is main-
tained when the two series of first differences (that is, period-to-period
changes in both variables) are examined. If the first differences are also
highly correlated, confidence that there is a real relationship between the
two variables is increased.
Moving Averages
An important monitoring indicator may be the movement of prices of
certain foods or commodities in local markets. Weekly wholesale and re-
tail prices of food crops from a sample of markets in the project area will
<<<PAGE=142>>>
130 Exploratory Analysis
Figure 10. Residuals Plotted against Their x-Value
(Demonstrating Nonlinearity of x-y Relationship)
6
5 -
0~~~
4 - v
3 -_
0~~~~~~
.~~~~
2 -
200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400
x value
be of interest to project managers. Over an extended period of time, a se-
ries of data exhibit three characteristics: an underlying trend, cyclical or
seasonal oscillations, and random movements. With a long data series re-
corded at narrow intervals, a simple smoothing to eliminate the random
noise is required; the use of moving averages may serve this purpose.
Consider a series of prices c1, ..., c.. A five-point moving average pro-
duces a new set of points:
. = 1 + c2 + C3 + c4 + c5
(/3 5
2 + c3 + c4 C5 + c6
C4 5
n-255
When plotted, these moving averages will reveal the cycles and trends
but remove most of the random movements. The longer the period cho-
sen for the moving average-three-point, five-point, seven-point, and so
on-the more the short-term movements are suppressed. The moving
average data points are fewer than the original series-points are "lost" at
each end.
<<<PAGE=143>>>
Analysis of Subsamples 131
Proportions
In chapter 4 of the companion volume and throughout this volume, we
have stressed the importance of adoption rates in various forms. Estimat-
ing the mean of a proportion or rate is of course a relatively simple calcu-
lation, as is the estimation of its reliability from a sample-as discussed in
chapter 6 of this volume. The adoption rate is expressed as the number
who are observed to adopt divided by the total number of observations.
If a simple random sample is used, the variance is given by the simple for-
mula var (p) = p (1 - p) / (n - 1), where p is the observed adoption rate.
Apart from their intrinsic usefulness, therefore, analyses based on rates
are appealing in that the calculations really do require nothing more than
a pencil and paper.
Analysis of Subsamples
We have not recommended collecting data from very large samples nor
including all variables that may be of some possible relevance. Our key-
note has been to collect the minimum data that are essential. Neverthe-
less, analysts may need to review a data set of moderate size and com-
plexity, particularly when the data refer to a time series accumulated over
several years. The steps of exploratory analysis we have introduced in
this chapter can be facilitated further by first randomly selecting a
subsample of the cases in the data set and using this subsample for a pre-
liminary examination of possible features of interest which can be tested
further with the use of the full set. If several hundred cases are available,
a preliminary selection of, say, 100 may serve at the stage of exploratory
analysis.
<<<PAGE=144>>>
9 Statistical Analysis of Data
THE EXPLORATORY OR INITIAL ANALYSIS of data will suffice in many
instances. Suitable tabular and graphic presentation with text, as dis-
cussed in chapter 10, is the next and only required stage of the process of
turning the data into information. In some instances, however, a more
formal statistical analysis will be needed. There is of course no clear di-
viding line between exploratory analysis and full formal analysis-some
of the simple techniques discussed in chapter 8 are perfectly valid tech-
niques in their own right. This chapter introduces the reader to more ad-
vanced analytical tools, which complement the simpler ones. We were
selective in choosing these tools and of necessity are brief in describing
them. Powerful as they are, they can be misused and misinterpreted even
by professional statisticians; if used by those not fully versed in the un-
derlying theory, they can be dangerous indeed.
The advent of microcomputers and statistical software packages has
made it possible to do significance testing, correlation and regression
analysis, and analysis of variance merely by following a few instructions
to summon the applicable part of the software program. Unfortunately,
the use of these packages does not normally require the operator to dem-
onstrate knowledge of the underlying assumptions concerning the struc-
ture of the data which must hold true if the analysis is to be valid. An emi-
nent statistician said recently, 'Perhaps a warning message should be
built into subset regression programmes. My guess is that, were this to be
done, users would obtain the warning more often than they would obtain
any actual answers. It has been said, 'If you torture the data for long
enough, in the end they will confess.' The data will always confess, and
the confession will usually be wrong."1 This chapter starts by comparing
two sample means; proceeds to consider 2 X 2 tables; and then by exten-
sion moves to larger cross-tabulations, to comparison of multiple means
1. A. J. Miller, 'Selection of Subsets of Regression Variables (discussion).'
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A, vol. 147, no. 3 (1984):410-15.
132
<<<PAGE=145>>>
Comparing Two Sample Means 133
through the use of analysis of variance, and finally to correlation and re-
gression.
Comparing Two Sample Means
In simple applications of statistical analysis to project monitoring, we
may want to compare the mean of a variable achieved in one zone with
that achieved in another; or to compare the average rate of adoption
achieved by project participants with that of nonparticipants. We may
want to know if these means estimated from sample observations are sig-
nificantly different, that is, that the difference is not due to the particular
samples that were selected.
We need to introduce here an extension of the concept of standard
deviation as a measure of dispersion, which was introduced in chap-
ter 8-namely, the standard deviation of all possible sample estimates for
a given sample size of a mean, percentage, or proportion. This is called
the standard error of the sample estimate, and it was presented for vari-
ous sample designs in chapter 6. For illustrative purposes, we consider
the standard error of a mean when calculated from the data collected by
using a simple random sample of size n.
sx 2Si. = r = X(X; )2
LX 0/i n(n-1)
From here on, we shall refer to the standard error of a mean, which im-
plies that we are dealing with sample data and estimating the value from
the sample itself.
When comparing means and their standard errors, one further mea-
sure is useful: the coefficient of variation. Clearly, a standard error of 2
has a different application in terms of a mean of 10 than in terms of a
mean of 100, so we convert the standard error into relative terms: coeffi-
cient of variation = Vx = sx /x.
Now consider a case where the application rate of fertilizer has been
estimated for each of two project zones using a random sample of twenty
farmers in each zone. The means and standard errors are:
Zone 1: mean application rate, 110 kilograms; standard error, 9.4
Zone 2: mean application rate, 160 kilograms; standard error, 19.5.
Do we have sufficient evidence that the difference in application rates
in these zones is not due to the chance involved in the selection of farm-
ers? The test used to determine this is known as the t -test. We calculate a
value of t given by
X2 1
f =
_(2 + S-2 )
X2 x1
<<<PAGE=146>>>
134 Statistical Analysis of Data
Using the values for the zones as shown above, we find that t = 2.3 1.
This well-known distribution is quantified in standard statistical ta-
bles. The extra number we need in order to use these tables is the number
of degrees of freedom. In our example it is given by (n1 + n2 - 2) - 38. We
find from standard tables that the 95 percent point of the t -distribution
with 38 degrees of freedom equates to a value of t = 2.02. Because our
computed value is higher than this, we can say with 95 percent confi-
dence that farmers in zone 2 tend to use higher application rates than
farmers in zone 1.
If t tables are not available, do not despair. Except for very small sam-
ples, the t-distribution is almost identical to the normal distribution. But
tables for this may not be available either. Then take as a rule of thumb
that if the size of the samples exceeds 10, the value of t needs to be greater
than 2 if you are to assume that there is a significant difference between
the means.
2 X 2 Tables
We move from a comparison of two means to a slight extension where the
data are assembled in a 2 X 2 table for the purpose of examining the exis-
tence of associations and interrelations. The use of a 2 X 2 table is most
easily demonstrated by using an example (table 15) to demonstrate the
simple calculations that can be made. To generalize the results we will
make use of table 16, which denotes each cell by an algebraic symbol.
The difference in the proportions 'adopting' for project and non-
project farmers gives an idea of project performance. The differences in
proportions are as follows. From table 15:
180_ 60
Pl - P2 = 250 150
- 0.32
From table 16:
a c ad-bc
PI _P2 =a + b c + d (a+b)(c+d)
Table 15. Adoption of Practice by Project and Nonproject Farmers
Do not
Population Adopt adopt Total
Project farmers 180 70 250
Nonproject farmers 60 90 150
Total 240 160 400
<<<PAGE=147>>>
2 X 2 Tables 135
Table 16. Table 15 in General Form
Item Yes (1) No (0) Total
In (1) a b (a + b)
Out (0) c d (c + d)
Total (a + c) (b + d) n = (a + b + c + d)
If several tables are being studied, comparisons of pls and p2s can be
made.
For making comparisons across a number of tables, a measure that
ranges from -1 to +1 may be more convenient. One such is Yule's Q,
which is calculated as follows.
From Table 15:
Q 180 X 90 - 60 X 70
180 X 90 + 60 X 70
- 0.59
From Table 16:
ad - bc
ad + bc
Q was originally devised as a measure of association and is appropriate
here because a difference in the odds on adoption for project and
nonproject farmers is equivalent to an association between 'being in the
project' and 'adopting the practice.' Q takes values ranging from 0 (no
association) to + 1 in one direction (complete positive association) and -1
in the other (complete negative association). The larger the figure, the
greater the strength of the association it summarizes.
Another measure sometimes used is the correlation coefficient r
(which also takes values lying in the range of -1 to + 1). We discuss the
general form for r later in this chapter, but in the particular case of a 2 X 2
table r can be expressed as follows (using the assignment of the numeric
codes 0 and 1 in table 16).
From table 15:
12,000
V(250 X 150 X 240 X 160)
- 0.316
From table 16:
ad - bcr [=
\/[(a + b)(c + d)(a + c)(b + d)]
<<<PAGE=148>>>
136 Statistical Analysis of Data
The result for r will be of the same sign as Q (because the numerator is the
same, the positive root is always taken in the denominator of r) and r will
always be closer to 0 than Q. It is often recommended that the value of r2
be considered, rather than the value of r, since r2 equals the proportion of
the variation explained. The value of r2 in this case is equal to only 0.1.
The quantity (ad - bc) occurs again in another often-used test of associ-
ation, termed the chi-square test. Suppose there is in reality no associa-
tion between the two variables. In this case, it would then be expected
that the (a + b) farmers, the (c + d) farmers, and the total of farmers would
all divide in the same proportion. In the cell in which a is found, the num-
ber would be expected to satisfy
a _ a+c
a+b n
giving an expected value in the first cell under an assumption of no asso-
ciation of
(a + b)(a + c)
n
The number actually observed is a, and so the difference (Dll) between
the observed and 'expected' values is as follows. From table 15:
_ (180 X 90) - (70 X 60)
D11 400
=30
From table 16:
D= a - (a + b)(a + c)n
ad - bc
n
Keeping the marginal totals constant, it will be seen that Di1 = D 22
-D 12=-D21
Clearly, the larger (ad - bc)/n, the bigger is the difference between the
observed value and that expected on the assumption of no association,
and the stronger is the evidence for the alternative view that there is a re-
lation between the variables.
Using this feature, the chi-square value is calculated as follows. From
table 15:
x2 = 400 (12,000)2
250 X 240 X 160 X 150
= 400 (0.316)2
<<<PAGE=149>>>
Cross-Tabulations 137
From table 16:
2X= n (ad - bc)2
(a + b)(a + c)(b + d)(c + d)
or substituting r from above,
= nr2
If there were no association between the variables, samples giving a
value of x2 greater than 1 would occur, on average, approximately once in
three samples, and values greater than 3.8 would occur only once in
twenty times. One reason for calculating this particular quantity is that it
is a convenient basis for combining results from a number of similar sam-
ple tables. If the association in all, say k, tables is in the same direction
(that is, if [ad-bc] is the same sign in all k tables), then the sum of x2s from
the tables can be added together and tested at the desired level against
the value of x2 with k degrees of freedom (details in most sets of statistical
tables).
Single-figure measures provide only a first stage of analysis, and the
reduction of the data into 2 X 2 tables may be an oversimplification.
Moreover, the description of these measures here is introductory only.
The effects of sampling design features, for example clustering, have not
been dealt with. But an analysis of this kind can be done quickly without
computing aids and is quite sound in testing for possible relation-
ships.
Cross-Tabulations
Not all tables which show data from the information system can be re-
duced to a simple 2 X 2 format. Two-way tables or cross-tabulations, in
which one variable is distributed across the columns and the other down
the rows, are probably the commonest form of data presentation. It is a
powerful way of communicating information, and the presentational as-
pects are discussed in the next chapter. This chapter touches on the anal-
ysis of a cross-tabulation.
In one common form of cross-tabulation, each observed case is allo-
cated to a cell of a table depending on its categorization according to the
two dimensions of the table. Table 17 shows an example in which farm-
ers were asked to assess the quality of the extension service. Their assess-
ments have been tabulated according to the size of farm of each respon-
dent. One of the tests that we may wish to perform is one about whether
the tendency of farmers to rate the service as satisfactory is related to
farm size. For this we extend the application of the chi-square test intro-
duced earlier. We calculate the X2 value as
XI (observed value - expected value)2
X expected value
<<<PAGE=150>>>
138 Statistical Analysis of Data
Table 17. Rating of an Extension Service
Farm size (ha.)
Rating 0-5 5-10 10-15 15-20 20+ Total
Very good 9 14 15 15 8 61
Good 36 41 14 7 6 104
Fair 19 15 4 3 1 42
Poor 12 7 2 2 23
Total 76 77 35 27 15 230
The expected value for the top left-hand cell (very good / 0-5 hec-
tares) is obtained by multiplying the row and column total in which the
cell lies and dividing by the overall total. The expected total for very
good / 0-5 = 76 X 61/230 = 20 and expected value for good / 0-5 = 76
X 104/230 = 34 and so on.
X, (9 - 20)2 + (36-34)2 + + (o -1)2
20 34 1
= 37
The degrees of freedom associated with this test are given by (number
of rows -1)(number of columns -1) = 12.
Reference to tables of the chi-square distribution with this number of
degrees of freedom shows that the probability of such a high value for x2
if there was no association between assessment and size of farm is very
small (less than one in a thousand).
Another popular form of cross-tabulation does not use a number of
cases as the cell entry, but rather a mean, percentage, or total that has
been calculated from the values for the number of cases in the cell. An ex-
ample is shown in table 18.
Each entry, although a percentage, is a percentage of a cell total that is
not shown. The percentages therefore are independent of each other and
do not sum to 100 either vertically or horizontally. Mistakes are com-
monly made in interpreting such tables and in drawing conclusions.
Moreover, if the numbers in each cell are not known, very little further
analysis can be attempted. We shall say more on this in the next chapter.
Comparing Differences from Multiple Groups: The Analysis of
Variance
Earlier in this chapter we introduced the t-test for testing the significance
of the difference between two means. In most cases, as with table 18, the
problem facing the analyst is to test for significant differences between a
<<<PAGE=151>>>
Analysis of Variance 139
Table 18. Proportion of Users of Hired Labor
(percent)
Farm size (ha.)
Zone 0-5 5-10 10+ Total
A 21 67 86 52
B 12 79 90 54
C 27 71 83 46
D 7 59 68 33
Total 15 68 77 47
multiple set of means. A typical question the analyst addresses is
whether there are significant differences in response between the vari-
ous zones. The null hypothesis is that there is no such difference. The
analysis aims to test this hypothesis; if it is found to be unlikely it is con-
cluded that farmers in different zones react differently. We could conduct
a series of t-tests comparing each mean with every other mean. For two
reasons, this is not the way to proceed: the significance tests will be incor-
rect, and there is a better way.
Suppose we make several comparisons of means using the 95 percent
confidence level of the t-distribution. In any single test, therefore, there is
a 0.05 chance of falsely concluding that there is a significant difference,
when in fact there is none. If several t-tests are performed, the probabil-
ity that at least one of these results in an incorrect conclusion of a signifi-
cant difference increases rapidly. The probability is 0.23 for five tests and
0.40 for ten tests.
We have seen analyses produced by computer statistical software
packages that provide a long series of t-values, which have been re-
viewed by the analyst, who has then chosen the significant differences
based on them. From the above, it follows that there is a good chance that
some of these choices were made incorrectly.
The technique used to test multiple means is termed the analysis of
variance. This principal area of formal statistical analysis is covered ex-
tensively in standard texts; therefore, we do not go into the theory under-
pinning this analysis here, but we offer a brief explanation of its function
and a warning regarding its misapplication, and in some cases limited
usefulness.
Until recently there was not much chance that an analyst would carry
out an analysis of variance without fully understanding its underlying
assumptions. Ease of access to computers and statistical software pack-
ages has changed the situation, however. The analysis of variance routine
in statistical packages can be accessed with only a few control instruc-
tions in the software manual. What is actually being calculated need not
<<<PAGE=152>>>
140 Statistical Analysis of Data
be understood. The danger of drawing erroneous conclusions in such cir-
cumstances is high.
Consider a simple case of a data set consisting of, say, crop yields ob-
tained in fields contained in a number of zones. This data set is
variable-values range over a certain set of values. We want to assess
whether the location of the fields by zone is a principal contributor to ex-
plaining this variation or whether the variation may be described as
caused by chance fluctuations from field to field irrespective of the zonal
location. In other words, we consider the total variation around the mean
of our data set and apportion it according to the variation within each
zone around the mean of each zone, and the variation between the means
of the zones. We compare the latter between-zone variance with the for-
mer within-zone variance. If this ratio is above a certain figure, we con-
clude that the zone is an important cause of differences in yields.
This brief statement covers the basic principle of analysis of variance.
The actual calculations need to be carried out according to precise rules,
and when we are dealing with two or three possible explanatory
variables-say zone, farm size, and season-the calculations become
quite complex, although well within the capacity of the aforementioned
computer software packages.
In its simplest form, the model we have used is of the form x, = x - eii,
that is, that the yield obtained by the jth farmer in the ith zone is equal to
the overall mean yield plus or minus a random number, denoted by F,
which may have a negative, positive, or zero value for any one farmer.
Several assumptions are made about e .They must be independent of
each other, must be distributed around a zero mean and have a common
variance, and must be normally distributed for the F-test to be valid. In
many cases these assumptions do not hold true. Sometimes the require-
ments can be met by suitable transformation of the data, but most soft-
ware packages do not warn the uninitiated that such transformations are
required. The computer will conduct the calculations and provide the
summary regardless. The summary output is in the form of an F-value
(equivalent, in a way, to the t-value discussed earlier in the case of com-
paring two means).
What are the consequences of using tests such as the t-test and F-test
when the data do not conform to the model that underpins the validity of
these tests? We quote a standard work2 :
Usually, but not invariably, the true significance probability is larger
than the apparent one; that is, too many significant results are ob-
tained.... The most serious disturbances appear to arise when the ex-
2. William G. Cochran and Gertrude M. Cox, Experimental Designs (New
York: Wiley, 1957), p. 91.
<<<PAGE=153>>>
Analysis of Variance 141
perimental error variance is not constant over all observations ... the
use of the same estimated variance for both comparisons would lead to
t-tests that were completely erroneous ... a transformation [of the data
may] place the data on a scale on which the error variance is more
nearly constant.
For routine testing to give first indications of differences, these prob-
lems may not be of great concern in many evaluation applications. But
they must be borne in mind if very formal impact evaluations are being
made.
If the F-test indicates that the null hypothesis is almost certainly
wrong-that is, in our simple case, there is a difference between the
zones that cannot be explained by chance variations-there remains the
important question as to which zone or zones are the "odd man out."
Does one particular zone stand out as having different farmer behavior
from the others, which are similar, or do all the zones have idiosyncratic
farmer performance? A simple method of completing the analysis is to
use a technique known as Tukey's significant gap. We assemble the zonal
means in ascending order and calculate the gap between successive
zones. An example is shown in table 19.
Let us assume that an analysis of variance has been carried out. The
value of F was significant at the 95 percent point confidence level. The
computer printout also shows that the "within-zone mean square" as the
denominator in the F calculation is 3,823. A significant gap is given by
G = \/2 X t X X within-zone mean square
V 2 0.05n
where t 0.05 is the 95 percent point of the t-distribution, which as stated
earlier is approximately 2; and n is the number of observations in each
zone, which in this case is 20.
Therefore, for our example,
GC=X2X 3,/823V 20
= 39
Table 19. Calculation of Gap between Zones
Zone Mean fertilizer application rate (kg./ha.) Gap
1 1101 20
4 1620 10
2 1 60} 40
<<<PAGE=154>>>
142 Statistical Analysis of Data
So zone 2 is the one that differs significantly from the others with a gap of
40.
There are two other important limitations in interpreting an F-test from
an analysis of variance. First, the F-value does not in itself denote the
proportion of variation that is explained by the variable being tested. If
two variables both result in statistically significant F-values, the fact that
one may be larger than the other is of no practical value. Second, if the
data set is large, an analysis of variance of almost any possible explana-
tory variable is likely to produce a significant result. The chance that the
zones, let us say, are absolutely equal in their farmer behavior is small.
With sufficient data we are almost bound to conclude that there are dif-
ferences, but whether these differences are of any practical importance
from the point of view of tactical or strategic project implementation is a
very different matter.
We therefore conclude that if an analyst is not well versed in the tech-
nique he would be well advised to steer clear of it, but even when carried
out, the results should be viewed with caution. Most monitoring and
evaluation reports will lose little if the analysis of variance is omitted.
What must not be omitted is sensible presentation of the basic tabula-
tions and cross-tabulations. Most of us would have singled out zone 2, for
example, without the aids described. We say more on this topic in the
next chapter.
Regression and Correlation
No weapons in the evaluator's armory are more commonly relied on
than the fitting of linear regressions and the calculation of correlation co-
efficients. Econometricians are even more dependent on these measures
of association. This section introduces these methods; the next section
warns of their dangers, for they are comm jnly misused. We will develop
the regression method using the classical least-squares approach, but the
reader is referred to chapter 8 for alternative methods which are quicker
and in certain circumstances more robust.
A linear relation between two variables y and x can be expressed in the
form y = a +bx, where a is the value of y when x = 0, and b measures the
slope of the line that represents the relation. In any practical project eval-
uation situation, the relation will not be perfect-deviations will be ob-
served which are caused either by random variations between the ob-
served cases or errors in the observations themselves. So we introduce
the residual term (si) and write the expression for any individual obser-
vation of the two variables as y, = a + bxi +&i where 6i has a mean of zero.
The least-squares method (which involves differential calculus) mini-
mizes the sum of the squares of the deviations of individual observations
from the fitted line. It results in the following formula for b, and then a:
<<<PAGE=155>>>
Regression and Correlation 143
b (xi - y)(yi - y
z (Xi -x)2
a = -
Figure 11 shows the plot of the proportion of contact farmers adopting
a new crop variety by year of project implementation. Table 20 shows the
calculation of b and a if done without the aid of a calculator.
Such a relation is used to estimate what the value of y would be for a
given value of x if the random residual did not intervene. Or in a case
such as that shown in figure 11, the value of y for a value of t (that is,
time) has not yet occurred: that is, we use the relationship to forecast the
value of y in future seasons or years. Its usefulness for these purposes de-
pends on how close the actual values are to the fitted regression-how
large are the values of si. The measure of the goodness of fit is known as
the correlation coefficient between x and y and is denoted by r where
r = I (xi - x-)(y, - y)
V(Xi - )2X(Yi - y)2
The extra manual calculation needed for this is shown in the last column
of table 20.
Figure 11. Regression of Proportion Adopting by Year
1.0
0.9 _
0.8 -
X 0.7 -
o 0.6 -
Q 0.5
0
0.4 -0~~~~~~~
0.3
0 1 2 3 4 5 (6) (7)
Project year
<<<PAGE=156>>>
144 Statistical Analysis of Data
Table 20. Method of Manual Calculation of b and a
Proportion of
Year adopters
(X) (Y) X-X y- y (x X-Xi (y -y) (X - X_ (y _ Y-2
1 0.17 -2 -0.22 +0.44 4 0.0484
2 0.43 -1 +0.04 -0.04 1 0.0016
3 0.23 0 -0.16 0 0 0.0256
4 0.52 +1 +0.13 +0.13 1 0.0169
5 0.60 +2 +0.21 +0.45 4 0.0441
Total 0.95 10 0.1366
Note: b = 0.95/10 = 0.095; a = 0.39 - 0.095 X 3 = 0.105. The line fitted through these
data is then expressed by the formula y = 0.105 + 0.095x.
The value of r will lie in the range of -1 < r ' + 1. Negative values of r
mean that the regression line is downward sloping, that is, y decreases as
x increases. The closer r is to either-1 or + 1, the better the regression line
explains the location of the observations. If r is close to zero, the esti-
mated association between x and y is a very poor predictor of the value of
y for a given x. For the data shown in figure 11, r = 0.81. The linear rela-
tionship therefore would seem to provide a good fit to the observed
points.
Dealing with only two variables is an oversimplification of the situa-
tion encountered in evaluation work. No one single variable x may ex-
plain the behavior of y, but there may be a series of variables, x, x2, ..., xn
which together jointly determine changes in y. We generalize our model
to the multivariate linear regression case, y = a + b1x1 + b2x2 + b3x3 +. .. +
b,xn. The calculations of a and the set of bis, (i = 1, ..., n) are more com-
plicated than in the bivariate case; they require the aid of computing
facilities.
Of course there may be a true relation between y and x1(i = 1, ..., n) but
not a linear one. The theory of statistics can accommodate this with cur-
vilinear regression, but the use of this lies outside the needs of most eval-
uation work.
Returning to the coefficient of correlation, r, it can be shown that r2 is
an estimate of the proportion of the total variation in the values of y that
can be explained by the fitted relation with x. In the case of the example
in figure 11, r2 = 0.66, so we may say that approximately two-thirds of
the variation in the number of farmers adopting the new variety is ex-
plained by the time factor-the number of years since project inception.
The F-test, using the analysis of variance, explained earlier, is used to
determine the significance of the regression relationship; but as stated
earlier, if the data set is large the likelihood is that significance will be es-
tablished. This does not mean that the relationship is always of opera-
<<<PAGE=157>>>
Cautionary Comments 145
tional value, particularly when r2 is small. We also advocate caution
when interpreting r2 values that are very high, say more than 0.75. Such
strong relations explaining most of the variation in the data rarely occur
in real project circumstances (as opposed to experimental trials). In such
circumstances, the evaluator is well advised to investigate the validity of
the data.
We are using r (or r2) as a measure of the relationship between x and y.
If r = 0, we are tempted to say that there is no relationship and that x and
y therefore are statistically independent. If variables are normally distrib-
uted, it is true that they are independent if and only if they are
uncorrelated. But if variables are not normally distributed, r cannot be
used to determine whether they are independent or related. In other
words, r is only useful as an indicator when the variables are distributed
normally. Because of this it is common practice in econometrics and re-
gression analyses for evaluations to transform skewed data so as to intro-
duce normality, or an approximation of it. Taking the square root of one
or both variables or alternatively the logarithmic values are the common-
est transformations used. Even if variables are normally distributed, it
does not follow that a high r2 proves that there is a relation between them
that has practical meaning for project implementation. This brings us to
the warning section.
Cautionary Comments about Correlation and Regression
The data analyst needs to formulate a hypothesis regarding a relation to
be examined before using correlation and regression methods. There is a
time-honored methodological maxim: 'Correlation does not prove cau-
sation.' Correlation of an effect with an identified stimulus is only useful
evidence if the other causal factors have been factored out. Production
may have increased as fertilizer sales rose, but the real stimulus to pro-
duction gains may have been changes in market prices. The correlation of
two variables observed over a number of time points is particularly likely
to lead to mistaken inferences. A high correlation coefficient may be
caused merely by the separate high correlations of each variable with
time. There are famous examples of nonsensical correlations in excess of
0.9 between, for example, salaries of clergy and sales of alcoholic bever-
ages when in fact both rise fairly steadily over an extended time. We have
said in chapter 8 that the first differences (period-to-period changes)
should be correlated-if the value of r for differences is high, the likeli-
hood of a real relation between the variables, independent of time, is in-
creased.
Another common error in interpreting correlation coefficients between
variables stems from the common situation in which a significant corre-
<<<PAGE=158>>>
146 Statistical Analysis of Data
lation measured over aggregates of persons does not appear when the
correlation is calculated over individuals. There may be a correlation at
an aggregated level (say, by district) between educational attainment and
business activity, but when the data are examined at the individual level
there may be little correlation between education and commercial or in-
dustrial activity. Districts with booming business tend to contain high
numbers of better educated people, perhaps because a high standard of
living facilities tends to accompany economically booming areas and bet-
ter educated people are attracted to areas of high living standards. In-
deed, a general problem with correlation coefficients is that their size can
be increased by increasing the level of aggregation in the data used to cal-
culate them.
Nor is it sufficient to show that the value of r2 is 'statistically signifi-
cant.' Many such statements are of little interest or importance for policy
purposes.
Perhaps the most serious problem in using regression models for data
sets collected in a real project environment is the effect of measurement
errors. We have commented already that the use of the least-squares
method, which underpins the calculation of b, the regression coefficient,
requires that the independent variable x be observed or measured with-
out error. If this condition does not hold, the reliability of the estimate of
the regression coefficient is seriously affected. Quick methods of fitting
the regression line were discussed in chapter 8; these may give more valid
estimates when errors affect both the dependent and independent vari-
ables.
These errors are not sampling errors but rather the difference between
the true value for a particular case and the figure that is actually recorded
and used in the analysis. Consider the situation in which the value re-
corded for the ith case, Xi, does not necessarily equal the true value of Xi,
the error being equal to wi. Thus xi = Xi + wi.
The wis can be positive or negative, and of course can be equal to zero.
Most commonly, errors are introduced during the collection of the data in
the field, but they also arise during the editing and coding of the data. It is
a rare data set dealing with the evaluation of agriculture projects that
does not suffer from a set of wis of considerable size. In a simple one-
independent-variable regression model, the 'true' value of the coeffi-
cient b is related to the calculated value b by the equation b = b/R, where
R is the reliability of the measurement of the independent variable. This
result is sometimes referred to as the attenuation effect:
R variance of X
variance of X + variance of w
The variance of w may be expressed as a proportion of the variance of
X:varw = kvar X.ThenitfollowsthatR = 1/(1 +k)and 1/R = 1 +k.
<<<PAGE=159>>>
Cautionary Comments 147
Thus if k = 0.1, the calculated value b should be multiplied by 1.1 to
correct for the attenuation effect. But in many cases of poorly observed
values or estimates given by respondents on the basis of long recall peri-
ods, k may be 0.3 or more. With regard to multiple regression, where we
are dealing with a set of independent variables xi,i = 1, ..., n, the issue of
errors in these variables is more complicated.
A common ambition in evaluation is to analyze an impact variable
such as income or yield by regressing it on a set of projected-related and
exogenous variables and choosing a minimum set of these variables that
appear to be the ones that most influence the impact variable. Choosing
this subset by the use of stepwise regression techniques is a popular type
of analysis, for computer software packages provide the means of han-
dling the daunting volume of calculations. In this volume and its com-
panion we have argued against such ambitious evaluations on other
grounds. A further reason is that many of the analyses of this type are in-
valid. It is only recently that competent statisticians have addressed the
growing popularity of such analyses and the fundamental problems they
present. The following quotations are from one discussion of this issue3 :
'Simple selection methods fail to deliver, the usual significance tests are
misleading, estimated regression coefficients are biased.' 'Variable selec-
tion methods using t or F criteria are really aiming to eliminate x-variables
whose true coefficients are exactly zero. The implausibility of the occur-
rence of such variables in practical situations is another argument against
the appropriateness of these methods.,
An exposition of the theoretical problems and practical dangers in
using the stepwise multiple regression to which these speakers allude
would take us way beyond the scope of this chapter. But such problems
exist, which emphasizes again that our recommendation for simple anal-
ysis may not be second best but rather all that our error-prone data can
support.
3. A. J. Miller, "Selection of Subsets of Regression Variables." Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, series A, vol. 147, no. 3: 410-15.
<<<PAGE=160>>>
1 0 Presenting Data to the User
IF THE PROCEDURES DESCRIBED in this book, particularlyin chapters 8
and 9, have been followed, the required amount of data will have been
collected, sorted, collated, and marshaled into a logical structure; pat-
terns will have been explored; and hypotheses will have been tested.
Now the crucial step is to present the data and accompanying text crisply,
succinctly, and on time. Chapter 6 of the companion volume discusses
communicating information, including report writing. Within that over-
all framework, this chapter discusses the issues that arise in presenting
the data.
The presentation of data to managers at various levels is facilitated if
the following principles are observed:
* Levels of detail and disaggregation will vary so as to be appropriate
for a particular type of reader.
* Definitions of variables, table headings, and layouts will be made
clear to the reader, who will not always have either a mathematical
background or technical knowledge of the topics discussed.
* References to the technical terms used in statistical analysis will be
explained for the nonprofessional reader.
* Text accompanying tables will summarize the main highlights re-
vealed by the tables, indicating the conclusions that may be drawn.
* Graphics and other diagrams will be used to focus the reader's inter-
est and aid his understanding.
Those undertaking to transmit data should be willing to communicate
provisional and approximate findings if they are significant. Unfortu-
nately, those who are fearful of making a mistake tend to err on the side
of caution. Careful checking of surprising facts, deliberate reviewing of
the quality of data, and not jumping to premature conclusions are all val-
uable attributes; but some willingness to make the best judgment possi-
ble on the basis of whatever evidence is currently available is also neces-
sary.
148
<<<PAGE=161>>>
Frequency Distributions 149
Previous chapters have introduced both exploratory and formal statis-
tical analyses of data. The following sections thus discuss only the tabu-
lar and graphic presentation of data and analytical findings.
Tables and figures should allow the reader to absorb readily the com-
position of the data set and appreciate without further analysis the most
obvious patterns and relationships.' Some techniques to help achieve
this include the following:
* Use clear and unambiguous class intervals in frequency distribu-
tions.
* Truncate the number of digits shown.
* Use clear, self-explanatory column and row headings.
* Liberally use differential spacing to highlight comparisons.
* Order columns and rows sensibly.
* Transform the data into percentages and indexes as appropriate-
without forgetting to apply techniques already mentioned to the
transformed data.
* Use distributional parameters-averages, standard deviations, and
so on, to summarize the arrays of data.
* Compare the data with data from earlier years or other geographical
regions.
* Use simple, uncluttered pie charts, histograms, and graphs to high-
light features of interest.
Frequency Distributions
When a large data set is being summarized into a grouped frequency dis-
tribution, the choice of class intervals is the crucial decision. Consider the
equal class-width distribution of farm sizes in table 21. It might be more
informative to split the first two classes into one-hectare widths because
60 percent of the total data set is in these classes. Also, in summarizing
the data, the upper classes could be merged into one group of 14.1-20
hectares.
There is a danger, however, in the excessive use of unequal class inter-
vals. The reader who sees a distribution presented in this form is first in-
clined to see it as a set of discrete and equal steps; only close observation
will reveal the varying widths of the classes. Our recommendation is to
maintain equal class intervals through most of the distribution and use
wider intervals if required for the last one or two classes.
1. For further treatment, see A. S. C. Ehrenberg, Data Reduction (London:
Wiley, 1978).
<<<PAGE=162>>>
150 Presenting Data to the User
Table 21. Frequency Distribution of Farm Sizes
Farm size Number of
(ha.) farms
0-2 350
2.1-4 250
4.1-6 150
6.1-8 100
8.1-10 70
10.1-12 30
12.1-14 25
14.1-16 15
16.1-18 5
18.1-20 5
Total 1,000
Note also how the farm size class intervals are referenced, 0-2, 2.1-4,
and so on, with the definition of the unit, hectares (ha.), included in the
row heading. This implies that any farm of more than 2 ha. but not larger
than 4 ha. would be in the second class, but strictly it could be argued that
a 2.02 ha. farm would be included in the 0-2 ha. class because its area
would round to one decimal place as 2.0 ha. Unless one is very pedantic
and shows the class boundaries defined to the same precision as the orig-
inal recording of the values, there is always some small level of ambigu-
ity. But to avoid giving the table a messy appearance, this is usually ac-
ceptable. It is not uncommon to find the classes shown as, say, 0-2, 2-4,
4-6-which leaves uncertain where a farm of precisely 2, 4, or 6 ha. is
placed. With continuous variables, for which very few of the values will
be precisely measured on the class interval, this may be acceptable. But
when discrete variables such as household size are being shown, this am-
biguity must be avoided.
How many classes to show is a matter of choice. Obviously, the point
of a grouped distribution is to summarize the data so that the eye of the
reader assimilates the essential shape-where the mode is and how
quickly it tails off. Ten classes, as in the above example, seems to us to be
a reasonable maximum to aim at.
Truncation of Digits and Summary Distributions
Most tables presented to managers fail to communicate because numbers
are shown to an excessive number of digits. Drastic surgery is often
needed to round the values by removing decimal places or units (tens and
even hundreds). Little is lost (unless, exceptionally, the precise value of a
carefully observed characteristic is required), implications of spurious ac-
<<<PAGE=163>>>
Truncation of Digits and Summary Distributions 151
Table 22. Maize and Bean Yields by Farm Size and Project
Participation
Farm
size Yield (kg/ha.)
Participant (ha.) Maize Beans
Yes 2.43 2,762 941
Yes 6.12 2,248 1,060
Yes 5.43 1,710 812
No 2.17 2,361 743
No 1.64 946 671
Yes 7.43 2,432 1,165
No 4.80 2,170 846
Yes 3.71 3,432 -
Yes 2.55 1,487 504
No 1.75 1,700 764
No 1.04 619 740
No 3.27 1,860 910
Yes 12.14 1,640 831
No 4.61 1,940 663
No 0.93 835 -
Yes 2.10 3,471 -
Yes 5.12 2,743 1,230
No 1.79 1,876 910
No 1.29 1,149 -
Yes 2.91 4,140 1,423
-No cases.
Table 23. Maize and Bean Yields by Project Participation
Participants Nonparticipants
Farm Farm
size Yield ('000 kg./ha.) size Yield ('000 kg./ha.)
(ha.) Maize Beans (ha.) Maize Beans
2 2.8 0.9 2 2.4 0.7
6 2.2 1.1 2 0.9 0.7
5 1.7 0.8 5 2.2 0.8
7 2.4 1.2 2 1.7 0.8
4 3.4 - 1 0.6 0.7
3 1.5 0.5 3 1.9 0.9
12 1.6 0.8 5 1.9 0.7
2 3.5 - 1 0.8 -
5 2.7 1.2 2 1.9 0.9
3 4.1 1.4 1 1.1 -
-Crop not grown.
<<<PAGE=164>>>
Table 24. Maize and Bean Yields by Farm Size
Participants Nonparticipants
Farm Farm
size Yield ('000 kg./ha.) size Yield ('000 kg./ha.)
(ha.) Maize Beans (ha.) Maize Beans
2 3.5 0.5 1 0.8 -
2 2.8 0.9 1 0.6 0.7
3 1.5 - 1 1.1 -
3 4.1 1.4 2 0.9 0.7
4 3.4 - 2 1.7 0.8
5 1.7 0.8 2 1.9 0.9
5 2.7 1.2 2 2.4 0.7
6 2.2 1.1 3 1.9 0.9
7 2.4 1.2 5 1.9 0.7
12 1.6 0.8 5 2.2 0.8
-No cases.
<<<PAGE=165>>>
Table 25. Maize and Bean Yields Grouped by Farm Size
Farm size Maize yields ('000 kg./ha.) Bean yields ('000 kg./ha.)
(ha.) Participants Nonparticipants Participants Nonparticipants
Less than 2 - 1.2 (6) - 0.8 (4)
2-3 3.1 (5) 2.1 (2) 1.0 (3) 0.8 (2)
4-5 2.2 (2) 2.1 (2) 1.0 (2) 0.8 (2)
6-+ 2.1 (3) - 1.0 (3) -
Total 2.6 (10) 1.5 (10) 1.0 (8) 0.8 (8)
-No cases.
Note: Numbers in parentheses denote the number of cases on which the yield is based.
<<<PAGE=166>>>
154 Presenting Data to the User
curacy are avoided, and much is gained in reader understanding. More-
over, having looked at the data in truncated form we may find that the
main message can be conveyed with a very abbreviated tabular format.
Table 22 illustrates this point. For ease of presentation we have kept the
number of values low, but the principles apply equally to larger data sets.
The various presentational possibilities illustrated below are not in-
tended to imply that all versions are meaningful or necessary to include
in a formal presentation. The examples show the range of presentational
possibilities, from which the most revealing would be chosen.
First, for presentational purposes, let us (in table 23) truncate and
round the data to the nearest hectare and assemble the project partici-
pants in one column and the nonparticipants in another.
Now let us (in table 24) order the data by farm size.
A picture now starts to emerge. Project participants tend to have larger
farms and obtain better yields. Let us now (in table 25) form a two-way
table by grouping farm sizes, calculating the mean yields, and bringing
the comparative yields together. (For calculation of the means, we use the
untruncated data and note that four farmers do not grow beans.)
Differences in yields between project participants and nonparticipants
seem to be caused by factors other than farm size. Although the partici-
pants tend to have larger farms, the maize yields achieved on the larger
farms are no better than others, and bean yields do not vary with farm
size.
Ignoring farm size, let us examine the grouped frequency distribution
of maize and bean yields:
Maize yields
('000 kg./ha.)
Farmers Less than 1 1-2 2-3 3+
Participants - 3 4 3
Nonparticipants 3 5 2 -
Bean yields
('000 kg./ha.)
Farmers Less than 0.8 0.8-1 1.0-1.2 1.2+
Participants 1 3 2 2
Nonparticipants 5 3 - -
These simple tables convey much of what the data have to reveal. If any-
thing more is needed, it will be a quantification of the obvious
distributional differences:
Maize yields Bean yields
Mean Standard Mean Standard
Farmers ('000 kg/ha.) deviation ('000 kg/ha.) deviation
Participants 2.6 0.9 1.0 0.3
Nonparticipants 1.5 0.6 0.8 0.1
<<<PAGE=167>>>
Presentation of Cross-Tabulations 155
We could now conduct t-tests to confirm the significance of the differ-
ence between participants and nonparticipants, but the visual impact of
the first two tables in the last paragraph has achieved the purpose. Table
25 may be preferred to the third table in the last paragraph in this exam-
ple, for the interaction between farm size and participation should not be
suppressed.
Ruthless truncation of decimal places and insignificant figures plus the
appropriate use of grouped frequency distributions can reveal most of
what the analyst wishes to convey without any formal statistical analysis
whatsoever. Nor is much lost by such truncation. Even if the recorded
values are precise, rounding does not reduce the appreciation of variabil-
ity in the data unless the data are very homogeneous. For many data sets
collected for monitoring and evaluation purposes, the observational er-
rors are at least as great as the level of truncation. If a yield is measured as
3,642.51 kilograms per hectare with the use of a crop cutting sample
technique, to quote the figure in this form is to give a completely erro-
neous impression of accuracy. It is better to show it in a table as '3.6 thou-
sand kilograms,' which is easier for the eye to scan and avoids giving the
wrong impression of a high level of accuracy in the measurement.
Presentation of Cross-Tabulations
The two-way table is the commonest form in which to present data. The
analytical aspects of cross-tabulations were discussed in chapter 9. Here
we consider presentation.
Two types of tables are involved: one in which the entries in the cells of
the tables are counts, the frequency with which a case belonging to that
cell occurred; the second in which the cell entry is a value such as a mean,
percentage, or total-for example, mean yield, percentage adopting,
total area planted.
Both types have some principles in common. The column and row
headings should be clear and unambiguous. The spacing, particularly
between columns, should help the figures stand out as discrete entries
rather than as a blur of continuous digits with but the narrowest of spaces
between the end of one entry and the start of the next. Truncation of dig-
its is a major help in achieving this spacing. Particularly important col-
umns or rows can be highlighted by the use of differential spacing, and, if
good quality printing is available, by the use of darker type.
If one of the dimensions of the tabulation is geographical-for exam-
ple, project zones or districts-its ordering should be considered care-
fully. Commonly, geographical characteristics are listed in their actual
physical sequence, say from north to south, or in the sequence customar-
ily used in national statistical digests; but in some cases it may be useful to
list them in the order of their importance in relation to the variable shown
<<<PAGE=168>>>
Table 26. Milk Production by Province
Total Number of Number of Production Percentage
production holdings cows per of
(millions of with cows in milk cow production
Province liters) ('000) ('000) (liters) sold
Central 310 210 333 932 46
Eastern 172 193 446 386 29
Rift Valley 153 77 290 529 36
Nyanza 138 194 525 263 38
Western 48 118 168 283 31
Coast 18 20 85 213 62
Total 839 812 1,847 455 38
Note: Excludes pastoral and larger farrn areas.
Source: Central Bureau of Statistics, Kenya, Report of Integrated Rural Survey 1974-75 (Nairobi, 1975).
<<<PAGE=169>>>
Presentation of Cross-Tabulations 157
Table 27. Number of Fertilizer Users
Zone
Farmers A B C Total
Participants 276 36 180 23 314 41 770
73 (27) 80 (18) 78 (31) 76
Nonparticipants 102 43 46 19 90 38 238
27 (10) 20 (5) 22 (9) 24
Total 378 38 226 22 404 40 1,008
in the table. For example, if the table is showing crop areas by region, it
may help the reader to list the regions in descending order of total area
under cultivation. Table 26 shows a cross-tabulation with these desirable
features.
If the cell entries are counts rather than values, the opportunity exists
to show both the numbers themselves and the percentage distribution by
row, column, and by row and column. Some statistical packages show all
these combinations in one cell. Table 27 is a simple hypothetical example.
The large numbers are the actual counts, the figures to the right of the
count are the row percentage distributions, the figures under the counts
are the column percentage distributions, and the figures in parentheses
express the overall row-by-column percentage distribution. Such a table
may be useable by the analyst, but it will totally confuse most readers. Ta-
bles should not be as cluttered as this one. The count and either the row
or column percentage should be the maximum number of entries in a
cell. The choice of the percentage depends on the message to be con-
veyed (see the next section of this chapter).
When the cell entries are values, the most important point to remem-
ber in producing a final version of the table is that the marginals (row and
column entries) are not subtotals as in the type just discussed. Therefore,
row and column percentages are not possible; this point, obvious though
it is, is sometimes overlooked.
The presenters' main responsibility in a cross-tabulation of this type is
not to stretch the data beyond reasonable limits. Cells with values that
are based on one, two, or three cases may be dangerously misleading. If
the number of cases in certain cells is limited, it is advisable to indicate in
footnotes the existence of such cells or to suppress the values by inserting
a marker denoting 'insufficient number of cases.' An alternative is to in-
dicate in brackets the number of cases in each cell-if this can be done
within the rules for clarity of presentation already discussed.
Consider table 28, an actual table based on a total sample of 71 cases.
Two of the cells show yields based on one observation only. Others are
based on two or three observations. Because of the insufficient number
<<<PAGE=170>>>
Table 28. Correlation between Fertilizer Use and Rice Yields
Farm size Average yield (ton/ha.) for Different Application Rates
and Less than 126 126-188 189-250 251-312 more than
type of rice kg./ha. kg./ha. kg./ha. kg./ha. 312 kg./ha.
Small 2.4 4.9 4.3 3.8 4.5
Medium 3.2 4.4 4.1 4.1 4.6
Large 4.7a 4.3 3.8 - -
Transplanted 4.7a 5.1 4.1 3.8 4.1
Broadcasted 3.0 4.3 4.0 3.9 4.8
Total 3.1 4.4 4.0 4.0 4.6
Average
-No cases.
a. Information obtained from one farmer only.
<<<PAGE=171>>>
Presenting Percentages 159
of cases, no uniform trends exist along the rows and the impression is cre-
ated that yields are semi-independent of fertilizer application rates. This
table conveys no meaningful message because the data have been
overstretched; the table should have been suppressed or compressed.
Notice also the ambiguity in the row heading-the rows seem to be
nonexclusive and based first on size of farm and then on sowing practice,
but this is not very clearly stated. Also, the heading 'Total Average' is
scarcely to be recommended, particularly when the words appear under-
neath each other giving the impression that the entries are 'Totals' and
that the "averages' are missing. 'Weighted mean' or "Overall mean"
would be preferable.
Presenting Percentages
Percentages and other indexes can either be very helpful in presenting
data clearly or very misleading, depending on the competence (and hon-
esty) of the presenter. Consider the data in this table giving the number of
farmers purchasing fertilizer in each of three districts in each of three
years:
Total Farmers purchasing fertilizer
District farmers Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
A 10,000 3,612 4,170 4,670
B 14,000 765 1,241 2,073
C 38,000 21,036 20,117 19,416
We can present these data in termns of the percentage of farms in a dis-
trict purchasing fertilizer in each year (noting that each percentage is in-
dependent of the others-they do not sum to 100 in any direction):
Percentage offarmers purchasingfertilizer
District Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
A 36 42 47
B 5 9 15
C 55 53 51
Or we can present the percentage distribution by district of the farmers
buying fertilizer in a year:
Percentage of fertilizer purchasers
District Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
A 14 16 18
B 3 5 8
C 83 79 74
Total 100 100 100
Or we can show the index of the number purchasing fertilizer in each dis-
trict, taking the number in year 1 as the base (100):
<<<PAGE=172>>>
160 Presenting Data to the User
Index of fertilizer purchasers
District Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
A 100 115 129
B 100 162 271
C 100 96 92
The first table in the last paragraph shows that fertilizer is most popu-
lar (or more easily available) in districts A and C; it also shows the time
trend, but it disguises the dominance of district C in terms of numbers of
purchasers. The second table shows this dominance of district C but dis-
guises the trends in numbers of purchasers over time. The third table
highlights the time shifts most clearly, bringing out the rapid growth in
district B and the decline in district C while losing the relative importance
in absolute numbers or relative incidence of fertilizer purchasers in the
various districts. Each such presentation has a role to play, but each pre-
sents a partial picture, which in isolation can even mislead.
In a two-way table the choice of the direction in which to calculate the
percentage distribution may be important. Consider an example of farm-
ers in three locations classified by the number of parcels of land making
up the holding:
Number of Location
parcels A B C Total
1 100 20 16 136
2 60 60 24 144
3 40 40 40 120
Total 200 120 80 400
Little may be detected from a casual examination of this, except that
there are more farmers in area A. Consider, however, the following table,
which expresses the same data in percentage form for each area:
Number of Location
parcels A B C
1 50 17 20
2 30 50 30
3 20 33 50
Total 100 100 100
This table clearly reveals that farmers in the three areas have very differ-
ent distributions in terms of fragmentation of holdings, with the modal
number being 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Conversely, to run the percent-
ages across the rows would reveal nothing, except possibly the larger size
of area A. Simplistic though these examples are, there have been many
real cases where a wrong choice of the direction for calculating percent-
ages masked the story that the figures had to tell.
160
<<<PAGE=173>>>
Attribution of Accuracy and Significance 161
Graphs and Figures
Chapter 8 discussed the use of graphs by the analyst as an aid to explor-
ing and understanding data. We now turn to their use in communicating
findings. The purpose of a pictorial presentation is to dramatize a point
without deliberately deceiving the reader's eye. Too often either the po-
tential of a pictorial impact is missed because of the selection of an inap-
propriate graph or excessive cluttering of it contents, or, by selecting false
origins, as explained below, or other misrepresentation-such as undue
expansion of the vertical scale-it can become exaggerated.
In general, graphs and figures are useful in conveying a trend or com-
parison of relative sizes in various categories. They are poor in conveying
actual numbers even if the numbers are entered on the graph.
Figures 12, 13, and 14 are examples of a graph, a bar chart, and a pie
chart. They give the eye an important message that the presenter of the
data wishes to convey. They are clear and uncluttered, and they drama-
tize the point that is being emphasized without undue distortion.
But consider figures 15 and 16. Figure 15 is an example of excessive
cluttering of a graph resulting in the eye obtaining an image of confusion
and woven threads rather than the significant differences between re-
gions. And figure 16 is an example of the commonest technique for exag-
gerating a message-namely, truncating the lower portion of a graphic
scale. The decline shown is approximately 64 points from a base of
2,156-less than 3 percent. This example of a decline in a stock market
index was indeed unusual, but because the vertical scale has a starting
point of 2,080 the decline takes on the appearance of total collapse. If the
graph is drawn with zero as the baseline, however, any effect is nullified
because much of the surface area of the graph will be occupied by that
part of the scale that the index had never reached in modern times; the
message of an unusual day thus would be totally masked. Where then
should the line literally be drawn? Many would argue that no nonzero
base can be justified, so that a graph is inappropriate in such cases. It is a
matter of judgment in each case. Our view, in the present example,
would be to start the scale at the lowest level of the index in, say, the pre-
vious year. This would put the one-day decline in better perspective.
Attribution of Accuracy and Significance
The presenter of data should discuss the likely accuracy of the data and
indicate which findings are significant in view of the margins of error in-
volved. The analysis of administrative records may present little diffi-
culty if based on an examination of the total file, which supposedly in-
cludes all relevant cases. The quality of the record keeping may, however,
be variable, and such variations should be noted.
<<<PAGE=174>>>
162 Presenting Data to the User
Figure 12. Sales of Maize by Credit Recipients
60
50
O 40
30
20
H N*5Drought year
10 I 
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985
Figure 13. Credit Recipients by Year
15
10 1
0 r os
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985
Key: E3 repeat borrowers El first-time borrowers
<<<PAGE=175>>>
Attribution of Accuracy and Significance 163
Figure 14. Credit Recipients by Land Tenure
Owner-occupied
(66 percent)
Customary tenure
(9 percent)
\ Tenants (25 percent)
Intensive, small-scale studies present the reporter with a difficult deci-
sion regarding the general validity of the findings. It will not usually be
possible to make inferences from a limited number of cases (perhaps
purposively selected) to the population at large. This is certainly true for
numerical estimates of totals, ratios, and so on. A case study, however,
aims to analyze the internal relationships of the variables that cause a
particular phenomenon. If a consistent pattern emerges, plausible infer-
ences may be made about the phenomenon's mechanism, which may be
likely to repeat under similar circumstances. As long as a suitable cau-
tionary note is struck, general inferences of causality and relationships
may be made on the basis of plausibility. For example, case studies may
examine in depth a few farmers who adopted or rejected a certain project
recommendation. Say that it is found that the reluctance to adopt the
new farming practice was quite logically caused by the perception that
labor will be constrained when the new practice makes heavy demands.
Assume also that the adopters have more family labor available than the
nonadopters and did not perceive the same constraint. The conclusion
that the choice of adoption or nonadoption is affected by the availability
of family labor may be a plausible inference for the general population in
the area, even though the numbers affected by the limited availability of
labor cannot be calculated from the study.
The communication of such findings requires skill in interpretation
and presentation. The temptation to claim too much must be resisted,
particularly when the pattern is inconsistent and blurred by a range of
extraneous factors. It may be a worthwhile conclusion that no discernible
<<<PAGE=176>>>
Figure 15. Percentage of Agriculture Lending by Region and Year
50
South Asia .......
40-
West Africa
East Asia - o .
East Africa
Europe, Middle East,
30- and North America
v. Latin America and ___*
the Caribbean _20
10 
1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985
<<<PAGE=177>>>
Attribution of Accuracy and Significance 165
Figure 16. Decline of a Stock Market
2,185.00
2,180.00
2,160.00
2,140.00 13.9
2,100.00 6. :KA
2,080.00 P~'~ ~
10:00 11:00 12:00 1:00 2:00 3:00
9:50 a m. 4:00 p.m.Time
pattern exists-then at least one set of hypotheses can be rejected, which
will help managers to avoid concentrating on the removal of an irrelevant
constraint.
Results from properly designed and executed sample surveys enable
numerical inferences to be made to the population at large with calcula-
ble margins of sampling error. The procedures for doing so were intro-
duced in chapter 6, although from the perspective of calculating the re-
quired sample size for a given sampling error. The formulas for
calculating the margin of error for any sample design can be found in
standard texts on sample surveys.2
Once the sampling error is calculated, the question arises of how to de-
termine which estimates are significantly different-either from one an-
2. See, for example L. Kish, Survey Sampling (New York: Wiley, 1965).
<<<PAGE=178>>>
166 Presenting Data to the User
other or from a standard of comparison- so that conclusions may be
drawn with reasonable confidence. The techniques have been intro-
duced in chapters 8 and 9, and further elaboration can be found in stan-
dard texts. What we note here, as in the companion volume, is the danger
that the reporter may set too demanding a standard before describing a
result as significant. The use of the classic 95 percent confidence level im-
plies that any statement of a significant change or difference has a very
high chance (19 to 1) of being correct. Without a recommendation emerg-
ing from the survey, an existing procedure may be maintained when
there is, let us say, a 3 to 1 chance that a change would be beneficial. Or if
a decision must be made, the manager may be forced to rely on subjective
judgments and be unaware that the data showed strong, but less than
certain, support for one particular course.
The relative costs of making an unneeded change compared with those
of leaving a procedure in place that required changing are the determi-
nants in deciding the level of confidence to be attached to testing for sig-
nificance. In one case, the cost of making a change may be very high.
Considerable confidence in the evidence for making such a change will
reasonably be demanded. In another, little may be lost in making a proce-
dural change, whereas to let matters drift may amount to bad man-
agement. The decision to change in this case does not require full confi-
dence in the significance of the evidence for it.
Often the implications of the survey data are not perceived in such a
major decisionmaking role. In simpler terms, the user may look at a table
of figures, wanting an answer to the question: 'Am I on the right track;
are yields rising?" An answer-'Yes, probably'-which implies a better
than even chance that it is so, may serve a more useful purpose than a
conservative response of "Not known' made on the basis of rigorous con-
fidence standards. Such an answer must of course be based not only on
the actual increase but also consider past variability.
Sampling errors can be calculated; nonsampling errors often cannot.
Yet as discussed earlier, these may be crucial in any consideration of the
accuracy of the estimates presented. The author of the tables should have
detailed knowledge of the source, methods used in collection, problems
in analysis, and so on. It is therefore necessary to provide an assessment
of the likely biases and observational errors that may affect the results,
even though such an assessment lacks the mathematical support that the
calculation of sampling error commands. To state that the estimate of
output is X with a standard error of, say, 4 percent, leaving unstated the
suspicion that the measurements were seriously biased, is to give a totally
spurious impression of accuracy. A description of the survey procedures,
design, methodology, nonresponse rate, practical problems, results of
field checks, and so on may serve the purpose. But because most readers
may skip such introductory sections, the reporter needs to comment on
the implications of these in the text which discusses the findings.
<<<PAGE=179>>>
Writing the Main Report 167
Writing the Main Report
As we have repeatedly stressed in this and the companion volume, the
functions of monitoring and evaluation are not achieved by the compila-
tion of bulky semiannual or annual reports to higher authorities-
reports which go largely unread or at least unused in terms of affecting
implementation procedures. Such reports may be required, and must
therefore be laboriously compiled, as a record for auditing. In the proper
exercise of monitoring and evaluation, however, there will be occasions
when surveys and studies are conducted within the work program. The
reports that give the results of such surveys should be structured to con-
vey the following information:
a. The topics under discussion
b. The source and reference period of the material presented
c. The methodology of the survey
d. A summary of the data
e. The necessary comments regarding the accuracy of the data
f. A review of the highlights and implications of the data
g. The drawing together of conclusions, options for the considera-
tion of managers, and, as appropriate, recommendations.
The order in which these sections are arranged needs careful consider-
ation and will vary according to the type of user addressed. Sections f
and g may be given as a summary at the very beginning of the report-
taking maximum advantage of the limited time the reader has to concen-
trate on the report. If the findings are important enough, the further at-
tention of the reader to the body of the report may be secured. The
background description contained in b and c may be relegated to appen-
dixes or retained as a necessary introduction at the beginning of the main
body of the report. Within the report itself, d may involve only a succinct
presentation of tables; the more detailed tables may appear as appen-
dixes.
Even when the author follows a structure consistent with this outline, a
common fault is excessive detail. Although it is important to provide the
necessary methodological background, there is rarely need to drag the
reader through a blow-by-blow account of the formulas for making sam-
ple estimates or calculating averages. Excessive detail often is provided to
impress the reader, perhaps because the author doubts the impression
that will be made by the analysis itself and the conclusions. Cover each
vital section, but as succinctly as possible.
The text which accompanies the numerical data and tables in a report
is intended to supplement the tables and thus assist in the process of con-
verting the data into information. The method of presentation of this es-
sential supplement and the style in which it is written will vary according
<<<PAGE=180>>>
168 Presenting Data to the User
to the writer; there is no harm in-and much in favor of-such individu-
ality, as long as the ultimate objective of clearly conveying the informa-
tion to the reader is achieved.
Each table needs to be accompanied by a paragraph or two of text
which draws attention to the significant facts, states their likely meaning,
sets them in their correct perspective in the context of the information
contained in other tables, and assesses the reliability of conclusions that
seem indicated. The alternative is to consolidate the text in one section
and the tables in another. We do not recommend this for two reasons.
First, the general reader may not refer to the tables when reading the text,
so that the impressions gained are divorced from the underpinning pro-
vided by the actual figures. Second, many users of the report may turn
directly to the tables to obtain figures. The text, with its insights and cave-
ats, will not be referred to, which leads to the danger that the data will be
misinterpreted. If the text and tables are integrated, these dangers are at
least minimized.
The text should be short and spare in style. Arguments should be
sharply presented. Side issues should be treated separately and not al-
lowed to confuse the development of the main thesis. Brevity, however,
does not release the writer from the need to give his assessment of the ev-
idence; rather, the briefer and more aggregated the presentation, the
more important his role in guiding the reader to the correct interpreta-
tion. Highly aggregated summary tables cannot be investigated by the
reader; it is therefore important that the writer provide the necessary ex-
planatory comments.
The reader of any report is asked to trust that the reporter has been ob-
jective and frank in marshaling the facts. It may be assumed that deliber-
ate falsification has not been introduced, but selective omission of con-
tradictory evidence, removal of data from their appropriate context in
order to make spurious generalizations, and failure to warn regarding
possible biases may produce a false picture.
It is unfortunate that much of the professional training of economists,
statisticians, and social scientists does not address how to interpret a table
and write a clear summary of this interpretation. Many monitoring offi-
cers fail to become more integrated into the management team in part be-
cause they lack conviction in listing the issues revealed by a report. If they
are uncertain of their writing ability, they would be better off restricting
the text, as far as is possible, to a simple listing of the points to be made.
We ourselves have made liberal use of lists in both this volume and its
companion, and we started this section on the writing of reports with an
example.
<<<PAGE=181>>>
Suggested Readings
Bailey, Kenneth D. Methods of Social Research, 3d ed. New York: Free Press, 1987.
Bogdan, Robert C., and Stephen K. Biklen. Qualitative Research in Education.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1982.
Casley, Dennis J., and Denis A. Lury. Data Collection in Developing Countries.
2d ed. London: Oxford University Press, 1987.
.Monitoring and Evaluation of Agriculture and Rural Development Projects.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.
Cook, Thomas D., and Charles S. Reichardt. Qualitative and Quantitative Meth-
ods in Evaluation Research. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1979.
Douglas, Jack D. Investigative Social Research. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1976.
Ehrenberg, A. S. C. Data Reduction. London: Wiley, 1978.
.A Primer in Data Reduction. Chichester, Eng.: Wiley, 1982.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Estimation of Crop
Areas and Yields in Agricultural Statistics. FAO Economic and Social Develop-
ment Paper 22. Rome, 1982.
.Programme for the 1980 World Census of Agriculture. Rome, 1976.
Hoaglin, David C., Frederick Mosteller, and John W. Tukey. Exploring Data Ta-
bles, Trends, and Shapes. New York: Wiley, 1985.
.Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. New York: Wiley,
1983.
Ingle, Marcus D., Noel Berge, and Marcia Teisan. Acquiring and Using Microcom-
puters in Agricultural Development: A Manager's Guide. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, 1983.
Kish, Leslie. Survey Sampling. New York: Wiley, 1965.
Kumar, Krishna. Conducting Group Interviews in Developing Countries. Washing-
ton, D.C.: U.S. Agency for International Development, 1987.
.A Manager's Guide to Rapid, Low-Cost Data Collection Methods. Washing-
ton, D.C.: U.S. Agency for International Development, 1987.
Maanen, John Van, ed. Qualitative Methodology. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1983.
Miles, Matthew B., and A. Michael Huberman. Qualitative Data Analysis: A
Sourcebook of New Methods. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1984.
169
<<<PAGE=182>>>
170 Suggested Readings
McCall, George, and J. Simmons, eds. Issues in Participant Observation. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1969.
Mosteller, Frederick, and John W. Tukey. Data Analysis and Regression. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1977.
Murphy, Josette, and Leendert Sprey. Introduction to Farm Surveys. ILRI Publica-
tion 33. Wageningen, Netherlands: International Institute for Land Redcama-
tion and Improvement, 1983.
.Monitoring and Evaluation of Agricultural Change. iLRI Publication 32.
Wageningen, Netherlands: International Institute for Land Reclamation and
Improvement, 1982.
O'Muircheartaigh, C. A., and C. Payne, eds. The Analysis of Survey Data. London:
Wiley, 1977.
Patton, Michael Quinn. Qualitative Evaluation Methods. Beverly Hills, Calif.:
Sage, 1980.
.Utilization-Focused Evaluation. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1978.
Poate, C. D., and Dennis J. Casley. Estimating Crop Production in Development
Projects: Methods and Their Limitations. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1985.
Scott, Chris. Sampling for Monitoring and Evaluation. Washington, D.C.: World
Bank, 1985.
Slade, Roger H., and J. Gabriel Campbell. An Operational Guide to the Monitoring
and Evaluation of Social Forestry in India. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation of the United Nations, 1987.
Smith, Robert N., and Peter K. Manning, eds. Qualitative Methods. Volume 2 of
Handbook of Social Science Methods. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1982.
Spradley, James P. The Ethnographic Interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1979.
.Participant-Observation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1980.
Stewart, David W. Secondary Research: Information Sources and Methods. Beverly
Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1984.
United Nations Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, Statis-
tical Office. Handbook of Household Surveys. New York: United Nations, 1984.
Yin, Robert K. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Beverly Hills, Calif.:
Sage, 1984.
<<<PAGE=183>>>
Index
Adoption rates for project services Crop production and yield measure-
and inputs, 1, 3, 57, 59, 131, 134 ment, 96-99; biological yield and,
Air or ground transects, 99-100 98; crop cutting method of, 102-
Analysis of data. See Data analysis 09; economic yield and, 98; eye
Area measurement. See Crop area estimate assessments and, 102,
measurement 113; farmer estimates and, 1, 102,
111-13; harvested yield and, 98;
Baseline surveys. See Socioeconomic harvesting method of, 102-03;
baseline surveys harvest unit sampling and, 108,110
Beneficiary of project. See Project Cross-sectional surveys, 58
beneficiary/participant Cross-tabulations: and data presen-
Bias, 51-52, 77, 81-82 tation, 151, 155-58; in statistical
analysis, 137-38
Causes and effects of events, 2-3
Class intervals. See Frequency distri, Data analysis, 7-9; graphic, 115-17.
butions See also Exploratory analysis; Sta-
Cluster sampling, 80, 92-93 tistical analysis
Community interviews (Cis): balanc- Data collection: cause and effect
ing participation in, 30-31; and and, 2-3; community interviews
data collection, 31-33; defined, and, 31-33; computerization of,
26; interview teams and, 30; limi- 8-9; constraints on, 6-7; data re-
tations of, 40; postmeeting conver- quirements for, 57; descriptive,
sations and, 33-34; size and tim- 2-3; explanatory, 2-3; predictive,
ing of, 29; structured guides for, 2-3; purposes of, 2-3. See also
28-29 Qualitative data collection; Quan-
Computerization of data collection, titative data collection
8-9 Data presentation: accuracy and sig-
Confidence levels, 84, 86, 92 nificance of data for, 161, 163,
Crop area measurement, 96-98; by 165-66; cross-tabulations and,
air or ground transects, 99-100; 155-58; frequency distributions
by grid sampling, 100; within and, 149-50; graphic, 149, 161-
holdings, 100-102; by point sam- 63, 164, 166; percentages and,
pling, 100 159-60; principles of, 148; tabular,
Crop cutting, 102-09 149; techniques for, 149; trunca-
171
<<<PAGE=184>>>
172 Index
tion of digits and, 150, 154-55. 100-01; defined, 61
See also Report of survey Household, defined, 60
Diagnostic studies for monitoring, 82 Household surveys. See Socioeco-
Document summary sheets, 49-51 nomic baseline surveys
Enumerator: role of, 74-75; training Informal sampling: defined, 78; dis-
of, 7, 59 advantages of, 81; probability
Errors. See Nonsampling errors; sampling and, 78-83
Sampling errors Informants. See Key informants
Estimator, defined, 76 Interviews, 74-75. See also Commu-
Exit polls, 90-91 nity interviews; Focused group in-
Exploratory analysis: adoption rates terviews; Qualitative interviews
and, 131; dispersion measurement
and, 126-27; fitting straight lines Key informants, 24
and, 127, 128; graphic examina-
tion and, 115-17; moving aver- Longitudinal surveys, 57-58
ages and, 129-30; ordering data
for, 117-23; purpose of, 114-15; Mixed cropping: defined, 62; pro-
residuals and first differences and, duction measurement of, 98-99
127-29, 130; subsample analysis
and, 131; transformation of data Nonsampling errors, 84-85, 145-47
and, 123-26
Observation record forms, 49-50
Farmer. See Holder
Farmer estimates, 1, 102, 111-13 Panel surveys, 57-58
Focused group interviews (FGls): Parcel, defined, 61
controlling, 38-39; defined, 26- Participant observation: advantages
27; duration of, 36; guides for, 34; of, 41-42; conceptual framework
limitations of, 40; location of and for, 42-45; defined, 41, 41n;
seating for, 36; opening statements fieldwork guidelines for, 46-49;
in, 36-37; participant selection for, limitations of, 52-53; minimizing
35-36; questions for, 37-38; re- biases in, 51-52; as qualitative
cording of, 39-40; size and com- data collection method, 5; site se-
position of, 34-35 lection and timing for, 45-46;
Formal sampling. See Probability study instruments for, 49-51
sampling Plots: and area measurement, 100-
Frequency distributions, 149-50 01; defined, 62
Point sampling, 100
Graphic analysis of data, 115-17 Probability sampling: characteristics
Grid sampling, 100 of, 78; and informal sampling, 78-
Ground or air transects, 99-100 83; objections to, 79-80
Group interviews. See Community Project beneficiary/participant, de-
interviews; Focused group inter- fined, 62-63
views Purposive sampling, 78, 78n, 79
Harvest unit sampling, 108, 110 Qualitative data collection, 3-6
Holder, defined, 60-61 Qualitative interviews: controlling
Holdings: area measurement of, conversations in, 19; guidelines
<<<PAGE=185>>>
Index 173
for, 15-21; informal, conversa- fractions and, 78, 91-92; frame,
tional, 11-12; initial contact for, 77, 80; grid, 100; harvest unit,
15; key informants and, 24; limita- 108, 111; informal, 78, 81; listing
tions of, 24-25; neutral attitude and, 80-81; point, 78; probability,
in, 19-20; potential of, 10; prob- 78-83; purposes of, 76; purposive,
ing in, 18-19; question sequencing 78, 78n, 79; quota, 78; random,
in, 15-16; recording of, 20-21; re- 5-6, 77, 78n; for rare events, 94-
liability of, 21-24; role playing in, 95; scientific, 78, 89; stratified, 79,
17-18; semistructured, open- 87-89, 91; systematic selection
ended, 13-14; topic-focused, and, 78, 78n, 87; two-stage tech-
12-13 niques for, 92-94; variance, 77,
Quantitativedatacollection, 3-6,31- 83, 83n, 86, 89
33. See also Structured surveys Sampling errors: calculating, 165-66;
Questionnaires: leading questions in, defined, 77; sample size and,
68-69; open-ended versus closed 83-85
questions in, 64, 67; pretesting of, Socioeconomic baseline surveys, 3,
73-74; question sequencing in, 69- 54-56, 56n
70; recording of, 71-73; response Statistical analysis: for comparing
set and, 69; and socioeconomic two sample means, 133-34; cross-
baseline surveys, 55, 56; tabular tabulations in, 137-38; dangers of,
format of, 65; verbatim or short- 132; regression analysis and, 127,
hand questions in, 70-71; wording 128-29, 142-47; 2 x 2 tables and,
of, 67-68 134-37; variance analysis and,
Quota sampling, 78 138-42
Stratified sampling, 79, 87-89, 91
Random sampling, 77, 78n Structured surveys, 1; advantages of,
Random selection of respondents, 4; concepts and definitions for, 54,
5-6, 78n 59-64; cross-sectional, 58; data re-
Recall period, defined, 63-64 quirements for, 57; design of, 4;
Reference period, defined, 63-64 interviewing respondents for, 74-
Report of survey: document sum- 75; longitudinal, 57-58; panel, 57-
mary sheets and, 49-51; observa- 58; planning for, 56-57; question-
tion record form and, 49-50; naire construction for, 64-74; role
study instruments and, 49-51; of enumerator in, 74; single-
written, 20-21, 49-51, 167-68 round, 58-59. See also Socioeco-
nomic baseline surveys
Sample, defined, 76 Survey design: constraints on, 6-7;
Sample design: constraints on op- longitudinal, 57-58; socioeco-
tions for, 6-7; costs of, 91-92, 93; nomic baseline, 56n; structured, 4
random selection for, 5-6; selec- Survey, report of. See Report of sur-
tion process for, 77; single-stage, vey
85-92; two-stage, 92-94 Systematic selection, 78, 78n, 87
Sample size: for comparison of two
rates, 91; and sampling errors, 83- Tables, 149; as format of question-
85; for two-stage sampling, 93-94 naire, 65; 2 x 2, 134-37
Sampling: bias, 77, 81-82; cluster, Transects, 99-100
80, 90-92; for comparison of two
rates, 91-92; disadvantage of, 80; Universe: defined, 76; requirement
<<<PAGE=186>>>
174 Index
for knowledge of, 80 Written report of survey. See Report
of survey
Variance: analysis of, 138-42; sam-
pling, 77, 83, 83n, 86, 89 Yield measurement. See Crop pro-
duction and yield measurement
THE MOST RECENT WORLD BANK PUBLICATIONS are described in the catalog New Pub-
lications, which is issued in the spring and fall of each year. The complete backlist
of publications is shown in the annual Index of Publications, which is of value
principally to libraries and institutional purchasers. The latest edition of each is
available free of charge from Publications Sales Unit, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A., or from Publications, The World
Bank, 66, avenue d'I6na, 75116 Paris, France.
<<<PAGE=187>>>

<<<PAGE=188>>>
A Joint Study
* I~~~L
The World Bank international Fbod and Agriculture
Fund for Agricultural Organization
Development of the United Nations
THIS VOLUME PROVIDES SIMPLE PRACTICAL METHODS of collecting and analyzing data
for monitoring and evaluating agricultural projects It further explains the
techniques referred to in the companion volume, Project Monitormg and
Evaluation in Agriculture The authors have selected methods that are both
simple and inexpensive because of the linuted resources of many development
projects and because such methods are usually preferable.
Each chapter deals with a specific area of data collection, analysis, and
use The subjects covered are qualitative and quantitative methods of data
collection, structured surveys, sampling problems, crop measurement,
preliminary and exploratory analysis of data, formal analysis, and data
presentation
Emphasizing qualitative interviewing methods, the book explains how to
design qualitative surveys and how to use methods of participant observation
It also extensively describes various aspects of quantitative methods for
gathering and analyzing data, such as sample theory and selection, but
treats as well the possible pitfalls of quantitative methods and when
these techniques may not be appropriate Together with its companion
volume-which explains in detail the concepts of monitoring and
evaluation-this book will be useful for those who design and implement these
systems and as texts for regional and national training programs This book
and its companion are a joint effort of the World Bank, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development
DENNIS J CASLEY is chief of the Operations Monmtoring Unit, Central Operations
Department, the World Bank He wrote this book while a staff member of the
Bank's Agricultural and Rural Development Department KRISHNA KUMAR, a
senior analyst at the Center for Development Information and Evaluation, U S
Agency for International Development, was a consultant to the World Bank for
the writing of this book
Co e, cZ, o B1,'l Frase
Ti^ -c -rs -i 3p'ins Jniversity Press
Eaic1-:s ann London 0-301-366P-t