<<<PAGE=1>>>
COUNTRY-OWNED,  
COUNTRY-LED
STRENGTHENING AFRICAN M&E SYSTEMS 
THROUGH COUNTRY-BASED PROGRAMMES
Authors: Takunda Chirau, Banele Masilela, & Ayabulela Dlakavu 
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
CLEAR-AA LEARNING NOTE
APRIL 2020
ABOUT CLEAR-AA 
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results – Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) is one of six regional centres housed in 
academic institutions across the globe with the purpose of building the capacity of countries, people and institutions to plan, 
measure and report on development programmes – a process referred to as monitoring and evaluation (M&E). CLEAR-AA’s 
work in supporting and improving M&E contributes to better governance and improved development outcomes across Africa.
In the past, CLEAR-AA’s approach to supporting and improving M&E in Africa has been to offer discrete interventions, for 
example pieces of training, peer-to-peer learning and technical assistance. But in 2019, we shifted to using country-based 
programmes to achieve systematic, systemic results. The positive impact on governance and development can be seen not 
only in individual countries but also in their sub-regions. 
IN THIS LEARNING NOTE
 ■ How CLEAR-AA does country programmes
 ■ Why country programmes work
 ■ Some challenges in Africa
 ■ CLEAR-AA’s recommendations for strengthening African M&E systems
<<<PAGE=2>>>
CLEAR-AA LEARNING NOTE COUNTRY-OWNED, COUNTRY-LED
The ownership principle
Each country programme is owned, focused and led by 
the country itself. A ministry, department, agency or other 
custodian owns and leads its country’s M&E system, while 
CLEAR-AA and other development partners support the 
sustainability of the system. This ownership principle is par -
amount.
The in-country capacity principle
The custodian of the country’s M&E system and CLEAR-AA 
take a consultative, participatory and systems approach to 
strengthening the country’s M&E system. Stakeholder voic-
es are valued and accentuated, which strengthens country 
ownership and in-country capacity. The in-country capacity 
principle means that we use local in-country partners who 
know the country’s M&E context. Higher education institu-
tions, private consultancies and voluntary organisations for 
professional evaluators, for example, implement the inter -
ventions, while CLEAR-AA provides technical backstopping.
Situation analysis
Our interventions for strengthening different elements of a 
country’s M&E system are informed by a situation analysis 
or diagnostic. We use our in-house tool called Monitoring 
and Evaluation Situation Analysis (MESA) to gather informa-
tion from ministries, departments and agencies, civil society 
organisations, higher education institutions, voluntary or -
ganisations for professional evaluators, and parliament. Then 
we validate the findings of our analysis through a workshop 
with stakeholders.
Strategy and plan
Based on the situation analysis and validation workshop, 
an M&E capacity strengthening strategy is then established 
for implementing interventions to strengthen the country’s 
M&E system. The strategy highlights the results that need to 
be achieved for the country to be able to improve its M&E 
performance and the specific approaches to be followed for 
delivering those results. The strategy is accompanied by an 
M&E capacity strengthening plan, which provides details of 
the results proposed in the strategy, indicating who will do 
what and when, and what resources will be required and 
where these will come from.
CLEAR-AA works in selected English-speaking African coun-
tries: Zambia, Lesotho, South Africa, Tanzania, Ghana, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, Kenya, Namibia, Botswana, and Uganda. We 
also work at the regional level with the East African Legis-
lative Assembly, the Pan African Parliament, the Economic 
Community of West African States, the African Evaluation As-
sociation, the African Institute for Development Policy, and 
the African Centre for Parliamentary Affairs. 
How does CLEAR-AA choose which 
countries to work in?
 ■ The potential for self- or co-financing
 ■ Partnership possibilities
 ■ General responsiveness
OTHER STRATEGIC AND OPPORTUNISTIC 
REASONS TO WORK WITH A COUNTRY
Political and administrative will
Internal appetite and/or demand at the administrative and 
political levels of a country are paramount. Securing political 
and administrative buy-in and will is crucial in making sure 
that M&E is championed by champions who can exert their 
influence on ministries, departments, and agencies. This is 
the case for Zambia, Uganda, Tanzania, and Ghana. 
Established M&E systems
In Uganda and South Africa, country M&E systems have been 
institutionalized through approved national M&E policies. 
This indicates that a government values M&E for improving 
development outcomes and bringing about social change. 
Other countries that have already established M&E or na-
tional evaluation systems are Ghana, Zambia, and Tanzania.
GHANA UGANDA
ZAMBIA
NAMIBIA
BOTSWANA
KENYA
TANZANIA
LESOTHO
SOUTH AFRICA
LIBERIA
SIERRA 
LEONE
<<<PAGE=3>>>
CLEAR-AA LEARNING NOTECOUNTRY-OWNED, COUNTRY-LED
Ability to deliver all CLEAR-AA 
programmatic interventions
Our work is based on the notion that a full package of projects 
must be implemented in a country if development outcomes 
are to be sustained. That package depends on a country’s par-
ticular needs. CLEAR-AA’s programmatic areas of evaluation 
systems, strengthening legislatures, capacity strengthening, 
and research and learning are implemented through these 
various projects. At present, Tanzania is the country that is able 
to deliver all the projects in the package.
Partnership with a knowledgeable local 
institution
CLEAR-AA’s approach is unique in that we use a local entity to 
strengthen the country’s M&E system – the in-country capaci-
ty principle. In Ghana, we are working with the Ghana Institute 
of Public Administration. In Zambia, there is the possibility of 
working with the Zambia Institute for Policy Analysis and Re -
search and the Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association.
CHALLENGES
Austerity measures
African countries have not grown their economies as antici-
pated, and austerity measures are in place to reduce govern-
ment spending. Informal conversations with public sector of-
ficials reveal that M&E services suffer the most, indicating that 
M&E’s role in improving governance and supporting social 
change is undervalued.
Bureaucracies
African governments are among those known to be exces-
sively bureaucratic, and initiating country-led M&E strength-
ening programmes is daunting task. 
Misperceptions of M&E
Monitoring and evaluation are at their nascent stages in most 
African countries. M&E is not well recognized let alone val-
ued. In fact, most public officials still see M&E as ‘policing’ and 
‘witch-hunting’ rather than as providing information for learn-
ing and improving.
M&E is not a vehicle for authoritarianism. In 
strengthening country M&E systems, M&E 
should be understood as an opportunity 
for learning rather than as machinery used 
to exacerbate authoritarianism through ac -
countability mechanisms. 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
Raise the visibility of country voluntary organisations for 
professional evaluators. VOPEs are important advocates for 
M&E and the cultivation of evaluative and critical thinking in 
a country.
Political and senior administrators should act as champi-
ons for M&E in their country. Political buy-in is required for 
channelling adequate resources for promoting M&E and fos-
tering an enabling environment.
Make M&E capacity strengthening country-led and coun-
try-owned. Current M&E systems are driven by donors. If the 
drive is endogenous, M&E findings are likely to be used.
The approach should be consultative and participatory. 
Including higher education institutions, voluntary organisa-
tions for professional evaluators, civil society organisations 
and parliament increases buy-in for and ownership of the M&E 
system. Information from the system is more likely to be used.
Conducting a situation analysis is a prerequisite. It helps 
to understand the status quo or prevailing current situation 
of M&E in the country before drafting a plausible intervention. 
Tools, methods and systems should be African-focused 
and produce information that is relevant and context specific 
to African governments and citizens.
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
CLEAR Anglophone Africa
@CLEARAA1
CLEAR Anglophone Africa
The Oval Building, University of the Witwatersrand
2 St David’s Place, Parktown, Johannesburg
CLEAR.AnglophoneAfrica@wits.ac.za
www.wits.ac.za/clear-aa
 Telephone: +27 11 717 3157
  
THE VIEWS EXPRESSED IN THE LEARNING NOTE ARE THAT OF THE AUTHOR