<<<PAGE=1>>>
Developing a  
visibility strategy  
for the  
SCOPING STUDY 
REPORT
Tanzania  
Evaluation 
Association
<<<PAGE=2>>>

<<<PAGE=3>>>
Developing a  
visibility strategy  
for the  
SCOPING STUDY 
REPORT
Tanzania  
Evaluation 
Association
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
ABOUT CLEAR-AA
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR-AA) is one of six regional centres 
housed in academic institutions across the globe. As part of a global network, our work is informed 
by international best practice, but we draw extensively on local expertise. We have a thoughtful 
and deliberative research and learning agenda, which enables us to constantly reflect on how to 
successfully strengthen monitoring and evaluation systems. Our work has helped us build strong 
relationships with governments, civil societies, and practitioners in the field, including professional 
associations. The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR-AA) builds the capacity 
of people and institutions to plan, measure, and report on the pro ject – a process referred to as 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). We work to improve the way M&E is done. 
Find out more about CLEAR-AA here 
Email: https://www.wits.ac.za/clear-aa/  
Phone: +2711 717 3387
ABOUT TANEA
The Tanzania Evaluation Association (TanEA) was established in 2006 and registered as national 
chapter of the African Evaluation Association (AfrEA) in 2009, bringing together monitoring 
and evaluation professionals from the public, private and civil society sectors, academia, and 
development practitioners, to promote and strengthen evaluation practices in Tanzania through 
capacity building, advocacy, professional development and networking . TanEA’s specific ob jectives 
are to encourage the development and publication of high quality evaluation practice, to advocate 
the Government of Tanzania to create and maintain a regulatory framework for monitoring 
and evaluation, to advance capacity development of the monitoring and evaluation profession, 
to facilitate networking and information sharing on evaluation and act as a reference point for 
evaluation resources and practice in Tanzania. 
Find out more about TanEA here
Email: tzevaluation@tanea.or.tz  
Phone: +255 752626252
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Scoping Study Report was developed with the support of the Centre for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results – Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) through the Dutch Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. 
Ms Matodzi Amisi, Dr Francis Mwai jande and Dr Takunda Chirau led the process of developing the 
Report. The process was supported by a working group of TanEA members who commented on 
the draft report, including Mr Rutagwelera Mutakyahwa, Ms Sakina Mwinyimkuu, Dr Isaak Micheal 
Nguliki, Mr Issac Kiwango, Mr Pantaleon Shoki and CLEAR-AA staff; Ms Banele Masilela and Mr 
Ayabulela Dlakavu. 
TanEA appreciates all TanEA members who participated in consultation meetings and provided 
inputs that shaped the report.
Citation: 
CLEAR-AA and TanEA (2020). 
Developing the Tanzania Evaluation Association visibility strategy: 
report from the scoping study. Johannesburg, South Africa
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Contents
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 1
1.1. Introduction to the study .......................................................................................................................1
1.2. The Tanzania Evaluation Association ........................................................................................2
1.3. Short note on key concepts ................................................................................................................2
2. Contextualising VOPEs ...................................................................................................3
2.1. What are VOPEs and why are they important? ................................................................4
3. Methods .................................................................................................................................. 6
3.1. The approach taken ..................................................................................................................................6
3.2. Respondents ....................................................................................................................................................6
3.3. Limitations ........................................................................................................................................................ 7
4. Findings  ..................................................................................................................................8
4.1. Stakeholder knowledge of TanEA ..................................................................................................8
4.2. Contribution to the level of visibility .............................................................................................8
4.3. Current TanEA communication platforms ...........................................................................11
4.4. Ways to improve TanEA visibility .................................................................................................12
5. Discussion ...........................................................................................................................16
5.1 Promoting evaluation and culture of evidence use ...........................................................16
5.2 Strengthening communication ........................................................................................................16
5.3 Creating space for information sharing and networking ............................................17
5.4 Raising awareness  ....................................................................................................................................18
5.5 Strengthening members’ capacity ................................................................................................19
5.6 Focus on young and emerging evaluators  .............................................................................20
5.7 Implementation plan, monitoring and evaluation ............................................................20
6. Thoughts for the strategy ...........................................................................................21
6.1. Underlying principles ...............................................................................................................................21
6.2. Issues to consider in the preparation of the strategy ................................................21
7. References  ........................................................................................................................24
<<<PAGE=6>>>
ACRONYMS
AfrEA African Evaluation Association
ALAT Association of Local Authorities of Tanzania
APNODE African Parliamentarians Network on 
Development Evaluation
CLEAR-AA Center for Learning on Evaluation and Results – 
Anglophone Africa
GMEF Ghana Monitoring and Evaluation Forum
IDEAS International Development Evaluation 
Association
LAAC Local Authority Accounts Committee
IOCE International Organization for Cooperation on 
Evaluation’s
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
NEP National Evaluation Policy
PO-PSMG President’s Office, Public Service Management 
and Good Governance
SAMEA South African Monitoring and Evaluation 
Association
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
TanEA Tanzania Evaluation Association
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Fund
URT United Republic of Tanzania
VOPE Voluntary Organizations for Professional 
Evaluations
YEE Young and Emerging Evaluators
<<<PAGE=7>>>
1
1.1 INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY 
The government of Tanzania, through the President’s Office, Public Service Management 
and Good Governance (PO-PSMGG), entered into a two-year partnership with the 
Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results-Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA). Through 
the partnership, government aims to embark on a set of activities to strengthen the 
government’s monitoring and evaluation system to benefit the wider M&E ecosystem of 
the United Republic of Tanzania (URT). In a stakeholders’ workshop held in Dodoma in 
October 2019, country partners recommended that the country’s association with the 
Tanzania Evaluation Association (TanEA) be strengthened (PO-PSMGG, 2019).
As part of the broader Tanzania country programme, initial consultations were held with 
TanEA leadership and URT government representatives to understand the challenges 
facing TanEA. During the consultations, TanEA’s lack of visibility was identified as a core 
problem facing the association and limiting its impact. Participants suggested that the 
work of the association is unknown to the different government ministries, departments, 
agencies (MDAs), local government authorities, and parastatals responsible for monitoring 
performance and conducting evaluations of public development interventions. The 
association was also perceived as having limited partnerships with other like-minded 
organisations within the URT’s national M&E ecosystem. Consequently, for most of the 
government and development partners in Tanzania, the value of the association is not 
evident. This undermines the potential of the association (and, by extension, monitoring 
and evaluation evidence) to influence development policies and decisions. It further makes 
it challenging for the association to grow membership and sustainably generate revenue. 
TanEA is partnering with CLEAR-AA, and PO-PSMGG, within the broader country 
programme, to develop a strategy to improve the association’s visibility with various 
prominent stakeholders. In accordance with with the strategic annual plans adopted at 
TanEA’s AGM, the strategy will identify areas on which TanEA can focus to strengthen 
monitoring and evaluation within Tanzania. 
To inform the development of the strategy, a scoping study was carried out. The scoping 
study was undertaken to estimate the extent to which TanEA’s work is known by different 
stakeholders in the Tanzanian monitoring and evaluation ecosystem and the contributory 
factors to the current situation. It also investigated potential strategic interventions 
or partnerships that TanEA could pursue to demonstrate the value of monitoring and 
evaluation in development and thereby effectively showcase the association’s sector 
leadership.
This report presents findings from the scoping study. The report is divided into six 
sections. The first section introduces TanEA and the pro ject, situating both within the 
broader country support programme led by PO-PSMGG. The second section presents 
literature on evaluation associations and their respective roles. Section three explains 
the process followed in the scoping study and identifies some of its limitations. Section 
four presents findings from the scoping study. Section five provides an analysis of the 
findings and describes the implications for the proposed pro ject to strengthen TanEA. The 
report concludes with section six which reflects on the study and makes suggestions for 
optimising interventions aimed at strengthening TanEA. 
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
<<<PAGE=8>>>
2
1.2 THE TANZANIA EVALUATION ASSOCIATION 
TanEA was established in 2006 and was registered in 2009. Over the past 14 years, the association 
has grown significantly, and currently has a functioning board and secretariat and its membership 
has grown to 70 registered members. The association has also held several evaluation activities 
with partners and achieved some recognition as an organisation by government (TanEA, 2015:4; 
TanEA, 2019:4). The long-term vision of TanEA is that of “a Tanzania where evaluation culture is 
embraced and supports social and economic development”. Whereas the mission focuses solely 
on evaluation, the vision incorporates both monitoring and evaluation stating that “TanEA is a 
professional M&E association that exists to promote and strengthen monitoring and evaluation 
practices in Tanzania through capacity strengthening, advocacy, professional development and 
networking”.
The 2017–2021 strategic plan states the ob jectives of TanEA as follows: 
 • Encourage the development and publication of high-quality evaluation results;
 • Hold national debates related to monitoring and evaluation;
 • Advocate that the Government of Tanzania creates and maintains an evidence-based 
evaluation culture;
 • Advance the development of capacity for the M&E profession; and 
 • Facilitate networking and information sharing on evaluation and act as a centre of excellence 
for evaluation resources and practice in Tanzania.
According to the 2017–2021 strategic plan, the association aims to promote and strengthen 
evaluation practices in Tanzania through capacity strengthening, advocacy, professional 
development, and networking, in pursuit of the outcomes below. The strategic plan further outlines 
four outcomes of TanEA’s theory of change over the four-year period as follows: 
 • Outcome 1: Guided by evaluation policy, the government of Tanzania and parliament 
strengthen the M&E systems. 
 • Outcome 2: The government and civil society improve the quality of M&E products and 
make evidence-based decisions.
 • Outcome 3: TanEA is regarded as an authoritative, effective and professionally inclusive 
institution in fulfilment of its vision and mission
 • Outcome 4: Individual evaluators and evaluation commissioners improve on the quality of 
evaluation reports.
1.3 SHORT NOTE ON KEY CONCEPTS
In this report, concepts such as monitoring, evaluation, M&E, M&E system, and M&E ecosystems 
are used extensively. Although the symbiotic relationship between monitoring and evaluation is 
recognised, there are instances in this report where monitoring and evaluation are referred to 
as separate and distinct activities, sectors or professions. In other instances, the catch-all M&E 
term is used. Where M&E is used it often refers to systems. This is because most countries in 
Africa, including Tanzania, regard M&E systems as broad systems that include both evaluation 
and monitoring. This is despite earlier work having established that, in practice, these systems are 
largely related to monitoring (CLEAR-AA, 2018). The term M&E system refers to a self-contained 
system where different parts work together and have a recognised coordinator. In this report 
this refers mainly to the public sector M&E system. The concept of M&E ecosystem refers to the 
wider (sometimes) undefined and unrecognised conglomeration of organisations, institutions and 
individuals who generate or use various versions of monitoring and evaluation evidence.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
3
E
valuation is a nascent research discipline, though it is a well-established human 
practice (Hogen, 2007). Using the education sector as an example, Hogen (2007) 
argues that while evaluation as a professional practice dates back to the early 
1900s, programme evaluation only emerged as a recognised profession in the 1970s. 
At that time universities started offering courses on programme evaluation. There were 
also professionals who regarded themselves as practicing programme evaluators. In the 
1980s, academic journals such as the American Journal of Evaluation and the Journal of 
Performance Evaluation were established. This period of professionalisation was followed 
by the rapid expansion of the evaluation profession across the globe. 
In the past 15 years, evaluation societies or associations, often referred to as Voluntary 
Organizations for Professional Evaluations (VOPEs), have grown in number (Kriel, 
2007). The International Organization for Cooperation on Evaluation’s (IOCE) database 
boasts 120 national VOPEs. Globally, 32 000 individuals are registered with evaluation 
associations (Picciotto, 2019:93). It is likely that many individuals who conduct evaluations 
or are involved in evaluative activities, may not identify themselves as evaluators or be 
registered with national VOPEs. Considering that many evaluators may belong to more 
than one association, the number of ‘registered’ professionals is probably much lower than 
for other professions (Picciotto, 2019). Although national VOPE formation has proliferated 
rapidly, their membership numbers have not grown accordingly. 
In addition to the national associations, the M&E 
sector has also seen the emergence of regional 
bodies such as the African Evaluation Association 
(AfrEA) and the European Evaluation Society 
(EES) which represent groups of national VOPEs. 
According to the International Organization for 
Cooperation on Evaluation (IOCE), 19 VOPEs 
are categorised as regional. Global bodies such 
as the International Development Evaluation 
Association (IDEAS) and the international 
umbrella body for associations, the IOCE, have 
also become widely established in the global M&E 
ecosystem (Kriel, 2007). 
Evaluation associations have grown in response to growing recognition of the evaluation 
practice and the greater number of practitioners working in the field. Some of the VOPEs 
were established to raise awareness of the importance of either monitoring, or evaluation, 
or both, in development initiatives (Kriel, 2007). The establishment of a functioning 
evaluation association is indicative of the degree of professionalisation or where conditions 
in a country prompt the move towards the professionalisation of evaluation (CLEAR-AA, 
2018). It is also indicative of the extent of institutionalisation of evaluation in countries. 
CHAPTER 2
Contextualising VOPEs 
Evaluation associations 
have grown in response to 
growing recognition of the 
evaluation practice and 
the greater number of 
practitioners working in 
the field.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
4
In Africa, evaluation is historically associated with the demand to assess effectiveness, 
efficiency, and the impact of aid and other international development interventions. 
Monitoring and evaluation has long been associated with accounting for development 
aid and answerability. However, as more countries emerge from conflict or military rule 
into democratic governance, M&E has been increasingly institutionalised within the public 
service. This has changed the discourse about M&E from compliance and accountability 
(specifically international accountability) to learning. International organisations such as 
UNICEF have increasingly emphasised that for evaluation to be sustainable, countries need 
to have the necessary local capacity to conduct evaluations and develop methods that 
respond to the local contexts (Amisi & Chirau, 2019; Segone, 2009). This focus on the 
capacity of local practitioners has also driven growth in evaluation associations within the 
continent. According to AfrEA, 29 associations in Africa are affiliated with the continental 
body
1. These associations vary in size, form, and capacity. 
2.1. WHAT ARE VOPES AND WHY ARE THEY IMPORTANT? 
Evaluation associations exist in many forms and vary in size. The forms that associations 
take and their functionality are shaped by local context, access to resources, organisational 
capacity, and leadership. There are certain features and functions that define associations, 
but not all associations will carry out all the various functions. In addition, VOPEs are 
referred to by different names. Some incorporate themselves as evaluation societies, or 
forums, while others use the concept of associations. Some VOPEs focus exclusively on 
evaluations, while others incorporate both monitoring and evaluation, as is the case of the 
South African Monitoring and Evaluation Association (SAMEA) and the Ghana Monitoring 
and Evaluation Forum (GMEF). In this report, the terms VOPE and association will be used 
interchangeably. This is partly because the Tanzania VOPE refers itself as an association, 
but also because association is a more inclusive term that covers both organisations 
that focus solely on evaluations and as well as those that incorporate monitoring and 
evaluation professionals.
Evaluation associations are member-based organisations, meaning that they are 
established by members and serve their members and their profession. Evaluation 
associations are primarily established to promote evaluation (and monitoring, as is the 
case in most African countries) as a practice, discipline, and profession. For members, 
evaluation associations define the profession, its practices, norms, standards, and 
evaluation tools. VOPEs provide space for community of practice (CoP) offering a sense 
of belonging and professional identity to members who practice M&E. This is done by 
defining evaluation, developing standards and guidelines for practice, and formulating a 
competency framework for evaluations. 
1  AfrEA Website. https://afrea.org/about-membership/#
Evaluation associations are 
member-based organisations, 
meaning that they are 
established by members and 
serve their members and their 
profession.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
5
The function of evaluation associations is not, 
however, simply to serve their members, but 
they play a critical role in defining the practice of 
evaluation and raising awareness of its inherent 
value for development and the potential benefits 
for other stakeholders including governments, 
parliaments, CSOs and communities. The 
practice of tracking programme performance, 
measuring change, assessing the effect of 
interventions, and informing policy is critical. 
This is to ensure that responses to complex 
social problems, in the context of competing 
priorities and limited resources, is informed 
by sound evidence in order to reduce the risk 
of losses or harm. It is at this policy-practice 
juncture that evaluation associations are 
critical. Their work raises public awareness the 
of the importance of evaluation and serves to 
inform the public on why it is important that 
the actions of their governments, those who are implementing development programmes 
in communities and intervening in the economy, are informed by systematic evaluations.
Lastly, any profession that seeks credibility and legitimacy in policy debates needs to 
define itself by clearly articulating how it achieves accurate outcomes and by providing 
policy makers with the information necessary for the formulation of sound and effective 
policy decisions. The evaluation profession is no different. Associations have a role to play 
in the process of defining and refining evaluation methods, criteria and ethics, in ensuring 
quality, and promoting the use of evaluations. To achieve these aims, associations work 
closely with governments, parliaments and institutions of higher education, capacity-
building providers and other regulatory bodies. Ensuring quality of evaluation practice is an 
important function of associations, but this is sub ject to certain difficulties as, in certain 
situations and sectors, evaluation has yet to be recognised as a legitimate professional 
discipline (Kriel, 2007). 
Most VOPEs are volunteer organisations and are registered as not-for-profit entities. They 
rely on members to volunteer their time to serve on boards and to carry out activities. 
As not-for-profit organisations, evaluation associations are public benefit organisations. 
Their main ob jective is to achieve developmental outcomes. This includes ensuring quality 
evaluations that provide policy and decision makers with sound evidence on which to 
base their decisions on complex social problems. It also includes ensuring that society has 
access to unbiased information on the performance of development interventions. Lastly, 
it also includes ensuring evaluation practice that is credible, ethical, rigorous and which 
is undertaken without pre judice or harm to those who are the sub ject of the evaluation. 
Associations should also promote evaluation as a means to achieve social justice, 
transformation, accountability, and learning. 
Like other not-for-profit organisations, evaluation associations have limited sources of 
funding. Most VOPEs depend on donor funding, membership fees and revenue earned 
from capacity-building activities such as training and conferences.
Attempts to improve TanEA’s visibility must take cognisance of the broader context of 
VOPEs’ functions and ob jectives. Certain challenges that TanEA experiences are not unique 
but are inherent in the nature of the work that VOPEs do and the particular structure of 
the VOPE. Some of the limitations relate to the lack of recognition of monitoring and 
evaluation as a discipline and profession. Having established this broader context, the next 
section of the report presents explains the process followed in the scoping study.
... any profession that 
seeks credibility and 
legitimacy in policy 
debates needs to 
define itself by clearly 
articulating how it 
achieves accurate 
outcomes and by 
providing policy makers 
with the information 
necessary for the 
formulation of sound 
and effective policy 
decisions.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
6
3.1. THE APPROACH TAKEN 
The ob jective of this scoping study was to gather information to enable the development 
of a strategy. The study was not a comprehensive research pro ject. The main data 
collection tool used in the scoping study was an online semi-structured questionnaire 
administered to TanEA members. The questionnaire had 18 closed-ended and 7 open-
ended questions. The questionnaire focused on TanEA’s visibility. It was not the intention 
of the questionnaire to collect data on all aspects of TanEA operations. The questionnaire 
was administered online by means of the Google Forms survey instrument on the 21 
February 2020 and members were sent a reminder 2 March 2020. The questionnaire 
remained open until the drafting of this report. This was done to provide the longest 
possible response time, especially for those who may have received the questionnaire late. 
The survey was complemented by document review. The documents reviewed included 
TanEA strategic plan, the ‘Reinvigorating TanEA’ report and the 2019 bi-annual report. In 
addition, a limited review of the literature was undertaken.
3.2. RESPONDENTS 
Forty-four members of TanEA participated in the survey. The association has 70 active 
members,
2 which means 62% of members participated in the research. All respondents 
identified themselves as members of TanEA. The ma jority (95.5%) of respondents were 
active members with paid up membership fees. Of the respondents, 52% had been 
members of TanEA for fewer than three years. Considering that TanEA has been in 
existence for more than a decade, a greater number of responses from individuals who 
had been with the association for longer were expected. However, 48% had been members 
of the association for longer than 3 years which means responses were informed by 
members’ experiences with the association over a number of years. Respondents had an 
even distribution of participants from different sectors. 
2  Number taken from ‘Reinvigorating TanEA’, 2015
CHAPTER 3
Methods 
23%
29%
30%
9%
9%
> 1 year
1 to 3 years
3 to 5 years
5 to 10 years
< 10 years
FIGURE 1: Number of years respondents had been 
active members of TanEA
95.5%  
of respondents 
were active, paid-
up members
<<<PAGE=13>>>
7
9%
3%
5% 4%
27%
7%
32%
6% 7%
StudentCentral govt.
(ministry, 
region)
Local govt. 
(district, 
ward, 
village)
Govt. 
institution or 
agency
Private 
consultant
International 
development 
agency
Private 
consultant
Private 
sector
University or 
institute of 
higher learning
   FIGURE 2: Respondents according to sector (%)
Most of the respondents were not currently on the board or part of the secretariat. They 
also had not previously been in either of the governing bodies. This indicates an active M&E 
community beyond the board and secretariat that has interest in a functional TanEA. 
9%
16%
11%64%
Board members
Part of the 
secretariat
Not part of the 
current board 
or secretariat but 
served in the past 
9%
64%  
were neither current 
 nor previous members 
 of the board or 
secretariat
FIGURE 3: Respondents according to  
membership status (serving on the TanEA board or secretariat)
3.3. LIMITATIONS
As previously mentioned, this was a limited scoping study. Its design and approach were 
informed by the purpose it was to serve and was not intended to be a comprehensive 
research study. The questionnaire was complemented by a document review of reports 
from TanEA and a literature review. The literature review did not include all possible literature 
on VOPEs or membership-based organisations, but it was considered adequate for the 
purpose of the study. The questionnaire also represents the perceptions of respondents. 
The findings from the questionnaire were triangulated against other data sources. 
Therefore, for the purposes of this report which is to support the process of developing a 
strategy, the results are regarded as accurate. The results presented in the next section 
of this report are used as valuable supporting information to assist in formulating the 
association’s strategy.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
8
4.1 STAKEHOLDER KNOWLEDGE OF TANEA
A starting point for the planning of any improvement on the visibility of the association is 
to understand how well it is currently known. A functional professional body must engage 
with key stakeholders in the wider M&E ecosystem. These stakeholders include government, 
development partners, and academic institutions, amongst others. Respondents were 
asked to rate the extent to which TanEA is visible to these stakeholders. Each of the 
stakeholder respondents were asked to rate TanEA’s visibility on a Likert scale with a 
range of 0 to 10, with 0 being virtually unknown and 10 being well known. The findings are 
presented below. 
4.1.1. Local and central government 
Important stakeholders in the national M&E ecosystem are the central government and 
Local Government Authorities (LGAs). The government, at a central and local level, is a 
user of M&E evidence in policy-making. The government also constitutes the largest M&E 
infrastructure in the country. Most ministries are likely to have M&E units or other units such 
as research, policy or planning units which fulfil the M&E function. Therefore, respondents 
were asked to rate the extent to which TanEA is known by government institutions. 
To the question of how well TanEA is known by the government (central/local) of Tanzania, 
only 34.1% of respondents believed that TanEA was well known by the government. They 
rated the government’s knowledge of TanEA above five on the Likert scale. This means 
that the respondents viewed the government’s knowledge of TanEA to be above average. 
However, 65.9% of respondents were of the view that the government does not know 
enough about TanEA. 
An analysis of TanEA membership shows that despite the government being the largest 
institution in the country, it only constitutes 15% of TanEA membership (Reinvigorating 
TanEA, 2015). Considering that the government is a ma jor stakeholder in the country’s M&E 
system, these results indicate an area of significant potential which should be investigated. 
A functional association requires a strong partnership with and champions within the 
government. There are existing opportunities that TanEA can exploit to strengthen its 
partnership with the government. This will be expanded upon later. 
FIGURE 4: How well is TanEA known by 
development partners?
CHAPTER 4
Findings 
4.1.2. International 
development agencies
Other important stakeholders 
in the M&E landscape are 
international development 
partners. In response to the 
question of how well is TanEA 
known by development partners, 
respondents were of the view 
that the association is not well 
known by development partners. 
As can be seen in the figure below, 
77% were of the view that TanEA 
is not well known by international 
development partners. 
23%
77%
77%  
of respondents 
said TanEA is not well 
known by international 
development 
partners
<<<PAGE=15>>>
9
Organisations such as the World Bank, African Development Bank, USAID, and the 
United Nations provide substantial funding for evaluation activities on the continent. In 
recent years, UNICEF has championed the cause national evaluation capacity-building. 
These organisations have invested in the building of capacity of local partners to conduct 
and use evaluation evidence in Botswana, Lesotho, Madagascar, Namibia, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe. UNICEF is already an established partner of TanEA. It is important to draw 
upon the lessons that the leadership of TanEA has learned in working with UNICEF, not 
only to consolidate and strengthen the partnership with UNICEF, but also as a guideline on 
how to attract other development partners. 
4.1.3 Civil society organisations
Predictably, respondents were of the view that the association is not well known by the 
general public. The association’s strategic plan and other documents clearly recognise that 
the association has not done enough to raise awareness about the importance of evaluation 
and that its work with the general public has been inadequate. Similar sentiments were 
also expressed on the question of exposure of TanEA in the Civil Society Organisation 
(CSO) or Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) sectors. In the questionnaire, CSO was 
described as any organisation in the not-for-profit sector and no limitation was placed on 
the type of CSO. The question encompassed a broader sector than just CSOs in the M&E 
sector. Of the respondents, 75% were of the view that TanEA was not as well known in the 
not-for profit sector while only 25% thought TanEA was adequately known by CSOs. This 
is concerning because 50% of TanEA membership is categorised as CSO/NGO. This could 
indicate that members of TanEA who are in the sector are not championing the work of 
the association in ways that raise the profile of the association. It could also be indicative 
of a limited number of institutional/organisational members from this sector. What is 
clear is that the opportunities presented by having the ma jority of TanEA membership 
in the CSO/NGO sector have not been used strategically to grow the association in this 
sector. 
4.1.4 Academia and students
Similarly, it was also concerning that only 38.5% of the respondents thought that TanEA 
was well-known to academics and students. It is worth noting that academics and 
students are the category of stakeholders which respondents felt had the most knowledge 
of TanEA. This suggests that this category of stakeholders could potentially be used by 
the association to raise its awareness and visibility. Students and young professionals are 
also important both to the sustainability of the profession and to the association. Without 
adequate investment in young evaluators, the evaluation association is at risk having the 
existing pool of members succumb to volunteer fatigue from being asked too frequently 
to volunteer their time. This is a threat to potential future leadership (participation on 
the board and the secretariat) of the association. As the current membership grows older 
and members retire from the profession, there is a risk of significant capacity loss. In 
conclusion, the interest in academic evaluation courses is a good indication of the real 
and perceived market value of evaluation qualification and this, in itself, can be a form 
of passive ‘advocacy/advertising’. Therefore, the value of students and young emerging 
evaluators should not be underestimated in the association.
As can be seen from the findings presented, respondents believe 
that TanEA is currently not well known by those who should be fully 
aware of the association. Partnership and collaboration opportunities 
have been missed. Taking advantage of these opportunities could 
strengthen national evaluation capacity and increase the likelihood 
of evaluation evidence influencing policy, management decisions, 
and programme design. It appears that evaluators, as evidence 
generators, are not effectively shaping public development discourse 
on the value of M&E in the country. The next section examines the 
factors that contribute to the perceived poor visibility of TanEA within 
the Tanzanian M&E ecosystem. 
... the value of 
students and 
young emerging 
evaluators 
should not be 
underestimated 
... .
<<<PAGE=16>>>
10
4.2 CONTRIBUTION TO THE LEVEL OF VISIBILITY
The scoping study attempted to identify the factors responsible for stakeholders’ limited 
knowledge of TanEA. The respondents identified three main reasons that contribute to 
TanEA not being well known in Tanzania. Firstly, 80% of respondents thought that TanEA 
had not adequately publicised or marketed its work and the practice of evaluation. 
Secondly, 61 % of respondents were of the view that the opportunities offered by TanEA 
for networking have not been an adequate incentive for members. Lastly, 40% stated that 
the value of M&E is not fully known or understood. 
31,8%
31,8%
34,1%
34,1%
40,9%
50%
61,4%
80%
M&E not prioritised by government
M&E done by international donors 
Monitoring and evaluation is 
not institutionalised in government
M&E not a profession
Not many M&E capacity building opportunities
Value of M&E not fully known
Inadequate opportunities for networking
There is little publicity by TanEA
The three most cited contributory factors are interrelated. The difficulty in generating 
publicity for M&E related activities can likely be attributed to the inability to convincingly 
demonstrate the value of evaluation in policy and development. Work of member 
associations tends to focus on addressing issues of immediate concern to members. This 
inward focus can make it difficult for activities delivered by associations to be of interest 
to or to capture the attention of the public. In addition, networking opportunities are only 
regarded as effective when they respond to the needs of members, demonstrate how the 
profession is grappling with real development challenges, and provide evidence that the 
association is keeping up with global trends. Failure to fulfil these fundamental functions 
renders any workshop, meeting, or discussion forum ineffective, irrelevant and lacking in 
value for building a sense of community that spurs passive advertisement that is done by 
members through word of mouth sharing or encouraging others to join the association, 
etc.
The strategy will have to include activities that address the issues raised above. This will 
require the following: 
 • The holding of topical workshops, seminars, and events that clearly demonstrate the 
value of M&E and its ability to offer real solutions to development challenges facing 
the country;
 • Formulation of interventions that can further TanEA’s legitimacy as a sector leader;
 • Identify prominent and influential stakeholders (individuals or organisations) who 
draw attention to the work of the association; and
 • Devise a communication approach that links M&E practice with individual practical 
experience. This point will be elaborated upon in the next section.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
11
4.3 CURRENT TANEA COMMUNICATION PLATFORMS
Effective communication that reaches the intended target audience with a relevant message 
is important for any organisation and is influential in creating a brand and an identity. The 
survey asked respondents to rate TanEA’s communication platforms and tools. The focus was 
on internet-based communication tools. 
4.3.1 Website
A website is an important communication platform for any association. TanEA is a member- 
based organisation comprising practitioners throughout Tanzania in many different sectors, 
and, therefore, an up-to-date website with current relevant information is essential. The website 
is also important for potential partners as source of information about the association and 
its work. However, respondents were of the opinion that the TanEA website did not function 
effectively as the anchor communication tool. Of the respondents, 45% thought the information 
on the website was inadequate and only (20%) said that the information was adequate, and 
they were able to find what they were looking for.
It is important to note that TanEA has recently revamped the website. Opinions of the website 
that were elicited from the questionnaires might relate to the old website or to the website 
when was being reconfigured. What is clear, however, is that the main concern of respondents 
was the inadequacy of information on the website. Respondents are of the view that visitors 
who visit the website to learn more about the association and its work will not be able to do so. 
At the time the scoping study was done, some of the key association’s documents were not 
on the website. An integral part of the proposed visibility strategy should be to identify ways in 
which to completely revamp the structure, content, and information available on the website. 
An important consideration is the ongoing maintenance of the website.
45,5%
20,5%
13,6% 13,6% 11,4% 9,1%
Info 
inadequate
Ease of 
access
Difficulty 
finding info
Info not 
helpful
Do not visit Info 
outdated
4.3.2 Social media
Social media dominates the way people and organisations share information. Like other 
evaluation associations, TanEA is subscribed to T witter, LinkedIn, Instagram, and Facebook. 
TanEA has a T witter account that was created in 2019 but is inactive. This account has never 
been used and it only has three followers. While other VOPEs on the continent do not have 
numerous followers (the Zimbabwean Evaluation Association has 349 followers; the Evaluation 
Society of Kenya has 441 followers and ZamEA has 36) and are slow to tweet their about work, 
TanEA’s presence on T witter is virtually non-existent. TanEA’s footprint on other platforms is 
equally poor. Findings indicate that 45.5% of the respondents thought that the association does 
not share much information on social media platforms. This probably explains why 20% reported 
that they did not follow TanEA on any social media platforms. This is a missed opportunity to 
share debates around M&E practice, peer-to-peer learning, and knowledge sharing.
Findings presented in this section show numerous missed opportunities for TanEA to pro ject its 
work and lead discussions on M&E in the country. The association has failed to communicate 
adequately on M&E and on its own endeavours. This could be attributed to the limited financial 
and human resources available to initiate and maintain communication activities. However, 
there are alternative low-cost and low-intensity approaches to communication that the 
association could explore.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
12
4.4 WAYS TO IMPROVE TanEA VISIBILITY 
The establishment and running of a voluntary professional body is onerous and demands significant 
time and resource input from volunteer professionals who run the association, and those who 
volunteer to implement activities. Most VOPEs have limited resources. TanEA is no exception. 
Although Tanzania has sustained an average growth of 6-7% over the past decade, at $900, the 
annual per capita income remains low compared to other African countries and is lower than 
that of its neighbour, Kenya. T welve million people live below the poverty line and have precarious 
sources of income (World Bank, 2017: 8). Crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, are likely to push 
these households and those just above the poverty line into further poverty. In this context, it is 
likely that there will be less resources being allocated for M&E activities. Employment opportunities 
for professionals will also be constrained as priorities shift to dealing with aftermath of COVID-19. 
This could further constrain revenue sources for TanEA. The VOPE will have to be creative in its 
advocacy for evaluation and clearly demonstrate its value to convince those considering investing 
in development to allocate resources for M&E. The association will also have to be inventive in how 
it organises itself and will need to raise funds but will also need to draw on existing resources in 
the country. 
Respondents identified three key partnerships that could strengthen the association and increase 
its visibility. This included the office of the President, specifically PO-PSMGG, (75%), international 
development agencies (86.4%) and universities (70%). The Parliament of Tanzania was also identified 
by 65% of respondents as an important potential partner for the association. The association will 
need to identify areas of mutual interest with organisations with whom they intend to partner and 
ensure that any potential partnerships are sustainable.
Respondents suggested several activities that could strengthen partnerships with key stakeholders, 
demonstrate the value of evaluation, and enhance the profile of TanEA. Recurring themes included 
raising awareness, advocacy, co-delivery of activities, and inclusion of partners in TanEA activities. 
4.4.1 Office of the President 
With regard to the presidency, a number of respondents were of the view that TanEA should 
pursue the opportunity for a formative role in the development of the country’s M&E strategy by 
working closely with the President’s office, specifically, PO-PSMGG. The development of M&E policy 
was seen not as an end in itself, but as a potential catalyst to institutionalise evaluation within 
government and thereby provide a legitimate platform for evaluators and TanEA. The following are 
two quotes from respondents: 
Strong advocacy is needed to stress the formulation of a national 
evaluation policy. This could be a vehicle for a working 
partnership and assimilation practice in the government.
TanEA should use both formal and informal approaches to 
advocate for the partnership [with government]. In addition, 
TanEA may also use approaches that are likely to widen 
the awareness of the Office of the President regarding the 
advantages of partnering with TanEA. For instance, TanEA 
could prepare evidence of how other Offices the President (from other 
countries) have benefited from partnering with organizations similar to 
TanEA.
Other suggestions made for strengthening the partnership with the President’s office included: 
 • Regular evaluation roundtables with the President’s office;
 • Facilitate an initiative and support the President’s office in strengthening its M&E systems 
and plans;
 • Elicit the support of the office of the President to champion evaluation and foster a culture 
of collecting evidence for policy-making;
 • Partner to organise M&E annual learning summit; and 
 • Partner with TanEA on strengthening the practice of evaluation of development 
programmes in local government authorities.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
13
The government is an essential partner in the pursuit of recognition of evaluation or M&E as 
a profession. As is the case in other countries, Tanzania has established institutions to regulate 
higher education. The Ministries of Education, Science, Technology and Vocational Training together 
with the Tanzania Commission for Universities are important partners as they are regulators of 
what is offered by universities. They are indispensable in the debates about professionalisation of 
evaluation or, at least, the recognition of evaluation as a distinct profession and practice. 
4.4.2 International development agencies
Regarding international development agencies, the recurring themes were similar to those 
relating to the office of the President. In addition, respondents were of the view that TanEA could 
collaborate with development agencies in the delivery of training. Respondents also pointed out 
that international development agencies partner with and fund organisations that have developed 
monitoring and evaluation systems. Partnerships with agencies can provide TanEA with potential 
members with established evaluation capacity in local implementing organisations. Lastly, as one 
respondent pointed out, TanEA can be a source of local evaluators that it accredits for international 
development agencies. The association has the potential to be a collective voice for local evaluators 
and an advocate for international development agencies to use local evaluators.
TanEA should identify itself as a unique institution that exists 
to support actors in development practice with evidence on 
what is working and what does not and promote innovations in 
monitoring and evaluation so that international development 
partners have faith in TanEA work.
TanEA has the human resource that many International 
Development Agencies need. TanEA can act as a human resource 
pool for conducting evaluations, quality assurance, and capacity 
building of the M&E professionals.
The following are some suggested activities:
 • Collaborate in M&E-related assignments and capacity-building activities;
 • Invite international development agencies to events organised by TanEA;
 • Work jointly to influence government policies;
 • Invite agencies to share their knowledge and experience on emerging M&E technologies;
 • Parallel review of SDGs;
 • Support TanEA by financing its strategic plan for strengthening evaluation in the country to 
become sustainable; and
 • Support the initiative for the establishment of a National Evaluation Policy (NEP) and 
professionalisation of M&E in Tanzania
<<<PAGE=20>>>
14
4.4.3 Parliament of Tanzania
Respondents strongly supported the need for TanEA to strengthen relationships with parliament. 
Several ideas were put forward for how TanEA can achieve this. Some of the respondents were 
of the view that as TanEA has already established some interaction with parliament, it is 
important to build on and sustain these established connections. In addition, other respondents 
stressed the importance of working with partners who already have relationships and possibly 
have the funding to work with parliaments, such as the African Parliamentarians Network on 
Development Evaluation (APNODE). This is an approach that TanEA has already taken. In 2019 
TanEA, in collaboration with CLEAR-AA, conducted training on the importance of evaluation as 
an accountability tool for APNODE members in the Tanzania Chapter. TanEA also partnered 
with UNICEF to raise awareness on the need for parliament to demand that evaluation is done 
by the executive. A two-day workshop was conducted in Dodoma involving a representative of the 
parliamentary committees. TanEA’s work with parliament does not seem to require significant 
ad justment or adaptation. It might require an element of strategic leadership and perhaps 
increased publicity. One point raised by respondents is the need to establish areas of mutual 
interest with the Tanzanian parliament for the partnership to be beneficial and sustainable. 
Here are two quotes that raised interesting points about a partnership with parliament. 
First, TanEA should undertake a study to understand the incentives for 
the members of parliament and the parliament as a whole to partner 
with TanEA. This could be in the tone of how the partnership 
could benefit MPs individually and the parliament as a whole. 
The results of the study will enable TanEA to get a good 
approach for value proposition to the parliament.
By ensuring that TanEA is fully and legally accepted by the 
Tanzanian Laws to be the Institution responsible tor M&E in 
the country. Also, M&E should be embedded in the Parliament 
Standing Committees as one of the Committees with 
responsibilities relating to M&E.
In addition, the following points were raised:
 • Sustain the existing rapport by sharing reports and experiences with the Local Authority 
Accounts Committee (LAAC), Association of Local Authorities of Tanzania (ALAT) 
and other committees which are closely affiliated with local government development 
p r oj e c ts ;
 • Invite members of parliament to become TanEA members;
 • Work with APNODE to demand a National Evaluation Policy in Tanzania, routine 
evaluation of development programmes implemented in LGAs and Central Government, 
and evaluation in parliament itself; and
 • Partner with APNODE to build capacity for M&E as an oversight function throughout all 
parliamentary committees.
Most respondents strongly supported working with parliament and the necessity for significant 
investment in sustaining this relationship. There was one respondent who suggested that 
working with politicians should be approached with caution. Although this issue was raised by 
only one respondent, this is a valid concern and one that TanEA should consider when working 
with parliament. There are other important issues that should also be considered when working 
with parliament. Firstly, members of parliament are not permanent employees of the legislature 
and changes in parliamentary representation are inevitable. Therefore, investments made in the 
building of relationships with individual members of parliament can be upended by changes in 
the political arena and members of parliament losing seats in parliament. Secondly, working 
with parliament requires that the specific outcomes expected of the engagement should be 
identified at the outset of the interaction. Consideration should also be given to the resources 
at the disposal of members of parliament. Having said that, working with parliament can offer 
unique opportunities to make the connection between evaluation evidence and solving real 
problems faced by local communities. Members of parliament represent local constituents and 
it is to them that they are ultimately accountable.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
15
4.4.4 Academia and students
The last important group of stakeholders identified was academic institutions which offer great 
opportunities for VOPEs. They are invaluable partners in the process of developing M&E/evaluation 
as a discipline and developing the capacity or competencies for evaluation in the country. Here are 
two interesting quotes about working with universities.
Universities are largely in need of four things, 1) ideas for 
new research projects, 2) publications, 3) research funding, 
and 4) research subjects/fieldwork. TanEA should be able to 
contribute in any of the four things. Otherwise, it will be very 
difficult to convince the universities to partner with TanEA.
... create awareness on the relevance and necessity of 
M&E in our national development for the students and the 
universities in general.
In addition, respondents identified the following potential activities:
 • Work with academia/universities to increase the supply of capacity to conduct evaluations;
 • Establish contact with all graduates of M&E programmes (this could be through a subgroup);
 • Initiate the design of M&E-related modules for the students taking M&E courses;
 • TanEA should allocate internship students for career development; and
 • Recruit students by means of a subsidised annual subscription fee.
Academic institutions can be complex partners for professional associations, for various reasons. 
Universities often function as disparate faculties and schools. Monitoring and evaluation as a 
discipline does not belong to any specific school and it is possible that within the same university 
M&E (or parts of M&E) is taught in different schools and courses, and offered at different levels 
(CLEAR-AA, 2018). Therefore, a university cannot be approached as a ‘single unified’ entity. 
Opportunities would have to be identified in the different schools. Also, academic institutions 
prefer to be independent in developing curricula and determining what is taught in their classes. 
Since M&E is not yet an established discipline, it can be difficult for a VOPE to establish its role 
and offering to universities which, in most cases, might have well-established systems and even 
advanced knowledge on the sub ject matter. This means that TanEA will have to position itself more 
as a partner and less of a ‘regulator’ of the sector in working with universities. However, gaining 
legitimacy with academic institutions and showcasing partnership with respected institutions can 
bolster the legitimacy of TanEA with other partners.
4.4.5 General comments from respondents 
Participants were asked to mention any ideas or suggestions they have for TanEA. The following 
are some of the issues that were raised:
 • Conduct annual M&E events like fairs and workshops with a view to including a wide range 
of monitoring and evaluation stakeholders from public, private, government, international 
organisations, local NGOs and CSOs, academia, and research entities;
 • TanEA needs to be relevant and responsive to the issues raised by members that and affect 
practitioners in Tanzania;
 • Organisational membership will strengthen M&E in Tanzania;
 • TanEA should increase the efforts to influence the government on the establishment and use 
of a national M&E system;
 • Transformation of leadership: 
 • Involve practitioners in the private sector, 
 • Include young M&E practitioners in leadership, 
 • Have visionary leadership and leaders who are more proactive in pushing their agenda; 
and
 • In addition to the visibility strategy, TanEA also needs a separate resource mobilisation 
strategy if this has not been incorporated as a component of the visibility strategy.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
16
M
embers identified a number of interventions that could be implemented to foster a culture 
of evaluation, strengthen conversations about evaluation as a profession, and make the 
value of evaluating development interventions apparent. The emergence of TanEA as the 
partner of choice in development initiatives requires a combination of good communication and 
strengthening of TanEA’s capacity to deliver. It also requires consideration of what is happening 
within the evaluation discipline itself. Argument and debate in terms of the contribution of a 
professional association in a country (and globally) cannot be divorced from discussions about the 
discipline itself and the significant benefits it offers. Having said that, themes emerging from the 
findings of this scoping study serve as a foundation for the building of a strategy to improve the 
visibility of TanEA. The themes are not mutually exclusive but are connected in that achievement 
in one area can be a catalyst for success of another. These matters will have to be validated and 
deliberated further with the members.
5.1 PROMOTING EVALUATION AND CULTURE OF EVIDENCE USE
TanEA has done extensive work to promote evaluation and evidence use in Tanzania. This includes 
participation in the 2015 International Year of Evaluation, where it jointly hosted workshops/
seminars, amongst other types of involvement. However, respondents were of the opinion that 
this was an area to which the association should devote more effort. Some respondents suggested 
that championing the development of the M&E policy in Tanzania should receive attention. 
The potential benefits of advocating and supporting the process of developing the country’s 
evaluation policy cannot be understated. TanEA can be instrumental in significantly influencing 
the development that will shape the country’s M&E ecosystem. This requires that TanEA 
positions itself strategically in its engagement with partners during this process, particularly with 
government and its membership. TanEA should be amongst stakeholders consulted in the drafting 
of the policy/strategy and should possibly lead some of the consultations. To fulfil this role, the 
board of directors will need to negotiate with the government to permit the association to play 
a formative role in the process. This may require that the board of TanEA appoints an individual 
from TanEA to engage with the government and be the association’s representative in the policy 
drafting process. Using its valuable knowledge of the sector, the association can also play a guiding 
and convening role during the consultations where all stakeholders participate and contribute. 
By doing so, TanEA can demonstrate its leadership and custodianship of the sector. In addition, 
TanEA could convene certain of the consultation workshops. The facilitation of consultations 
with members and partners on a government (national) policy would boost the legitimacy of the 
association as a representative of M&E practitioners in Tanzania.
5.2 STRENGTHENING COMMUNICATION
The communication of the association should not only showcase the work that TanEA is doing, 
but also what its partners are doing. The research shows that TanEA’s communication has 
been inadequate. The website has recently undergone a much-needed revamp but still provides 
insufficient information and some of the tabs are inactive. This needs to be addressed without 
delay. A functional, up-to-date and user-friendly website is essential for communicating with 
members, potential members and partners. It is also a basis for social media communication. 
Currently TanEA has not exploited the potential benefits of the various social media platforms 
and has either been inactive or the communication has been negligible on its four social media 
platforms.
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
<<<PAGE=23>>>
17
Effective communication requires a clear strategy or plan of 
action informed by a good understanding of the intended target 
audience, the message that needs to be communicated to the 
different target audiences, and the most effective means/tools 
for the communication. It also requires clarity on what will be 
achieved by communicating with the stakeholders. Bamberger 
(2007) suggests five categories of evaluation stakeholders that 
associations should consider. (1) Organisations who commission 
evaluations; (2) Evaluation practitioners who design and 
implement evaluation; (3) Evaluation users; (4) Communities or 
groups affected by development interventions; and (5) General 
public. Different messages should be tailored for each category 
of stakeholders according to the types of messages that are 
pertinent to their needs and the method of delivery of the 
messages, therefore, should be selected accordingly.
The table below presents some preliminary ideas based on Bamberger’s categorisation and ideas 
suggested by respondents. 
EVALUATION 
STAKEHOLDER POTENTIAL NEEDS MEANS
Organisations that 
commission evaluations
Access to evaluators in Tanzania
Latest evaluation methods 
Website 
Social media 
Evaluation practitioners
Evaluation training 
International and regional developments in 
evaluation 
Professionalisation debates 
Opportunities to network 
Spaces to share their work 
Consultancy opportunities 
Website
Conferences
Publications
Evaluation users Evidence 
Policy briefs 
Seminars/conferences/
workshops 
Communities affected by 
interventions
How interventions are affecting their 
communities 
Local events 
Media 
General public 
Development trends in their country 
What works and what does not work to 
address social and economic challenges? 
Media (radio, TV and print)
Social media 
Effective communication is an essential ongoing activity for any VOPE and communication should 
be timely and frequent. Websites must be updated regularly with current information, social media 
accounts must be attended to, both for what other partners and stakeholders are sharing but also 
to share topical information. Therefore, effective communication requires dedicated resources, 
either full- or part-time. This can either be a voluntary or a paid service. It is important to note that 
this work can be demanding for a volunteer, particularly if that individual already has a full-time job 
or is consulting. A strategy to streamline and optimise the association’s communication efforts 
should be discussed with members. Members must consider and prioritise which stakeholders 
must constantly be kept up to date which communication platforms are the most effective in 
terms of effort and reach.
5.3 CREATING SPACE FOR INFORMATION SHARING  
AND NETWORKING
Information sharing and the need for networking is a fundamental necessity for evaluators, both 
established and emerging (Kriel, 2007). Evaluators need a platform on which they can engage 
on professional developments, debate on emerging theories, and disseminate information on the 
latest methods and technologies. It is also important that the platform chosen should provide a 
conducive space to share and critique each other’s work. This process of ideation, participatory 
Members must 
consider and prioritise 
which stakeholders 
must constantly 
be kept up to date 
which communication 
platforms are the 
most effective in 
terms of effort and 
reach.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
18
sense-making, and collective learning is essential for the 
profession to grow and mature. To stimulate collaborative 
evaluation, professionals need a forum that that encourages 
relationship-building and provides emerging evaluators with the 
opportunity to interact with established practitioners, to learn, 
grow and access opportunities to strengthen their professional 
development. 
A number of responses suggested that conferences, workshops, 
and seminars could provide ideal opportunities for sharing 
information, learning and networking. These have become a 
common method of information sharing for VOPEs. Annual 
monitoring and evaluation weeks, conferences and seminars 
have become regular features in evaluators’ calendars. TanEA 
has held a number of workshops and seminars but has, as yet, 
not hosted an annual monitoring and evaluation week. The 
ob jective of TanEA is to host what will be known as a ‘National 
Evaluation Week’. This is seen as a great opportunity to build 
partnerships with other stakeholders and to earn revenue. 
Financial and in-kind sponsorships are more forthcoming from partners if the funding is sought 
for specific events or activities. Evaluation weeks also offer valuable publicity opportunities for 
TanEA and partners and serve to initiate and foster long-lasting partnerships. If participation 
is fee-based, the hosting of evaluation week can be a revenue source for the VOPE. Most VOPEs 
rely on conferences and capacity-building workshops to raise money. Therefore, hosting evaluation 
week can achieve two ob jectives for the association. 
There are two important factors to consider when hosting conferences and workshops. Firstly, 
organising workshops and conferences is an onerous undertaking. Hosting a conference requires 
resources to organise both the substantive elements and the logistics. Substantive elements include 
decisions on the theme and sub-themes, organising the content (calls for abstracts, assessing 
abstracts, communicating with potential presenters), ensuring that the programme is well 
coordinated and responds to the overall theme, and recruiting guest speakers who are well known, 
respected in the field, and relevant. Logistically, an evaluation week conference is demanding, it 
requires the finding of venues, making speakers’ travel arrangements, logistics, revenue collection 
and a host of other administrative tasks. The association might have to enlist the assistance of 
a professional conference organising company to stage a big evaluation week. Secondly, linked to 
the first, for an evaluation week to sustain the association, consideration needs to be given to the 
cost of delivering the evaluation week, the potential for sponsorship, and the revenue that can 
be generated from fees. This requires a sound understanding of the demographics of potential 
delegates and their ability to afford attendance fees.
Nonetheless, hosting an evaluation week conference is an effective strategy that has been used 
by other associations to build evaluation community of practice, raise the profile and enhance 
the reputation of TanEA, and create opportunities for information sharing and learning. For most 
associations, conferences are regarded as a source of revenue. Hosting a conference, as a means 
to improve the visibility of the association, should be given serious consideration by TanEA.
5.4 RAISING AWARENESS 
Raising awareness of the importance of evaluation was identified as an area that requires TanEA’s 
attention. Picciotto (2019) argues that in current post-modern society which characterised by 
growing inequality, the capture of governments and states by the elite, and the rise of post-truth 
and fake news, evaluation evidence is crucially important. Society needs the methodical and 
rigorous analysis, and the synthesis and sense-making processes that evaluation offers. Evaluation 
offers policymakers a relatively ob jective perspective (because of measures taken to control for 
bias) on why programmes succeed or fail. Evaluation is necessary to inform policy makers as they 
attempt to address problems which are becoming increasingly complex due to growing global 
connectedness and trans-border challenges such as climate change and volatile global financial 
systems that weaken political sovereignty of nation states. Unfortunately, the value of evaluating 
public policies and programmes – or the consequences of not evaluating them – is commonly not 
apparent to African governments or communities, so there is little incentive to invest in evaluation 
Evaluators need a platform 
on which they can 
engage on professional 
developments, debate on 
emerging theories, and 
disseminate information 
on the latest methods 
and technologies. It is 
also important that the 
platform chosen should 
provide a conducive space 
to share and critique each 
other’s work.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
19
(Amisi & Chirau, 2019). The questions that resonate in Tanzania’s socio-political context are: how 
can the value of evaluation be best demonstrated and how can the association demonstrate to 
government and the public that evaluation is not merely an auditing function and neither is it 
about proving effect to donors, but is primarily about learning, improving the quality of policies and 
services delivered? It ultimately serves to bring social change to people and communities. 
Respondents suggested that a newsletter should be published to share the work of the association 
with potential partners. This could be a useful way to communicate with members and others 
to enhance the credibility of TanEA. The VOPE toolkit developed by IOCE identifies the following 
activities that can be used to raise awareness about evaluation
3:
 • Present an evaluation award. TanEA can determine what awards to present, how often they 
will be presented and the process that will be followed to do so;
 • Making or issuing of statements on matters that are important to evaluations;
 • Connecting regionally and internationally. TanEA is already a member of AfrEA, but as 
indicated in the introduction, there are a number of other equally creditable international 
networks that TanEA could consider joining.
5.5 STRENGTHENING MEMBERS’ CAPACITY
Promoting evaluation capacity and ensuring quality evaluation practice is an important function of 
evaluation associations. Capacity is a function of training, continuous career redevelopment, and 
availability of opportunities to apply skills in practice – all of which assist individual practitioners 
to become competent in designing and implementing evaluations.
Respondents identified capacity building for TanEA members as a necessary intervention to 
strengthen the association. The same need was identified in the reinvigoration of TanEA strategy. 
As mentioned in the introduction, evaluation is a fledgling profession. Not all practitioners have 
had prior formal training in evaluation and may have transitioned from other disciplines. The 
advantage that TanEA offers is that most of its members have postgraduate degrees. According 
to the reinvigoration of TanEA report, 63% of the members have master’s and PhD degrees while 
31% have bachelor’s degrees and/or postgraduate diplomas (TanEA, 2015:5). Thus, at least 63% 
of the membership has research education and experience. There is no indication of how many 
members have evaluation training. Nonetheless, the association has a strong research background 
upon which to build.
Training and mentoring were identified as potential interventions to strengthen member 
competencies. Training needs to be responsive, thus it should be informed by what members 
need. It will also have to cater to different levels of expertise and experience, considering the wide 
disparity in competencies. TanEA can partner with institutions such as United Nations agencies, 
World Bank, and CLEAR-AA, to deliver relevant training interventions. The necessity for training 
presents an opportunity to build the capacity of TanEA by offering training courses, which could 
position TanEA as a legitimate representative of evaluators to partners and raise the profile of the 
association amongst current and potential members.
In addition, respondents indicated the need for opportunities to put skills to use. Research conducted 
by CLEAR-AA found that though governments in Africa are increasingly commissioning evaluation, 
national resource availability constrains governments’ commissioning capacities. Therefore, most 
evaluations are still commissioned by international organisations using international evaluators in 
cooperation agreements (or contracts) that disadvantage local evaluators by appointing them to 
junior non-analytical/writing roles in evaluation teams (Amisi & Chirau, 2019; CLEAR-AA, 2018). 
Respondents indicated that TanEA can be a hub for opportunities for consultancies but TanEA 
cannot create the opportunities. However, through the website, the discussion forums and other 
TanEA platforms, the association can advertise opportunities available with other partners. This 
requires that TanEA is on the mailing list of other organisations. The process of developing the 
strategy should include identifying organisations who are commissioning evaluations in Tanzania 
and establishing working relationships with them. This is another less resource-intensive activity 
that can direct traffic to the TanEA website and other communication platforms while utilising 
the expertise of members who are available for consulting opportunities. 
3  http://vopetoolkit.ioce.net/
<<<PAGE=26>>>
20
5.6 FOCUS ON YOUNG AND EMERGING 
EVALUATORS 
Young and emerging evaluators were frequently mentioned 
as a special cohort requiring focus and support. The 
association has an undisputed role to play in building the 
capacity of emerging evaluators and providing opportunities 
for them to grow in the sector. Growing a cohort of emerging 
evaluators can also create a pool of potential volunteers. 
The specific focus on emerging evaluators is in keeping with 
international trends. Eval partners launched EvalYouth in 
2015 to promote Young and Emerging Evaluators (YEEs) 
to become competent, experienced and connected professionals who contribute to evaluation 
capacity and promote the inclusion of young evaluators in evaluations at national, regional and 
international levels (EvalPartners, 2015). EvalYouth regularly hosts events targeted at emerging 
evaluators. Other VOPEs such as AEA, SAMEA and AfrEA have active groups for young and 
emerging evaluators. These groups are formalised with a clear agenda to advance young and 
emerging evaluators. 
There is some ambiguity about what constitutes young and emerging evaluators, and whether 
this is a homogenous group. Because evaluation is a relatively new discipline in most countries, it 
is possible that emerging evaluators might not necessarily be young people who are embarking 
on their careers. They could be individuals who are well established, either as researchers or 
practitioners in other disciplines. This group should be differentiated from young evaluators who 
are students, recent graduates, or young professionals in the evaluation field. TanEA will need 
to establish the demographics of the emerging evaluators in Tanzania and constitute this group 
properly in order to be able to respond appropriately to the needs of the group also to use the group 
most effectively for publicity.
TanEA could benefit from an organised youth group with links to international evaluation partners. 
These links could assist to keep up to date on is happening on the continent. This would require 
a champion, either within the current secretariat or from the general members, to organise the 
group and formulate a plan to drive the emerging evaluators’ 
agenda. This could be a fairly low-key initiative but could 
serve to ensure that Tanzania’s emerging evaluators are 
engaged in ongoing debates and exposed to international 
opportunities and are learning from others in the field. Their 
membership of other organisations and participation in 
collective activities would also raise the profile of TanEA. 
As a strategy to assist young and emerging evaluators, 
respondents suggested the introduction of partially- or fully-
subsidised membership subscriptions and discounted fees 
for attendance at TanEA’s events to provide young members 
with affordable mentoring and networking opportunities. It is 
unclear if TanEA is currently in a position to offer subsidised 
membership and this will need to be explored. 
5.7 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN, MONITORING AND EVALUATION
As previously mentioned in this report, any potential strategy should include activities that are 
feasible and practicable for TanEA to implement. Caution should be exercised not to embark on 
overambitious plans that are beyond the scope of the organisation. This is a common organisational 
pitfall that frequently results in an inability to implement strategies and can be attributed to 
three interrelated issues: 1) A failure to plan for implementation; 2) A lack of organisational 
capacity to implement the strategy; and (3) An underestimation of external constraints beyond 
the organisation. Ideally, a strategy implementation plan should be detailed but simple. The plan 
should clearly outline a time frame for each of the activities, it should allocate responsibilities 
clearly and should also include accountability measures. For overall assessment of the success of 
the plan, there should be a simple way to track the implementation of the strategy to determine 
if it achieved its intended goals.
Young and emerging 
evaluators were 
frequently mentioned 
as a special cohort 
requiring focus and 
support. 
TanEA could benefit 
from an organised 
youth group with 
links to international 
evaluation partners. 
These links could assist 
to keep up to date on 
is happening on the 
continent.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
21
T
his section provides suggestions and points to be considered when deciding on the strategy 
to improve TanEA’s visibility. The suggestions and ideas focus on two different areas – the 
underlying principles and the important issues for consideration. The principles should inform 
how the strategy will be developed. The issues for consideration are factors that should shape the 
strategy, rather than actual activities to be undertaken. These should be kept in mind by members 
and the board as they deliberate on the contents of the strategy. 
6.1 UNDERL YING PRINCIPLES
The development of the strategy should be guided by the following principles: 
 • The process should be participatory and adopt a ‘systems lens’ approach, and members 
representing different sectors of TanEA membership should participate in the process;
 • The strategy should be informed by and respond to local context; it should consider 
opportunities and limitations presented by the current socio-economic and political realities;
 • The strategy should be informed and aligned to the broader TanEA ob jectives;
 • The strategy should be developed and implemented in a way that strengthens local capacity;
 • The strategy must be feasible and implementable; with due regard for the existing capacity of 
the association; and
 • The strategy should be able to be monitored and evaluated to learn from experience and 
improve on future strategies.
6.2 ISSUES TO CONSIDER IN THE PREPARATION OF THE STRATEGY
a. Capacity of the association 
Much like other voluntary associations, TanEA faces capacity limitations. The board provides oversight 
and has fiduciary responsibilities but does not have a responsibility to deliver. The secretariat fulfils 
the delivery function of the association. To overcome the challenge of limited capacity, the strategy 
should be underpinned by strong partnerships with other organisations in the Tanzanian M&E 
ecosystem. The activities in the strategy should ideally be low intensive with high returns and should, 
ideally, be co-delivered with partners. However, the association should avoid a dependency trap. 
Caution should be exercised when pursuing activities that can only be delivered with the support or 
leadership of partners. Dependency hampers the building of a sustainable organisation. 
b. The strategy should be informed by a better 
understanding of the membership
The last analysis of the composition and types of TanEA members was 
done in 2015. TanEA does not currently have a database of members’ 
information. Analysis of membership should be done to establish who 
the members of TanEA are, which sectors they are in, their experiences, 
and their expectations of the association. This analysis should also 
include an understanding of the potential for contribution by the 
members. This should be raised at the upcoming meeting which will 
be held to discuss this report and generate ideas for the strategy with 
members. 
CHAPTER 6
Thoughts for the strategy 
The activities 
in the strategy 
should ideally be 
low intensive with 
high returns and 
should, ideally, be 
co-delivered with 
partners.
<<<PAGE=28>>>
22
c. Need a better understanding of the 
target market of TanEA
In addition to a clear understanding of the membership, 
its needs, and its expectations, the association needs 
to understand its broader target market. Bamberger’s 
categorisation mentioned above can be useful to 
segment the target market and to determine what 
it is that the various categories of members might 
need from TanEA. This would yield useful information 
for stakeholder identification and provide background 
information for developing the strategy. It should be 
noted, however, that the categories only relate to the 
evaluation ecosystem. The pressing issue for TanEA is to 
define the target market of the association. The overall 
concept of M&E can be somewhat confusing as, despite 
the collective term M&E having achieved acceptance 
and understanding, the functions involved in monitoring 
and evaluation are, in fact, two distinct disciplines with 
a symbiotic relationship.
Like most VOPEs on the continent, TanEA focuses on both monitoring and evaluation, although 
its mission and ob jectives mention only evaluation and exclude monitoring. Most of the activities 
of the association are aimed at strengthening evaluation and the use of evaluation evidence. 
This is understandable, given that evaluation is often less established within different institutions 
compared to monitoring and data systems. However, this raises questions about the association’s 
target market and partners and the effort that should be put into providing value for all stakeholders. 
Monitoring is a vast field with its own standards and competencies. It is also sub ject to different 
regulations and is governed by the National Bureau of Statistics whose mandate is to develop 
standards and methods and provide an interpretation of concepts and deﬁnitions for statistics 
and data. TanEA’s 2017–2021 strategic plan recognises that the country’s statistical system 
functions efficiently under the auspices of Tanzania Statistical Master Plan. 
The extent to which TanEA aspires to have a custodial role on monitoring is unclear. The evaluation 
terrain remains poorly defined thereby providing opportunities for the association to take a 
custodial role. Decisions will need to be made on which areas the association wants to focus its 
limited resources. The extent to which TanEA wants to engage with the monitoring subsector or 
how much effort will be required to engage with stakeholders working with monitoring and data, 
and those who are in evaluation and other evaluative activities, are important considerations in 
the efforts to strategically position the association. They will also determine which organisational 
members TanEA will pursue.
d. Complexity and transformation
Most problems currently faced by society, and for 
which policy makers must formulate solutions, 
are complex. COVID-19 and climate change are 
good examples. Over the years, evaluators have 
recognised that evaluation tools and approaches 
require updating to remain relevant and responsive 
to users of evaluation evidence (Picciotto, 2019). 
Tools that evaluators have traditionally used are 
programme-centric and rely on neat programme 
results frameworks and theories of change. In recent 
times, however, post-implementation assessments 
have come under pressure as information is needed 
more rapidly. In addition, programme performance 
is influenced by numerous factors beyond the 
boundaries of programmes. 
The extent to which 
TanEA wants to engage 
with the monitoring 
subsector or how much 
effort will be required to 
engage with stakeholders 
working with monitoring 
and data, and those 
who are in evaluation 
and other evaluative 
activities, are important 
considerations in the 
efforts to strategically 
position the association. 
Tools that evaluators have 
traditionally used are 
programme-centric and 
rely on neat programme 
results frameworks and 
theories of change. In 
recent times, however, post-
implementation assessments 
have come under pressure as 
information is needed more 
rapidly.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
23
Governments are also having to align with global measurements such as the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) that are interrelated in ways that are unpredictable and uncontrolled. 
Evaluators are increasingly drawing on complexity theories and systems thinking to respond 
(Schwandt, Ofir, Lucks, El-Saddick & D’errico, 2017) and using big data in evaluations. Evaluators 
are increasingly being being called upon to focus on transformational change and to not limit their 
functions to measuring the achievement of programme ob jectives. 
These developments require the profession to expand its efforts from simply answering questions 
about the effect of programmes on participants and to move into the realm of determining whether 
interventions are challenging and altering the prevailing embedded unequal power structures that are 
responsible for poverty and inequality. A failure to clearly demonstrate how evaluation contributes 
to transformation of unequal societal power structures can 
limit the interest the public takes in evaluation. Evaluators 
unable to link their work to an agenda of transformation 
will struggle to help communities counter the onslaught of 
fake news, ‘alternative truth’, and the rise of populist ideas 
based on misinformation. The COVID-19 pandemic offers 
both a challenge and an opportunity for associations to 
convince policy makers and society of the inestimable value 
of M&E evidence in helping countries navigate the complex 
problems that they face.
e. Visibility should be linked to organisation 
sustainability
At the start of this pro ject the problem was regarded as 
that of visibility in that the association was perceived as 
not being recognised and, in some cases, not known by 
important partners. This could be attributed largely to poor 
communication. However, as the report demonstrates, 
the problem goes beyond communication and is closely 
associated with strategic positioning with partners and 
practitioners. 
The 2017–2021 strategic plan rightfully places recognition by partners (specifically government) as 
not an end in itself, but rather as an enabler to cultivate a robust evaluation system and foster a 
culture of learning in government. Any plans to raise the profile and expand the sphere of influence 
of the association should not neglect the following critical aspects of organisational activity: 
potential sources of revenue (both now and into the future), strengthening the capacity of the 
organisation, growing the membership, the future leadership of the organisation, and sustaining 
members’ commitment to the association.
The COVID-19 pandemic 
offers both a challenge 
and an opportunity 
for associations to 
convince policy makers 
and society of the 
inestimable value of 
M&E evidence in helping 
countries navigate the 
complex problems that 
they face.
<<<PAGE=30>>>
24
References
Amisi. M. M. and Chirau, J.T. (2019). Strengthening Regional Evaluation Capacity-Building through Local 
Partnerships: Emerging issues and recommendations from CLEAR-AA’s 2018 regional strategy 
workshops. 
CLEAR-AA (2019). Compass: Tracking monitoring and evaluation developments in Anglophone Africa. 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
Hogen, R.L. (2007). The Historical Development of Program Evaluation: Exploring Past and Present. Online 
Journal of Workforce Education and Development Volume II, Issue 4 Fall 2007. Accessed 15 April 
from: https://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1056&context=ojwed
Kriel, L. (2007). How to Build Evaluation Associations and Networks: Learning from the Pioneers. In Segone, 
M. and Ocampo, A. (eds.). Creating and developing evaluation organizations -lessons learned from 
Africa, Americas, Asia, Australia and Europe.
Picciotto, R. (2019). Is evaluation obsolete in a post-truth world? Evaluation and Program Planning 
73 (2019) 88–96. Accessed from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S014971891830329X?via%3Dihub 
Schwandt, T., Ofir, Z., Lucks, D., El-Saddick and D’Errico, S. (2017). Evaluation: a crucial ingredient for 
SDG success. In Evaluation Matters. Third Quarter, 2017.p8-15. 
Segone. M. (2009). Enhancing evidence-based policy making through country-led monitoring and  
evaluation systems. M. Segone (Ed.), (2009). 
Country-led monitoring and evaluation systems: 
Better evidence, better policies, better development results: Retrieved from:  http://mymande.
org/sites/default/files/images/Country_ledMEsystems.pdf
Tanzania Evaluation Association (2015). Reinvigorating TanEA for Promoting Evidence Based Policy 
Decisions and 2015 International Year of Evaluation
Tanzania Evaluation Association (2017). Tanzania Evaluation Association (TanEA) STRATEGIC PLAN: 
2017-21 
Tanzania Evaluation Association (2019). Extracts from mid-year report Jan-June 2019. 
The World Bank (2017). The United Republic of Tanzania Systematic Country Diagnostic. Accessed 05 
May 2020, from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/510681488823616126/pdf/TZ-
SCD-Final-Approved-by-AFRVP-03012017.pdf 
WEBSITES VISITED 
https://vopetoolkit.ioce.net/en/section/3-carrying-out-vope-work Accessed 18 April 2020
http://tanea.or.tz/index.php/community/ Accessed numerous times 
https://afrea.org/about-membership/# Accessed 16 April 2020 
https://ioce.net/vopes Accessed 12 April 2020 
CONTACT DETAILS
Website: http://www.tanea.or.tz/
Email: tzevaluation@gmail.com; tzevaluation@tanea.or.tz 
Phone: +255 752626252
<<<PAGE=31>>>

<<<PAGE=32>>>
