<<<PAGE=1>>>
Intangible Capital
IC, 2024 – 20(1): 60-88 – Online ISSN: 1697-9818 – Print ISSN: 2014-3214
https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants of  innovative behavior from the perspective 
of  individual factors: A conceptual framework
Yesica Corzo-Morales* 
 , Orlando E. Contreras-Pacheco 
Universidad Industrial de Santander (Colombia)
*Corresponding author: yesica2208427@correo.uis.edu.co, 
ocontrer@uis.edu.co 
Received June, 2023
Accepted November, 2023
Abstract
Purpose: This  study  outlines  the  structured  dimensions  of  innovative  work  behavior  (IWB).  It
interprets and associates the underlying characteristics found in the existing literature to develop a
conceptual framework, which provides a comprehensive overview of  IWB from the perspective of
individual factors. This study also identifies the cognitive and behavioral determinants of  individual
innovative  behavior  and  the  most  related  management  theories.  Furthermore,  it  investigates  the
quantitative modeling methods used to explore this phenomenon and recommends practical managerial
applications to promote employees’ innovative behavior. 
Design/methodology/approach: The  conceptual framework was developed through a systematic
literature review, following three fundamental stages: 1) planning, 2) development, and 3) synthesis of
the review. We retrieved 637 documents, spanning a 5-year time frame, from both Scopus and Web of
Science  academic  information  indexing  and  retrieval  systems.  Subsequently,  seven  inclusion  and
exclusion criteria were applied to determine the eligibility of  the studies, incorporating the guidelines
from the PRISMA statement. The final sample consisted of  49 scientific articles that answered five
guiding questions, leading to the integration of  the framework.
Findings: This study examines the dimensions of  IWB—that is, the generation, introduction, and
realization of  ideas—by analyzing the fundamental properties mentioned by the authors of  the selected
documentary  sample.  It  further  identifies  48  determinants  of  IWB,  categorized  under  three
organizational management theories: personality traits, self-determination, and social exchange theories.
This study also analyzes the applied quantitative research methods, business sectors, and countries
investigated, identifying the most commonly used methods and most frequently investigated sectors and
countries. Additionally, it highlights the current research agenda for promoting IWB as an enabler of
competitive organizational development. Finally, we present a conceptual framework that provides a
theoretical structure for understanding individual IWB. 
Practical implications: We clarify the current research landscape of  IWB in an organizational context.
We also help identify the level of  academic interest in this subject for future studies. Furthermore, we
compile valuable recommendations for business managers aiming to enhance the competencies of  their
workforce in managing innovative processes.
Originality/value: We introduce a new conceptual framework for IWB that considers its primary
strategic purposes. Therefore, this study is a reference point for future empirical innovation management
studies. It provides a classification of  individual-level determinants with a cognitive and behavioral
focus,  incorporating  constructs  such  as  spirituality,  altruism,  ethical  and  empathic  behaviors,  and
resilience.
-60-
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Keywords:  Innovative work behavior, Individual innovation, Determinants of  innovative behavior, Innovation, 
Conceptual framework, Literature review.
Jel Codes: M12, M19
To cite this article: 
Corzo-Morales, Y ., & Contreras-Pacheco, O.E. (2024). Determinants of innovative behavior from the perspective 
of individual factors: A conceptual framework. Intangible Capital, 20(1), 60-88. https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389 
1. Introduction
Thriving  in  the  ever-evolving  business  landscape  demands  that  organizations  boldly  embrace  innovation,
relentlessly reinvent themselves, and navigate the complexities of  a digitally interconnected world to secure a
lasting competitive edge (Nöhammer & Stichlberger, 2019). From this perspective, the relevant literature has
demonstrated  that  innovation  at  work  is  a  key  factor  in  organizational  performance  and  effectiveness
(Colombelli, Haned & Le Bas, 2013; Wang, Gao & Panaccio, 2021). Innovations in products, services, and
business  and  industrial  concepts  allow  organizations  to  differentiate  themselves  from  their  competitors
(Almulhim, 2020). Furthermore, process and organizational innovations increase operational efficiency, reduce
costs, and enhance profitability (Alnajjar & Hashim, 2020; Thornhill, 2006). To obtain these benefits, it is
essential to leverage the innovative potential of  teams and individuals within organizations (Agarwal, 2014; Chen
& Huang, 2009; Migdadi, 2022).
However, despite the growing awareness of  the importance of  this phenomenon, most research has focused on
traditional approaches, overlooking a crucial aspect: the individual is a fundamental driver of  innovation in the
workplace (Lee, Pak, Kim & Li, 2019; Mariz-Perez, Teijeiro-Alvarez & Garcìa-Alvarez, 2012; Tajeddini & Martin,
2020). This study delves into the underexplored territory of  the individual factors that drive Innovative Work
Behavior (IWB) and presents a conceptual framework that aims to highlight this critical dimension.
Individual-level IWB is represented by  an employee’s intention to introduce or apply new ideas, products,
processes, and procedures to their work roles (Yuan & Woodman, 2010). It is also framed as critical thinking,
which enables the recognition of  potential problems and the exploration of  opportunities and solutions to create
value  (Alessa  & Durugbo, 2021). According  to the  literature, research  into the  determinants of  IWB  has
explored three types of  factors: (a) individual factors including attitudes and cognitive abilities; (b) job-related
factors  that  encompass  job  characteristics,  such  as  job  complexity;  and  (c)  contextual  factors,  such  as
organizational climate (Hammond, Neff, Farr, Schwall & Zhao, 2011).
Several literature reviews have focused on the individual-, contextual-, and organizational-level determinants
of  IWB (Anderson, Potočnik & Zhou, 2014; Crossan & Apaydin, 2010). Recommendations have also been
made in research on individual innovation based on teamwork (Hülsheger, Anderson & Salgado, 2009). Prior
systematic reviews have addressed the impact of  learning behaviors in work teams on innovative behavior,
arguing that learning and innovation are mutually dependent (Widmann, Messmann & Mulder, 2016). The link
between human resource practices and employee IWB has also been investigated (Bos-Nehles, Renkema &
Janssen,  2017).  Pérez-Peñalver,  Aznar-Mas  and Montero-Fleta  (2018)  evaluated  individual  innovation
performance  in  organizations  by  presenting  an  innovation  model  that  integrates  idea  generation  and
implementation with creativity, critical thinking, initiative, teamwork, and networking. Alessa and Durugbo
(2021) provided an overview of  existing knowledge on management concepts and contributions to IWB
research from 2000 to 2019.
Despite the continuous evolution of  the literature on factors affecting innovative work behavior, there is a need
to expand, analyze, consolidate, and integrate the results of  previous research focusing on the determinants
influencing employees’ IWB (Alessa & Durugbo, 2021; Anser, Yousaf, Yasir, Sharif, Nasir, Rasheed et al., 2022;
Bos-Nehles & Veenendaal, 2017). This review adds value and originality by providing a theoretical framework
-61-
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
that enhances the understanding of  the concepts, dimensions, properties, and determinants associated with
individual-level IWB, analyzing research from 2017 to 2022. To fulfill this objective, a systematic literature review
serves  as  the  primary  input  of  this  study.  Through  this  approach,  the  research  offers  several  theoretical
contributions and clarifies five specific research questions.
Q1. What are the key concepts of  IWB, its dimensions, and properties?
Q2. What individual-level determinants have the greatest influence on employees’ IWB?
Q3. What are the main economic sectors addressed by this research topic?
Q4. What are the most commonly used quantitative modeling techniques for the study of  IWB?
Q5. What research gaps are evident in the literature on employee IWB, based on individual factors?
The  conceptual framework is presented by  analyzing and synthesizing different theoretical approaches in
management, empirical research, and practical applications. This research not only fills an evident gap in the
existing literature, but also provides organizations with an evidence-based roadmap to foster innovation in
their workforce. In the competitive landscape of  business, where innovation is a key differentiating element,
such studies are perceived as useful and necessary for the advancement and survival of  organizations and
institutions.
The remainder of  this manuscript is structured as follows: Section two describes the methodology. Section three
synthesizes the results and classifies the general concepts of  IWB, followed by analysis. Section four presents the
conceptual framework of  the study. Section five discusses the findings. Finally, conclusions are presented in
section six.
2. Methodology
Constructing a conceptual framework  involves creating a structure of  complex relationships that encompass
concepts, theories, practices, and criteria for a specific topic (Díaz, Demissew, Carabias, Joly, Lonsdale, Ash et al.,
2015). This approach allows for a clear and concise interpretation through the systematic review approach
proposed by Tranfield,  Denyer and Smart  (2003). Following Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, Altman, Altman, Antes
et al. (2009), this systematic review provides a comprehensive literature overview. It establishes connections
among existing knowledge through a comprehensive strategy that enables the identification, evaluation, and
synthesis of  reliable information. Additionally, the recognition that a systematic literature review can contribute
to framework development is widely acknowledged, as evidenced by its application in numerous studies (Alessa
& Durugbo, 2021; Crossan & Apaydin, 2010).
Subsequently, adopting a conceptual framework in this study provides a structure for organizing the literature
related to IWB from the perspective of  individual factors. This framework not only facilitates understanding of
the dimensions of  IWB but also allows the identification and association of  underlying properties in the existing
literature, thereby contributing to the consolidation of  a global view of  this phenomenon and the coherent
integration of  related management theories. Ultimately, this theoretical approach not only helps fill a gap in
existing research, but also has practical applications, offering organizations a valuable reference framework for
understanding and promoting the innovative behavior of  employees more effectively.  The systematic review
approach of  Tranfield et al. (2003) consists of  three stages: 1). Planning - establishing the objective and search
strategy; 2) review development - describing how data are identified, selected, and evaluated using the PRISMA
flowchart to represent the number of  reviewed studies; and 3) synthesis and analysis of  information. In this final
stage, the bibliometric analysis process is a preliminary step in the development of  the guiding questions used to
examine the profile and research structure (i.e., distribution, knowledge areas, main sources of  publication,
frequent words, and co-citation network of  authors) of  the sample obtained on the study topic (Kostoff,
Tshiteya, Pfeil, Humenik & Karypis, 2005).
In  addition,  the  content  analysis  process  addresses  the  five  guiding  questions.  These  include  the  theories,
concepts, properties, determinants, methods, countries, and sectors studied in previous research on IWB. The
result  is  the  integration  of  a  conceptual  framework  that  simplifies  the  complex  innovation  interactions
experienced by employees in their work environment.
-62-
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
2.1. Stage 1: Planning
The objective of  the first stage was to evaluate the research profiles of  the selected studies. This stage included
analyzing publication  trends,  author  productivity,  geographic  scope,  predominant research  designs, and the
quantitative techniques used. Additionally, a search strategy and protocol were developed to identify relevant
databases and key terms for the search equation to find matches in article titles, abstracts, and content, along
with the inclusion and exclusion criteria for selecting the study sample. Following similar guidelines to literature
reviews focused on innovation management and current selection time frames (Betancur,  Pardo del Val &
Martínez-Pérez, 2022; Idris & Durmuşoğlu, 2021), the systematic literature review was conducted for academic
products found between January 1, 2017, and September 9, 2021. Details of  the strategies used are presented in
Table 1.
Strategy Description
Search Engine
The study utilized academic information indexing and retrieval systems Scopus and Web of  Science 
(WoS). This decision was based on criteria of  availability, information accessibility, precise filtering, 
and being renowned references for academic quality, indexing peer-reviewed publications across 
multiple domains and research topics (Wilt & Fink, 2007).
Key Terms
A preliminary retrospective search defined logical operators and tested various keywords by iterating 
alternative equations. The best results were obtained with an equation focused on the terms: 
“Individual Predictors of  Innovative Behavior” OR “Determinants of  Innovative Behavior” OR 
“Innovative work behavior”.
Inclusion criteria
• Publications between 2017 and 2021.
• Document type: Scientific articles published in peer-reviewed journals.
• Language: English.
• Study design: Quantitative empirical studies.
• Results demonstrating the influence of  individual factors on innovative behavior.
Exclusion criteria
• Document type: Proceedings, book chapters, books, or other.
• Study design: Qualitative studies.
• Studies not presenting empirical research on individual innovative behavior
Table 1. Development of  the search strategy
2.2. Stage 2: Review Development
During this stage, the PRISMA flowchart, a tool that facilitates the organized graphical representation of  a
process in four phases (identification, screening, eligibility, and final inclusion of  the selected sample), was
employed (Moher et al., 2009). In the identification phase, 552 and 157 studies were collected from Scopus and
WoS, respectively, resulting in 709 documents. Upon review, 72 duplicates were removed, resulting in a final
selection of  637 studies from the period between 2017 and September 9, 2021.
Following the guidelines of  Botha and Steyn (2020), the inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the period,
publication  in  English,  and  type  of  document  (scientific  article)  were  applied  in  the  screening  phase.
Consequently, the number of  documents was reduced to 473. In the eligibility phase, a joint review of  the
remaining 379 documents was conducted by evaluating the titles, abstracts, and objectives of  each article to
ensure correspondence with the established quality protocol. We verified that there were no discrepancies in the
selection of  impact or experimental studies that included questionnaires on IWB. This joint review identified 85
relevant studies and excluded 294.
Finally, the document sample was organized and stored using the Mendeley reference manager in the inclusion
phase. At this stage, an individual content analysis of  the selected studies was conducted, resulting in the
exclusion of  36 articles that were not closely related. This process yielded a final sample of  49 documents.
Figure 1 illustrates this process.
2.3. Stage 3: Information Analysis
The selected document sample was processed through bibliometric analysis using the Bibliometrix package in
RStudio and Scopus software, as described in the results section. This analysis allows for the assessment of  the
impact of  scientific activity  in specific  periods (Arbeláez & Onrubia, 2014). Subsequently,  an analysis was
-63-
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
conducted by thoroughly reading the 49 selected articles, individually identifying and classifying information
corresponding to the five guiding questions. The following section presents the results of  the bibliometric and
content analyses.
Studies in Scopus (n=552) Studies in WOS (n=157) 
Records after deleting duplicates (n=637) 
Selected records (n=473) 
Excluded Articles (n=164)
Inclusion criteria: time period, document
type and English language
Record selected for detailed evaluation (n=85)
Excluded Items(n=294)
Not ideal subject matter after evaluating
the document.
Included studies that meet all criteria and 
provide information
(n=49)
Excluded Articles with Motives (n=36)
They do not measure specific variables at
the level of individual factors.
IN CLUDED ELIGIBILITY SCREEN IN G IDEN TIFICACIÓN Total Items (n=709)
Total records screened (n=379) Excluded Articles (n=94)
Exclusion criteria: qualitative study
method.
Figure 1. Study selection flowchart, according to PRISMA guidelines (Moher et al., 2009)
3. Results
In this section, we present the bibliometric analysis. It includes the distribution of  the selected IWB sample by
year, the study areas of  greatest interest, the main research sources, associated terms, researchers, and the
co-citation network. Subsequently, answers to the five guiding questions are presented (AR1, AR2, AR3, AR4,
and AR5), shedding light on the theoretical framework of  IWB.
3.1. Bibliometric Analysis of  Information
The results of  the bibliometric analysis suggest significant growth in research on IWB during the analyzed
production period (see Figure 2). This trend supports claims from previous studies, highlighting a marked
research interest and active agenda, with opportunities to continue exploring how IWB emerges from individual
factors (Alessa & Durugbo, 2021; Bos-Nehles & Veenendaal, 2017).
Note: Data consulted with a cut-off  date of  September 9, 2021
Figure 2. Distribution of  annual production (Scopus, 2021)
-64-
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
The  identified  areas  of  study  with  the  highest  interest  in  this  topic  include  Management,  Business,  and
Accounting (n = 29), Social Sciences (n = 16), and Psychology (n = 7). This observation reinforces the existing
research interconnection between analyzing phenomena related to organizational behavior and business contexts
linked to information technologies, as suggested by Nöhammer and Stichlberger (2019).
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
innovative work behavior
innovative behavior
innovation
knowledge sharing
creativity
creative self-efficacy
work engagement
employees
psychological empowerment
motivation
workplace
curiosity
self-determination theory
job satisfaction
organizational behavior
emotional intelligence
Frequency
Words
Keywords by Author
Figure 3. Frequency of  keywords indexed by author (Bibliometrix)
Regarding the main publication sources, the leading journal in terms of  the number of  publications was the
European Journal of  Management (EJM)  (n =  6) from the Academy of  Business & Economics, followed by the
International Journal of  Innovation Management (n = 4) from the International Society for Professional Innovation
Management (ISPIM), which is a globally renowned entity in this research field. Additionally, the most frequently
used keywords per author were identified to understand the intellectual structure better (see Figure 3).
Regarding the leading researchers in IWB research during the evaluation period, prominent figures included
Professor Bilar Afsar, PhD. in Leadership and Innovation Management (Asian Institute of  Technology, Bangkok,
Thailand)  (n =  4) and Professor Yousaf  Zahid, PhD. in Management Sciences (Hazara University, Pakistan)
(n = 3). The  authors’ co-citation networks were also analyzed to gain a more comprehensive view of  the
sample’s  structure  and  knowledge  connections.  This  network  was  generated  from  the  data  processed  in
Bibliometrix using bibliographic coupling and the number of  shared references between two documents to
measure similarity. The greater the overlap in bibliographies, the stronger the connection. The node size reflects
the author’s impact, and the link thickness represents the co-citation relationships. Figure 4 presents a co-citation
network illustrating the intellectual structure.
In general, the network consists of  five groups differentiated by color, although collaborative work is reflected
among them. The purple group includes 11 authors, highlighting Scott and Bruce’s (1994) dominant position and
its  focus  on  integrating  research  streams  into  the  antecedents  of  innovation  and  developing  a  model  of
individual innovative behavior. The blue group comprises 13 authors, led by Yuan and Woodman (2010), whose
research focuses on IWB. The orange group features positions equivalent to those of  the 11 authors, and
Amabile (1988) is a prominent figure exploring creativity and innovation management in depth. The green group
connects ten authors with Hammond (2011) and De Jong and Den-Hartog (2010) in key roles. Finally, the red
group includes four authors.
-65-
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Figure 4. Co-citation network intellectual structure (Bibliometrix)
3.2. Guiding Questions Results
This  section  introduces  the  key  concepts  of  individual-level  IWB,  as  presented  by  various  authors.  The
dimensions of  IWB are identified and related, along with the properties discussed in the selected literature.
Following  a  sequential  perspective  to  develop  the  corresponding  conceptual  framework,  each  article  is
categorized into a distinct group during the systematic review process. This allows the determinants of  IWB to
be  grouped  according  to  three  theoretical  approaches  (personality  traits  and  individual  attributes,
self-determination, and social exchange).
Furthermore, we present the analysis results regarding the quantitative techniques used, the countries studied,
and the economic sectors addressed. Finally, we identify gaps that suggest future research directions in this field.
Thus, the study answers the guiding questions (AQ1, AQ2, AQ3, AQ4, and AQ5), allowing for the construction
of  the corresponding framework.
AQ1. What are the key concepts of  innovative behavior, its dimensions, and its properties?
a) Key concepts about employee IWB:
Academic  literature  has explored the  characteristics  and indicators of  innovative  people  in the  workplace,
focusing on individual-level IWB (Scott & Bruce, 1994; Yuan & Woodman, 2010). During the analysis process,
-66-
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
the key IWB concepts proposed by the sample authors (eight documents) were identified and labeled based on
their research (see Table 2). Additionally, three fundamental concepts were incorporated (Kanter, 1988; Scott &
Bruce, 1994; West & Farr, 1989) and are present in many of  the 49 selected studies. It is important to highlight
that not all the studies had the main objective of  establishing a specific definition of  IWB.
Research on individual-level innovative behavior has demonstrated continual growth. Specific interpretations
range from employees generating ideas outside the traditional context (Kanter, 1988) to complex processes
culminating in the commercialization of  real products or services (Bos-Nehles et al., 2017; Janssen, 2000; Scott
& Bruce, 1994). In this context, this study conceptualizes IWB as complex employee attitudes and behavior,
involving a multistage process including generating, creating, developing, applying, promoting, and launching
novel ideas. This is to achieve internal and external benefits for the organization, thus ensuring competitive
advantage.
Definition Author and year
A complex and non-routine behavior in which employees defend their new ideas 
while avoiding traditional thinking.
Kanter, 1988
The sum of  individual actions for the creation, introduction, and intentional 
application of  new ideas, which could benefit performance within a work role, group, 
or organization.
West & Farr, 1989
The generation, promotion, and realization of  ideas. Scott & Bruce, 1994
A series of  individual behaviors and actions aimed at the generation and introduction 
of  a new idea that is important and useful, intending to enhance organizational 
performance through its development and implementation.
De Jong & Den Hartog, 2010 
It refers to intentional behavior to generate, process, and develop new ideas in a 
complex and iterative process.
Ummi, Razali, Zuraini, Amlus, & 
Razak, 2019 
It is multi-stage behavior that attempts to improve processes, products, or procedures 
and ultimately culminates in implementing a new idea in a work role, group, or 
organization.
Saether, 2019
It is related to proactivity in generating, searching, communicating, and implementing 
novel ideas.
Bin & Kassim, 2019
The generation, exploration, defense, and application of  ideas and opportunities that 
lead to novel products.
Asurakkody & Kim, 2020
It is the ability to work actively to generate ideas, produce new products, and find new
markets and processes.
Linh, Tran, Doan, Van Nguyen, 
2020
It is the generation, production, processing, and application of  new ideas to improve 
efficiency and organizational processes.
Abukhait, Bani-Melhem & Mohd-
Shamsudin, 2020
All individual actions aimed at generating, introducing, and applying novel ideas are 
beneficial at any organizational level.
Hosseini & Haghighi, 2021
Table 2. Grouping of  concepts on individual innovative work behavior
b) Dimensions and identification of  properties:
The  literature  on  IWB  has  identified  this  concept  as  a  multidimensional  global  construct  that  captures
employee performance and behavior to contribute to the innovation process (De Jong & Den Hartog, 2010).
Although some authors have suggested that IWB consists of  only two dimensions (Yuan & Woodman, 2010),
the majority conceptualize it as encompassing three dimensions: idea generation, introduction, and realization
(Scott & Bruce, 1994). In this study, the authors who expressed their positions regarding the theoretical
dimensions of  IWB are labeled. However, only 22% of  the documents analyzed provided interpretations
regarding IWB dimensions.
The  first  stage  corresponds  to idea  generation,  where  employees identify  problems and opportunities and
develop novel and useful ideas to address everyday challenges at work, thus optimizing the existing capabilities of
the organization (Hosseini & Haghighi, 2021; Linh et al., 2020). The second stage involves the introduction or
promotion of  the ideas. It addresses employees’ ability to establish connections with individuals who can provide
the necessary support to launch ideas (Ummi et al., 2019). The third stage is idea realization, which refers to
-67-
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
producing products or services that can be implemented and utilized within a work role, group, or organization.
The view of  IWB dimensions is based on the concept described by Scott and Bruce (1994), as this perspective
provides a more complete and broader approach to understanding individual innovation.
Accordingly,  we  categorized  the  descriptive  properties  associated  with  the  generation,  promotion,  and
realization  of  ideas.  Descriptive  properties  are  the  different  elements  that  influence  and  qualitatively
characterize a profile, group, community, object, or process subjected to analysis to deepen and provide a
greater understanding of  the phenomenon under study (Hernández, Fernández & Baptista, 2014). In the first
review, all observable data that presented similarities were grouped according to the conceptual descriptions
proposed by the authors of  the selected sample. Items that showed similar behaviors were included only once.
However, the authors who supported these properties at the process level were related. Table 3 shows the
classification of  the properties of  the idea generation dimension, as argued by the authors, corresponding to
22% of  the selected sample.
Regarding the introduction of  ideas, only 24% of  the authors addressed the properties described in Table 4.
Generation of  Ideas Dimension
Properties Fountain
Creative ideas that vary daily are presented and influenced by personal and 
situational factors.
Helmy, Adawiyah & Setyawati, 2020; 
Kustanto, Hamidah, Eliyana, Santri-
Mumpuni & Gunawan, 2020; Laguna, 
Mielniczuk & Gorgievski, 2021; Liu, Xu & 
Zhang, 2020; Obeidat, 2021
Critical thinking is introduced to develop “outside the box” ideas that go 
beyond expectations.
Derin, Toker & Gorener, 2021; Kustanto et 
al., 2020
A complex and proactive behavior is presented to generate practical, 
realistic, and feasible ideas.
Afsar, Al-Ghazali, Cheema & Javed, 2020; 
Hafeez, Panatik, Rahman, Rajab, Abu-Bakar
& Norazman, 2019
Internal and external knowledge is recombined in new patterns. Işık, Aydın, Dogru, Rehman, Alvarado, 
Ahmad et al., 2021
It incorporates searching for existing information, technologies, or materials 
to develop and generate new approaches, methods, and work techniques.
Bibi & Afsar, 2020; Bin-Saeed, Afsar, 
Shahjehan & Imad-Shah, 2019
Table 3. Properties of  the idea generation dimension
Introduction of  Ideas Dimension
Properties Fountain
Interactions between colleagues and supervisors facilitate information and 
support the management of  new ideas.
Afsar et al., 2020; Arsawan, Rajiani, Wirga &
Suryantini, 2020; Clarke & Higgs, 2020; 
Derin et al., 2021
Common expectations, knowledge, experience, and timely information 
about the new idea or problem solution are shared with stakeholders.
Bin & Kassim, 2019; Helmy et al., 2020; Işık
et al., 2021; Kustanto et al., 2020; Wang et 
al., 2021
The advantages and disadvantages of  creative solutions to problems 
involving substantial deviations are evaluated.
Abukhait et al., 2020; Ren, Zhang & Wei, 
2021
Strategic alliances and financial support are identified to consolidate the idea 
and benefit the team and organization.
Liu et al., 2020
Agreements are developed, and appropriate stakeholders with the power to 
make decisions are recognized.
Abdullah, Ahmad, Ahmad, Mohd Khatijah, 
Fazida et al., 2019
Table 4. Properties of  the idea introduction dimension
Regarding the realization of  ideas, only 6% clarified and described its characteristics, as shown in Table 5.
-68-
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Realization of  Ideas Dimension
Properties Fountain
It occurs through cooperation and the contribution of  employees’ resources, 
knowledge, and skills.
Kmieciak, 2020
A proactive behavior is developed, focusing on enthusiasm, consistency, and 
persistence in applying the idea.
Alnajjar & Hashim, 2020
An action-based approach is used to develop goals, gather information, plan, 
and execute ideas.
Hafeez et al., 2019
Table 5. Properties of  the idea realization dimension
AQ2. What are the individual-level determinants that have the greatest influence on employees’ IWB? 
Toward a classification of  determinants influencing employees’ IWB and its practical implications
This study reviews the spectrum of  theoretical lenses used (highly cited articles) during the content analysis
process. In this process, each article was labeled under three categories related to management theories addressed
by the authors of  the sample. The first category was associated with personality traits and individual attributes,
accounting for 39% of  the selected articles, equivalent to 19 studies. The second category, concerning self-
determination theory, comprised 31% of  the documentary sample, equivalent to 15 studies. The third category,
at 26% (13 studies), was related to knowledge management and social exchange theories. The remaining 2%
included two studies corresponding to theory categories one and three. The influential determinants of  IWB that
were positively evaluated in these studies were then classified. Similarly, the most relevant practical implications
presented by the authors to strengthen and develop employees’ competencies and skills were included. It is
important to note that some studies are simultaneously related to two theories. The groupings are presented
below, and the findings are summarized in Tables 6, 7, and 8.
Category 1. Theory of  Personality Traits and Individual Attributes
Personality trait theory suggests that certain specific traits and attributes influence how a person chooses, adapts
to, and shapes their surrounding environment (Tett & Burnett, 2003). Trait theory has demonstrated how and
why employees vary in their ability to generate innovative behaviors at work (Afsar et al., 2020; Hammond et al.,
2011; Mustafa, Coetzer, Ramos & Fuhrer, 2021; Woods, Mustafa, Anderson & Sayer, 2018).
The studies reviewed in this work explored the effects of  personality (Ummi et al., 2019), emotional intelligence
(Hafeez et al., 2019; Malik, 2021), altruism (Alnajjar & Hashim, 2020), positive affect (Laguna et al., 2021); work
commitment and cultural Intelligence (Afsar et al., 2020; Hosseini & Haghighi, 2021); awareness and openness to
experience (Abdullah et al., 2019; Mustafa et al., 2021; Sabahattin, 2020); multiple personality traits (Stock, Groß
& Xin, 2019); adaptability, work curiosity, and resilience.
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Personality Traits 
(PT), 
Conscientiousness 
(CO), Openness to 
Experience (OE), Job
Satisfaction (JS).
JS (internal state expressed by the affective 
and/or cognitive evaluation of  work 
experience) was positively related to the 
generation, introduction, and realization of  
ideas. OE (the level of  individuals’ curiosity, 
imagination, and openness to new ideas) and
CO (associated with superior task 
performance - conscientious employees tend
to be hardworking, persistent, and 
goal-oriented by nature) moderated the 
relationships between JS and IWB.
Managers and owners of  small
and medium-sized businesses 
in the manufacturing sector 
might consider using 
personality tests during the 
hiring phase. Doing so can be 
beneficial in identifying and 
selecting employees who are 
likely to demonstrate a 
propensity to engage in 
innovative behaviors. Likewise,
to take advantage of  
employees’ strengths, assigning
them roles/tasks that best suit 
their personality characteristics
is recommended.
Mustafa et al., 2021
The Big Five PT 
(5-T), JS, 
Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior 
(OCB).
OCB (beneficial and favorable attitudes of  
employees) plays a mediating role in the 
relationship between the 5-PT (OE, CO, 
extraversion, agreeableness, neuroticism) 
and JS, directly affecting IWB.
Sabahattin, 2020
-69-
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
OE. The authors stated that OE is a significant 
determinant of  IWB, as it accounts for 
employees’ intelligence and high curiosity in 
a wide range of  creative areas and levels of  
analysis.
Managers in the banking sector
are recommended to submit 
candidates to work personality 
adjustment tests during the 
recruitment and selection 
process to identify appropriate 
profiles for organizational 
innovation.
Abdullah et al., 
2019
Personality. Personality (external and internal aspects of  
an individual’s character) positively affects 
individual IWB.
The employer must promote 
the training and development 
of  skills that strengthen 
employees’ personality and 
improve the organizational 
culture.
Ummi et al., 2019
Hyper-core 
Self-Evaluations 
(Hyper-CSE)
Hyper-CSE (a multifaceted personality trait 
that subsumes the notions of  locus of  
control, self-esteem, and self-efficacy) 
positively affects innovative thinking in 
senior executives.
Those responsible for 
recruiting professionals for 
management-level positions 
must implement tests 
evaluating personality and 
performance aspects.
Stock et al., 2019
Political Skills (PS),
Self-Efficacy (SE).
PS (skills that an individual uses to observe 
and interpret the actions of  the social 
environment and propose influential 
strategies) is positively associated with IWB 
through SE in the breadth of  the role (the 
perceived ability of  an employee to carry out
a broader work task proactively).
Developing programs for 
public sector employees that 
increase PS through practical 
workshops is recommended.
Clarke & Higgs, 
2020
Knowledge 
Self-Efficacy (KSE),
Altruism.
Personal factors such as KSE (an 
individual’s judgment of  his or her ability to 
organize and execute successful 
performance in everyday tasks) and altruism 
(voluntary behavior that seeks to increase 
the well-being of  others) positively impact 
thinking innovatively.
Managers are recommended to
provide beneficial feedback to 
improve employees’ knowledge
and SE.
Nguyen, Nguyen, 
Do & Nguyen, 
2019; Phung, 
Hawryszkiewycz, 
Chandran & Ha, 
2019b*
Work Commitment 
(WC)
WC is defined as the ability of  a person to 
become aware of  and invest all their skills in
a work role. The authors mention that WC 
drives innovation and positively influences 
creativity.
To promote WC, it is 
important to provide 
employees with an 
environment that encourages 
continuous learning through 
teamwork and participatory 
and shared decision-making; 
this, in turn, can drive 
organizational innovation.
Hosseini & 
Haghighi, 2021; 
Koroglu & Ozmen, 
2021
WC, Employee Voice
(EV).
EV has a positive effect on IWB in the 
pharmaceutical sector. The WC of  the 
employees has a mediating role between 
them.
Sifatu, Sjahruddin, 
Fajriah, Dwijendra 
& Santoso, 2020
JS, WC. Both JS and WC positively effect IWB. Arsawan et al., 
2020*
Flow, Employee 
Silence (ES).
The highest levels of  innovative behavior 
occur when the flow level (the mental state 
in which employees enjoy doing their 
motivated work with an optimal level of  
performance and maximum utilization of  
skills) is high and the silence level of  the 
employees are low, allowing them to 
exchange ideas and obtain the necessary 
support and resources.
Managers must establish an 
organizational, supportive, 
independent, and ethical 
climate and design job 
descriptions in ways that 
encourage employees’ intrinsic 
motivations. Companies can 
also overcome ES by 
countering an unfavorable 
reward system, role stress, and 
job insecurity.
Maqbool, Černe & 
Bortoluzzi, 2019
-70-
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Behavioral Courage 
(BC).
BC, understood as the attitude of  courage 
and disposition of  character to achieve 
objectives in the face of  external or internal 
opposition, was positively associated with 
IWB.
The authors recommend that 
hospitality industry managers 
cultivate WRC among their 
staff  by welcoming questions, 
discussion, and knowledge 
sharing. They also propose 
implementing training 
programs focusing on the 
development of  ER.
Bibi & Afsar, 2020
Career Adaptability 
(CA), Work Related 
Curiosity (WRC), 
Employee Resilience 
(ER).
CA is how a person views their ability to 
cope with and capitalize on change in new 
job responsibilities. WRC is a personality 
construct defined as the desire to seek 
knowledge. ER is understood as a set of  
individual skills that allow employees to act 
in times of  uncertainty and adapt quickly to 
changes. These personality constructs are 
significant in the promotion and realization 
of  innovative ideas.
Abukhait et al., 
2020
Emotional 
Intelligence (EI).
EI is defined as the ability to use one’s own 
emotions and those of  others to develop 
relationships. This study demonstrated that 
EI positively impacts employees’ IWB, 
enhancing the ability to generate ideas and 
solve problems.
Organizations can promote the
level of  EI in employees 
through training programs on 
emotion management.
Malik, 2021
Emotional 
Intelligence (EI),
Ambidextrous 
Leadership (AL).
EI (the ability to understand one’s and 
other’s emotions) mediates the relationship 
between AL behavior (the ability to 
encourage exploratory and exploitative 
behaviors in subordinates by increasing the 
generation of  ideas and problem 
recognition) and the IWB.
Authors recommend that 
human resources directors 
promote leadership practices 
and implement exercises to 
control employees’ emotions 
through training.
Hafeez et al., 2019
Altruism, 
Transformational 
Leadership (LT).
The authors identified the mediating role of  
altruism in the relationship between TL 
(social process based on mutual trust between
leaders and their followers) and IWB.
Alnajjar & Hashim, 
2020
Ethical Behaviors 
(EB).
EB (individual attitudes in line with acting 
correctly according to the ethical duties, 
policies, rules, and norms of  organizations) 
significantly affect IWB.
The authors suggest constantly
encouraging EB of  public 
sector employees, promoting 
teamwork, and fostering a 
friendly environment.
Khorakian, 
Mohammadi-
Shahroodi, Jahangir 
& Nikkhah-
Farkhani, 2019)
Cultural Intelligence 
(CUI), Work 
Engagement (WE), 
and Interpersonal 
Trust (IC).
CUI (an employee’s ability to function and 
manage effectively in culturally diverse 
situations and environments) can 
significantly impact employees’ innovative 
work. Furthermore, WE (a situation in 
which employees find work meaningful) and
IT (the extent to which a person trusts and 
is willing to act on the words, actions, and 
decisions of  another) partially mediate the 
effect of  CUI on IWB.
In multinational organizations, 
human resources departments 
can design training programs 
to promote cultural awareness 
through didactic and 
experiential exercises to deeply
understand other cultures 
directly related to the 
company’s stakeholders.
Afsar et al., 2020
Positive Affect (PA). PA refers to consciously accessible feelings 
(emotions and moods) that are unstable and 
depend on events and situations in the work 
context. Enthusiasm and comfort, as high 
arousal effects, can endow a person with 
vigor, allowing engagement in work tasks 
and stimulating creativity to implement new 
ideas.
Learning to regulate work-
related effects and building 
good social relationships may 
be a goal for instructors, 
coaches, and counselors 
working with small business 
owners and managers.
Laguna et al., 2021
Note: (*) signifies determinants associated with the theory of  social exchange presented in Group 3.
Table 6. Determinants and strategies associated with the theory of  personality traits and individual attributes.
-71-
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
These  studies  demonstrate  the  positive  impact  and  connections  of  traits  and  abilities  that  increase  work
productivity and drive innovation in organizations (Ummi et al., 2019). Table 6 describes the determinants of
IWB associated with this theory and presents some of  the main strategies proposed by the authors of  the
selected subsample.
Category 2. Self-Determination Theory
Deci and Ryan’s (2000) self-determination theory is a motivational framework in which individuals have an innate
desire for personal growth and initiative. The authors maintain that understanding human motivation requires
consideration of  the natural psychological needs for competence, autonomy, and relatedness (Deci & Ryan,
2000). Consequently, different researchers have studied parallel psychological processes such as harmonious
passion (Jan & Zainal, 2020), creative self-efficacy (Jan, Zainal & Lata, 2021), the paradox mentality (Liu et al.,
2020),  autonomy  (Saether,  2019),  and  motivation.  Several  authors,  such  as  Wang  et  al. (2021),  argue  that
employees  who  experience  high  motivation  have  a  high  sense  of  agency  and  congruence  between  their
work-related activities and their own identity and interests in working by choice. However, according to Ren et al.
(2021), external factors such as financial stress can affect an employee’s autonomous motivation that generates
innovative behavior. Saether (2019) and Bawuro, Shamsuddin, Wahab and Usman (2019) allude to the fact that
work-style and the synchronicity that an employee may have with their work activities generate motivation to
execute their work, thereby increasing the generation of  ideas. Bin and Kassim (2019) mentioned that the
creative process generated in a motivated employee requires intellectual stimuli that strengthen the individual’s
rationality to find novel solutions to problems.
In recent research, person-organization fit has been tested as a trigger for autonomous work motivation, which
generates greater innovative behavior (Bawuro et al., 2019; Saether, 2019). From another perspective, some
authors emphasize the variables that strengthen the effects of  an employee’s motivation to remain involved in
creative  and  innovative  work  processes.  Specifically,  psychological  empowerment  and  its  dimensions  are
discussed: meaning, competence, self-determination, impact (Bin & Kassim, 2019), and leadership attitudes that
influence  and  motivate  others  toward  innovative  behavior  (Kustanto  et  al.,  2020).  Table  7  describes  the
determinants of  this theory and the strategies proposed by the authors of  the subsample.
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Autonomous 
Motivation (AM)
The authors mention that autonomous 
motivation (when people who engage in a 
work activity have a full sense of  
disposition) has a positive relationship 
with IWB.
Better salary guarantees can 
help improve employees’ AM 
and improve job performance 
significantly.
Ren et al., 2021 
Autonomous 
Motivation (AM)
Autonomy (A), 
Competence (COM), 
and Relationship (R).
The satisfaction of  the basic psychological
needs of  autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness (the nutrients essential for 
individual growth, integrity, and well-
being) was positively associated with 
employees’ IWB through AM.
Implementing management 
processes and practices that 
support leadership, autonomy, 
and flexible work processes 
can facilitate innovative 
performance outcomes at both
the individual and 
organizational levels.
Wang et al., 2021
Person Organization Fit
(POF),
Autonomous 
Motivation (AM).
Employees with higher levels of  POF 
(refers to the correspondence between a 
person’s characteristics and their 
environment) have higher levels of  AM. 
Autonomously motivated employees 
engage in IWB more frequently. 
Autonomous forms of  motivation 
mediate the relationship of  person-
environment fit with IWB.
Managers can consider the fit 
between R&D employees’ 
values and the organization 
during the hiring process and 
throughout their tenure with 
the company.
Saether, 2019
-72-
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Autonomy. There is a positive relationship between 
employee autonomy and IWB. The 
authors argue that more motivated 
employees may feel more committed to 
their organizations, showing a greater 
willingness to exhibit innovative behavior 
at work.
Authors suggest implementing 
special training programs for 
managers that promote 
attitudes such as WC and 
autonomy.
Obeidat, 2021; 
Siregar, Sujana, 
Pranowo & 
Supriadi, 2021; 
Swaroop & Dixit, 
2018
Intrinsic Motivation 
(IM), Meaningful Work 
(MW).
Meaningful work (a subjective 
experience of  ‘meaning’ resulting from 
the ‘fit’ between the person and the job)
mediates the relationship between 
intrinsic motivation (the extent to which
an individual experiences pleasure and 
interest in performing a work task 
without being controlled by external 
contingencies, such as rewards and 
punishments) and the IWB.
For the educational sector, 
authors recommend, 
formulating policies for 
creating jobs that allow a high 
degree of  labor autonomy. 
This practice can promote IM 
and a sense of  meaning at 
work, increasing innovative 
behavior.
Bawuro et al., 2019
Intellectual stimulation 
(IS), Intrinsic 
motivation (IM).
Intellectual stimulation (the leader’s ability 
to promote intelligence, careful problem-
solving, and rationality) and IM are 
significant determinants of  IWB.
Providing a trusting and open 
work environment to share 
knowledge and continually 
develop organizational 
strategies to reinforce 
employee IM can lead to 
greater IWB.
Bin & Kassim, 2019
Harmonious Passion 
(HAP).
Harmonious passion (a type of  passion 
for an activity in harmony with other 
aspects of  life, resulting from the 
autonomous internalization of  a favorite 
activity into one’s identity) influences 
IWB.
Authors recommend designing
and implementing discussion 
and training programs that 
engage employees in their 
roles.
Jan & Zainal, 2020
Paradox mentality 
(PM).
Adopting a paradox mindset (a mental 
attitude in which actors recognize and 
accept the persistent inconsistencies of  
contradictory forces) satisfies the basic 
psychological needs of  employees, 
promoting their IWB.
Organizations can reinforce 
employee awareness of  
applying paradoxical 
frameworks through 
experiential learning activities 
and applied training.
Liu et al., 2020
Spirituality (S), Person 
Organization Fit 
(POF), Psychological 
Empowerment (PE).
Workplace spirituality (an employee’s 
attempt to find meaning and purpose in 
their work and strengthen their 
interconnectedness) and POF (general 
match of  an individual’s values with the 
overall values of  an organization) 
positively influenced IWB. There is also a 
substantial effect of  S on psychological 
empowerment. When S is promoted, 
employees feel empowered and show 
autonomy and competence in their 
efforts, resulting in IWB.
The authors recommend 
hospitality managers create 
forums for open discussion 
about spirituality, values, and 
employee rights and integrate 
organizational and personal 
goals to increase idea 
generation.
Likewise, different workshops
on incorporating spirituality in
the workplace should be 
conducted, allowing a healthy 
culture to promote 
innovation.
Afsar & Badir, 2017
Creative self-efficacy 
(CSE)
Servant leadership (SL).
Creative self-efficacy (confidence to 
achieve novel proposed results) 
significantly mediates the relationship 
between servant leadership (attitude to 
help and encourage others) and IWB.
To improve CSE and IWB in 
managers in the hotel industry, 
it is recommended that 
activities that contribute to the 
development of  SL qualities be
implemented.
Jan et al., 2021
-73-
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Transformatio-nal 
Leadership (TL), 
Intrinsic Motivation 
(IM), Creative Process 
Engagement (CPE), 
Roles of  Psychological 
Empowerment (RPE).
Transformational leadership has a stronger 
positive relationship with IWB when 
employees have high levels of  intrinsic 
motivation and psychological 
empowerment (four types of  feelings: 
meaning, competence, self-determination, 
and impact). Furthermore, the study 
proved that creative process engagement 
(employee participation in creativity 
processes) mediates the effect of  these 
relationships.
The authors recommend the 
implementation of  flexible and
participatory management 
systems where employees feel 
safe and are not afraid to share
the work lessons learned.
Bin-Saeed et al., 
2019
Transformatio-nal 
Leadership (TL), 
Psychological 
Empowerment (PE).
When the PE is positive, TL (leadership’s 
ability to influence and motivate 
subordinates to meet the goals and 
interests of  the organization beyond 
expectations) occurs, affecting the IWB. 
This phenomenon occurs when 
employees feel safe and perceive their 
work as meaningful.
Implementing practices for 
developing cognitive skills at 
the professional level and 
incentives for good work 
performance can increase 
innovative work behaviors.
Helmy, Rabiatul & 
Banani, 2019; 
Kustanto et al., 
2020
Table 7. Determinants and strategies associated with the self-determination theory.
Category 3. Social Exchange Theory
Social  exchange  theory  is  widely  used  in  organizational  research  to  understand  employee  behavior  in  the
workplace (Cropanzano, Anthony, Daniels & Hall, 2017). This theory postulates that knowledge occurs in a
social framework with dynamic and reciprocal relationships between the individual, environment, and behavior
(Almulhim, 2020). Social exchange refers to transactions or relationships between two or more parties (e.g.,
employees, supervisors, or managers) that involve the process of  exchanging mutual resources (e.g., experiences
and  knowledge)  (Kim  &  Park,  2017).  Some  scholars  have  used  this  theory  to  explain  knowledge-sharing
behavior,  highlighting  its  significance  as  influenced  by  personal  attitudes  and  motivations,  necessitating
substantial social interaction (Işık et al., 2021), functional flexibility mechanisms (Yasir, Majid, Yousaf, Nassani &
Haffar, 2021), economic reward systems (Anser, Yousaf, Khan & Usman, 2020), and knowledge management
(Aldabbas, Pinnington & Lahrech, 2021). This assertion is due to the influence of  knowledge exchange on
innovative behavior (Asurakkody & Kim, 2020; Derin et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2019). Table 8 describes the
determinants of  this theory and strategies proposed by the authors of  the subsample (See Table 8).
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Knowledge Sharing 
(KS)
Innovative Work 
Behavior (IWB).
Knowledge sharing (attitude of
sharing and receiving 
information or experiences) is 
an important determinant of  
IWB.
The use of  information and 
communication technologies 
significantly influences the 
processes of  knowledge 
donation and collection. 
Employees’ willingness to 
donate and collect knowledge 
allows them to improve IWB.
The authors recommend designing systems 
that allow employees to record the knowledge 
obtained to formulate strategies that improve 
processes and efficiency in developing new 
employees’ tasks. The authors also mention 
that implementing training sessions that 
promote psychological empowerment will 
lead to a higher level of  KS and, in turn, will 
allow increasing innovative behavior among 
employees. Likewise, they propose 
encouraging employees to generate new ideas 
and share knowledge related to their 
management challenges through suggestion 
boxes, virtual platforms, software systems, and
social networks, among others, which allow 
for the resolution of  problems and the 
creation of  worth.
Almulhim, 2020; 
Arsawan et al., 
2020; Asurakkody 
& Kim, 2020; Bin 
& Kassim, 2019; 
Helmy et al., 2019; 
Işık et al., 2021; Jan
et al., 2021; Kim &
Park, 2017; 
Kmieciak, 2020; 
Linh et al., 2020; 
Phung, 
Hawryszkiewycz &
Chandran, 2019a*
-74-
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Determinants Description Strategies
Author 
and year
Knowledge Sharing 
(KS),
Ethical Climate (EC).
The ethical climate (comprising
perceptions of  selfishness, 
benevolence, and principles for
ethically correct behavior) 
mediates the positive 
relationship between KS and 
IWB.
Authors suggest organizations invest in 
sustainable systems for the IWB and develop
management procedures that encourage 
benevolent behavior based on principles and 
low levels of  selfishness.
Derin et al., 2021
Knowledge Sharing 
(KS), Workplace 
Friendship (WF).
Workplace friendship (a 
non-exclusive relationship at 
work involving mutual trust, 
commitment, liking, and shared
interests and values) influences 
IWB through knowledge 
gathering.
Authors recommend that hotel industry 
managers implement social activities that 
improve collective intelligence by 
strengthening interpersonal trust and 
emotional connection between workers.
Helmy et al., 2020
Knowledge Sharing 
(KS),
Functional Flexibility 
(FF).
Knowledge sharing and 
functional flexibility (individual
ability to perform multiple 
tasks in various jobs) 
significantly affect workers’ 
innovative behavior.
Authors suggest that managers incorporate 
performance-based learning and 
development practices. They also suggest the
design of  flexible work models that 
encourage employee participation.
Anser et al., 2020, 
2022
Knowledge Sharing 
(KS),
Psychological 
Empowerment (PE).
The authors proved that KS 
(proactive and responsive 
knowledge-sharing behavior) 
leads to IWB. However, this 
relationship is mediated by PE 
(motivational exercise that aims
to improve employee 
performance by involving them
in decision-making processes. ).
Authors suggest that companies provide 
employees with necessary training, resources,
and tools, including access to information 
such as organizational plans, policies, 
financial positions, and objectives. These 
forms of  structural empowerment give 
employees meaning in what they do in their 
work role in addition to supporting their 
IWB competencies.
Aldabbas et al., 
2021
Note: (*) signifies determinants related to the theories presented in group 1.
Table 8. Determinants and strategies associated with the theory of  knowledge management and social sharing.
AQ3. Countries and economic sectors where this research topic have been addressed.
Regarding the geographical scope of  the research on individual-level innovative behavior in the selected sample,
there is a notable prevalence in Asian countries, such as China (n = 6), Pakistan  (n = 6), and Malaysia  (n = 4).
The participation of  European countries, such as Spain, Italy, and Switzerland, also stands out, followed by
North America. However, there is little research on the impact of  IWB in the context of  developing countries,
specifically in Latin America.
Figure 5. Economic sectors of  study addressed in IWB research
-75-
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Figure  5  shows  that  the  economic  sectors  most  addressed  were  the  information  and  communications
technologies  sector,  corresponding  to  32%  of  the  documentary  sample,  followed  by  the  industrial  sector,
corresponding to 27%, linking manufacturing, metallurgical, robotics, automotive, pharmaceutical companies,
among others.
AQ4. Quantitative Research Methods
In the analysis of  the selected sample, it was evident that the quantitative method most used by academics to
study individual constructs that influence innovative behavior is Structural Equation Modeling (SEM), which
is  consistent  with  the  objective  of  this  multivariate  technique,  which  tests  causal  relationships  between
observable and latent variables (Hair, Hult, Ringle & Sarstedt, 2017). The authors argued that modeling using
the Partial Least Squares (PLS-SEM) technique allows for effectively handling small sample sizes and complex
models. Regarding study design, cross-sectional research dominates (Helmy et al., 2019; Koroglu & Ozmen,
2021;  Wang  et  al.,  2021),  employing  probabilistic  sample  types  such  as  simple  random,  stratified,  and
non-probabilistic samples chosen for convenience and intention. Likewise, it was found that self-administered
questionnaires–online and in-person–were the measurement instrument most commonly used by the authors.
Table 9 details the techniques, methods, and sample sizes selected by the authors.
n
Author and
Year
Quantitative Technique Sampling Method
Size
Multigroup Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis
Confirmatory factor 
analysis (CFA)
Exploratory Factor Analysis
(EFA)
Hierarchical Regression 
Analysis
Multilevel Analysis
Stepwise Multiple 
Regression
Linear Regression Analysis
Partial Least Squares 
(PLS-SEM)
Structural equation 
modeling (AMOS)
Stratified Sampling
Convenience Sampling
Intentional Sampling
Judgment Sampling
Saturation Sampling
Simple Random Sampling
Probability Sampling
1 Laguna et al., 
2021
 ✓ ✓ ✓ 796
2 Ren et al., 2021 ✓ ✓ 245
3 Işık et al., 2021 ✓ ✓ 360
4 Wang et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ ✓ 284
5 Siregar et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ 209
6 Aldabbas et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 340
7 Yasir et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ ✓ 769
8 Koroglu & 
Ozmen, 2021 ✓ ✓ ✓ 416
9 Jan et al., 2021 ✓ ✓ ✓ 257
10 Mustafa et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ 125
11 Malik, 2021 ✓ ✓ 171
12 Derin et al., 
2021
✓ ✓ ✓ 400
13 Hosseini & 
Haghighi, 2021
✓ ✓ 232
14 Obeidat, 2021 ✓ ✓ 150
15 Abukhait et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ 313
-76-
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
n
Author and
Year
Quantitative Technique Sampling Method
Size
Multigroup Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis
Confirmatory factor 
analysis (CFA)
Exploratory Factor Analysis
(EFA)
Hierarchical Regression 
Analysis
Multilevel Analysis
Stepwise Multiple 
Regression
Linear Regression Analysis
Partial Least Squares 
(PLS-SEM)
Structural equation 
modeling (AMOS)
Stratified Sampling
Convenience Sampling
Intentional Sampling
Judgment Sampling
Saturation Sampling
Simple Random Sampling
Probability Sampling
16 Kustanto et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ 53
17 Liu et al., 2020 ✓ ✓ ✓ 459
18 Clarke & Higgs,
2020
✓ ✓ 249
19 Helmy et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ 163
20 Sifatu et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 306
21 Sabahattin, 
2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 150
22 Jan & Zainal, 
2020
✓ ✓ 257
23 Alnajjar & 
Hashim, 2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 298
24 Bantha & 
Nayak, 2020
✓ ✓ 340
25 Anser, M. K et 
al., 2022
✓ ✓ 751
26 Kmieciak, 2020 ✓ ✓ 252
27 Almulhim, 
2020
✓ ✓ 324
28 Arsawan et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 311
29 Afsar et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ 381
30 Anser et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 825
31 Bibi & Afsar, 
2020
✓ ✓ 273
32 Asurakkody & 
Kim, 2020
✓ ✓ 159
33 Linh et al., 
2020
✓ ✓ ✓ 396
34 Bin & Kassim, 
2019
✓ ✓ 148
35 Saether, 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓ 235
36 Saraih, Wei, 
Razali, Zuraini, 
Amlus & Abd-
Razak, 2019
✓ ✓ 189
37 Hafeez et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 130
-77-
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
n
Author and
Year
Quantitative Technique Sampling Method
Size
Multigroup Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis
Confirmatory factor 
analysis (CFA)
Exploratory Factor Analysis
(EFA)
Hierarchical Regression 
Analysis
Multilevel Analysis
Stepwise Multiple 
Regression
Linear Regression Analysis
Partial Least Squares 
(PLS-SEM)
Structural equation 
modeling (AMOS)
Stratified Sampling
Convenience Sampling
Intentional Sampling
Judgment Sampling
Saturation Sampling
Simple Random Sampling
Probability Sampling
38 Bawuro et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 309
39 Khorakian et 
al., 2019
✓ ✓ ✓ 266
40 Maqbool et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 608
41 Abdullah et al., 
2019 
✓ ✓ 397
42 Helmy et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 360
43 Phung et al., 
2019a
✓ ✓ 236
44 Nguyen et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 396
45 Bin-Saeed et al.,
2019
✓ ✓ 347
46 Stock et al., 
2019
✓ ✓ 861
47 Swaroop & 
Dixit, 2018
✓ ✓ 267
48 Afsar & Badir, 
2017
✓ ✓ 493
49 Kim & Park, 
2017
✓ ✓ 400
Total 2 9 5 7 2 1 9 17 14 1 25 19 1 1 1 1
Table 9. Methods and techniques in the study of  individual-level Innovative Work Behavior (IWB).
AQ5. Identifying gaps for future research on employees’ innovative behavior based on individual factors.
This section highlights the gaps revealed by the sample authors as opportunities for future research. Future
studies could investigate the different multifaceted perspectives of  personality and their relationship with IWB
according to different working conditions (Bibi & Afsar, 2020; Laguna et al., 2021; Sabahattin, 2020). Abdullah et
al. (2019) pointed out that it is important to analyze the link between personality and individual innovation from
a religious point of  view. There is also discussion about replicating the relationship between altruism and IWB in
sectors other than commercial operations (Alnajjar & Hashim, 2020). Hafeez. et al. (2019) and Malik (2021)
indicated that although there is a link between emotional intelligence and IWB in high-tech, knowledge-intensive
organizations, they should be explored in other business contexts and cultures.
Research is then directed toward emphasizing the impact of  cognitive, motivational, and behavioral components
on individual performance and innovation. For example, Phung et al. (2019) considered it pertinent to investigate
the differences between the roles or disciplines of  personnel (e.g., division, department, and organizational
leaders, or personnel from social and technical areas) and their innovative behaviors. Other authors, such as
Stock et al. (2019), note a gap in the literature, suggesting a need to examine whether individual upper-echelon
characteristics (i.e., selfishness, overconfidence, and hyper-CSE) have varying effects on IWB dimensions, such as
idea generation or implementation.
-78-
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Some authors believe that because of  the cross-sectional self-reported data in their studies, it is essential to replicate
the research using other methods and longitudinal data. This reduces the potential for bias by using different
sources for predictor and criterion variables (Saether, 2019). Kim and Park (2017) suggested employing stratified
(for example, gender, age, industry, or work area) and random sampling methods. This would facilitate more precise
results and increase the generalizability of  findings related to the study of  attitudes and personal characteristics (e.g.,
ethical leadership, compassion, empathic attitudes, and knowledge-sharing behaviors) as determinants of  IWB.
Similarly,  Almulhim  (2020)  added  that  various  social  variables  can  affect  the  relationship  between  IWB,
knowledge sharing, and moderating variables such as personal growth, workload, and emotional exhaustion.
Therefore, in future studies, models could be implemented that involve  variables related to the moods of
employees that allow the design of  new work styles. Additionally, some academics have proposed analyses of  the
influence  of  the  workplace  (hybrid  or  remote  work)  on  IWB  performance  at  both  the  individual  and
organizational levels (Arsawan et al., 2020; Kim & Park, 2017; Linh et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2019; Phung et al.,
2019a).  From  this  perspective,  creative  work  environments  and  methodologies  can  be  examined  in  more
exploratory studies on autonomy, resilience, empathy, transfer, and knowledge exchange in IWB.
Within the IWB workspace, constant motivation exists to replicate current research models in various settings
(e.g., European and American countries), as well as exploring the similarities and differences that may exist
between the results of  these studies in different business contexts. This work suggests studying knowledge
exchange in two ways: donation and collection of  knowledge. In addition, researchers could focus their studies
on deepening vertical knowledge sharing between hierarchical organizational levels.
4. Theoretical Framework
A theoretical framework is defined as a description of  key components and their relationships within a field of
knowledge (Díaz et al., 2015). In this context, the framework was developed through a systematic literature
review, analyzing information sequentially by addressing the five guiding questions of  the study . We began with
the concept ualization of  IWB based on its dimensions.  Some authors argue that IWB is a two-dimensional
process related to the phases of  the innovation process (De Jong & Den Hartog, 20 10; Yuan & Woodman,
2010). However,  Scott  and  Bruce  (1994)  advocated  for  a  three-dimensional  view,  involving  generation,
introduction,  and realization of  ideas. This approach  has generated great relevance  and impact in current
research (Aldabbas et al., 2021; Işık et al., 2021; Koroglu & Ozmen, 2021; Laguna et al., 2021) and is used as a
model for the development of  this framework.
In  this  context,  a  three-dimensional  employee  innovation  process  is  presented,  along  with  its  associated
properties. Next, the three theoretical lines outlined by the authors of  the selected literature were connected,
acting as a guide for understanding, describing, and explaining the causal relationships between the constructs
that  impact  IWB.  Using  the  theories  of  personality  traits,  individual  attributes,  social  exchange,  and
self-determination,  the  determinants  of  IWB  were  grouped  and  consolidated.  Subsequently,  quantitative
methods aimed at investigating phenomena such as the development of  individual innovation were explored,
given that these methods contribute to reducing subjectivity and bias in interpreting the results.
During the analysis, we identified that the authors widely employed SEM, arguing that this technique offers a
deeper understanding when modeling latent variables. Finally,  the managerial contributions of  the  selected
studies were compiled to enrich the employee innovation process.
The conceptual framework in Figure 6 comprises four panels that respond to the guiding questions. The panel
corresponding to AQ1, “Dimensions of  IWB”, is organized as a process, leading to the properties of  the
generation,  introduction,  and  realization  of  ideas.  On  the  left  side,  the  panel  corresponding  to  AQ4,
“Quantitative Techniques”, brings together the most frequently used methodologies to guide the investigation of
the relationships and antecedents of  IWB. The central panel AQ2, “Theories”, shows the themes that support
the investigation of  the determinants identified in the literature review. Finally, the lower panel, corresponding to
AQ5, highlights the managerial implications proposed by the authors of  the sample. The four panels are linked
by  thick  numerical  arrows  (1),  (2),  and  (3),  indicating  the  order  and  influential  sequence  suggested  for
understanding IWB.
-79-
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Promotion for the generation
of ideas through ICTs.
Continuous and team learning
environment.
Personality and performance
tests.
Training programs to strengthen
cognitive skills.
AQ5. MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
• Critical thinking
• Proactive behavior
• Combination of  knowledge
• Interaction between colleagues
• Evaluation advantages and disadvantages
• Identification of alliances of interested
parties
• Resources-skills cooperation
• Persistence in the process
• Action-based approach
AQ1. DIMENSIONS OF INN OVATIVE WORK BEHAVIOR
Generation of  ideas Introduction of  ideas Realization of  ideas
AQ4. Quantitative techniques
AFC – AFE
SEM PLS
SEM - AMOS
Linear regression
Hierarchical Regression
Theory Personality Traits Self-determination Theory Social Sharing theory
Conscientiousnes
Opennes to experience
Personality
Hyper CSE
Política Skill
Self-efficacy Altruism
Commitment
Trust
Flow
Emotional Intelligence
Behavioural Courage
Resilience
Adaptability Curiosity
Motivation
Person Organization Fit
Competence
Relationship
Harmonious Passion
Intellectual Stimulation
Autonomy
Paradox Mentaly
Psychological Empowerment
Spirituality
Leadership
Workplace Friendship
Knowledge Sharing
Functional Flexibility
AQ2. Determinantes
Properties
1
2
3
Figure 6. Individual-level IWB integrative framework
5. Discussion
This study developed a conceptual framework that consolidates various elements of  IWB among employees,
starting  with  the  proposed  dimensional  significance  to  address  this  phenomenon.  While  there  is  no  clear
consensus on the dimensions of  individual innovative behavior, they predominantly emerge as the generation,
introduction, and realization of  ideas (Koroglu  & Ozmen, 2021; Scott & Bruce, 1994). These dimensions
encompass the capacity to transform creative thoughts into brilliant products or services that attract consumer
attention, are useful, and penetrate the market (Hafeez et al., 2019; Malik, 2021).
The literature posits that generating ideas is typical of  critical thinking and creative behavior (Pérez-Peñalver et
al., 2018) . However, combining knowledge and social interaction is essential to consolidate this dimension of
IWB, considering the inherently social nature of  human beings (Derin et al., 2021; Helmy et al., 2020). The
second dimension includes the interactions between colleagues and stakeholders, which allow the sharing of
experiences learned in the workplace and the emergence of  novel ideas (Aldabbas et al., 2021; Asurakkody &
Kim, 2020; Phung et al., 2019 b). The third dimension, the realization of  ideas, is considered a decisive step in
the development of  agreements, identification of  strategic alliances, and evaluation of  ideas (Aldabbas et al.,
2021;  Wang  et  al.,  2021).  However,  in  addition  to  the  creative  component,  factors  such  as  persistence,
competence, and action-based approaches, which are fundamental to successful innovation processes, are
required.
This  conceptual  framework  organizes  research  on  individual-level  innovative  behavior  by  grouping  and
classifying  the  determinants  into  three  theoretical  bases:  personality  trait  theory  (personal  attributes),
self-determination theory  (employees’ ability  to make  decisions and adjust to the  organization),  and social
exchange theory (employees’ ability to socialize with coworkers). These determinants are fundamental to a
person’s job performance in generating, introducing, and carrying out an idea until it becomes a commercial
transaction. Emotional intelligence and friendships in the workplace can influence how one person differs from
another in terms of  overcoming challenges and finding alternatives to creative processes.
Employee attitudes, such as empathy and altruism, have gained greater importance in recent studies (Alnajjar &
Hashim, 2020). Organizations seek to strengthen strategies that allow knowledge interaction between giving and
-80-
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
receiving. This interaction leads to the generation of  ideas from employees through understanding and the ability
to  communicate  with  and  understand  others.  Other  determinants  such  as  flow  (Maqbool  et  al.,  2019),
harmonious passion (Jan & Zainal, 2020), and resilience (Abukhait et al., 2020) are also prominently featured in
research because of  the adaptive competencies that companies increasingly require in dynamic environments.
Although creative self-efficacy has been determined (Jan et al., 2021), meaningful work and knowledge sharing
(Arsawan et al., 2020), as attitudes that affect IWB, must be encouraged, and organizations must support these
behaviors in their workforce to guarantee the innovation process. Academics have consistently emphasized
practical implications based on training to strengthen skills, implementing flexible work programs, fair salary
treatment, and an ethical work environment.
Regarding quantitative methods for measuring the determinants of  IWB, the authors mostly used SEM using the
PLS-SEM technique (Helmy et al., 2020; Işık et al., 2021; Kustanto et al., 2020; Malik, 2021; Obeidat, 2021),
arguing that it does not require assumptions about the multivariate normality of  the data and efficiently works
with complex models with small sample sizes. Nevertheless, some authors consider it important to use large
sample sizes to avoid biased results (Almulhim, 2020; Arsawan et al., 2020) , which aligns with Hair’s (2017)
recommendation about sample sizes for PLS-SEM.
This study has some limitations that must be acknowledged. The selection of  academic products was limited to a
specific time range and filtering conditions, potentially excluding relevant work beyond these parameters and
overlooking recent developments in the field of  IWB. Furthermore, the cultural and economic diversity of  the
contexts  studied  limits  the  generalizability  of  the  results  to  other  environments.  The  complexity  of  the
interactions among the identified factors is also a limitation. Furthermore, the preference for quantitative rather
than qualitative approaches may have influenced the perspectives presented in this study.
The  field  of  IWB  presents  itself  as  a  constantly  evolving  research  area  with  numerous  promising  future
directions. Given that IWB is influenced by significant cultural and economic differences, in line with what was
proposed by authors such as Afsar et al. (2020), it is essential to recognize the need for additional research that
explores its applicability in various work environments. Furthermore, appealing to the replication proposed by
Anser et al. (2020, 2022), future research should focus on innovative behavior in virtual and remote work
contexts,  considering  the  impact  of  personality  traits,  information  and  communication  technologies,  and
applications of  artificial intelligence and automation on employees’ creativity. Finally, it would be pertinent to
direct  this  research  toward  exploring  diversity  and  inclusion  in  the  workplace,  innovative  leadership,  and
organizational climates. Together, these various lines of  research hold promise in advancing the understanding
and promotion of  IWB in the constantly changing and developing world of  work.
6. Conclusions
The  data  obtained  in  this  study  provide  a  comprehensive  perspective  of  the  research  agenda  concerning
individual-level IWB, presented through a conceptual framework. First, the concept of  IWB is depicted as a
complex  and  multidimensional  attitude  that  drives  the  process  of  materializing  innovative  ideas,  ensuring
competitive advantage at the organizational level. Additionally, the dimensions of  IWB—namely idea generation,
introduction, and execution—are outlined, along with their distinctive characteristics.
Second, 48 determinants of  innovative behavior studied by the selected authors were identified, related to
management theories, such as personality traits, self-determination, and social interaction. These theories are
linked to the study of  individuals, exploring how and why their capabilities, motivational aspirations, skills, and
work behaviors may vary.
Third, the geographical scope of  the selected sample was examined, evidencing a marked prevalence in the Asian
continent, with greater research interest in the information and communications technology sector. However,
research opportunities have opened up on the American continent with a focus on emerging countries.
Fourth,  the  PLS-SEM  technique  has  emerged  as  the  most  prevalent  quantitative  method.  Likewise,
cross-sectional studies and the utilization of  questionnaires, both online and physical, stand out as commonly
employed practices among academics for data collection. However, there is a notable gap calling for longitudinal
research and studies into probabilistic aspects within this domain.
-81-
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Fifth, the practical implications derived from the selected studies are summarized at the managerial level. While
these implications are not explicitly generalizable, they express ideas with potential business applications to
encourage  individual-level  innovative  behaviors  in  the  work  environment.  These  include  the  creation  of
continuous learning environments; the implementation of  training programs focused on strengthening cognitive
skills and emotional management; the promotion of  leadership practices, teamwork, and social interaction; and
the establishment of  labor guarantees and systems for the collection of  ideas and the dissemination of  lessons
learned.
Finally, we acknowledge the limitations and present potential avenues for future research. First, it is important
to mention that the heterogeneity of  the business sectors studied does not allow generalization of  the results
or  the  practices  recommended  by  the  sampled  authors.  Additionally,  the  preference  for  studies  with
cross-sectional self-report measures limits the causality of  the IWB determinants. Future research should
focus  on  longitudinal  data  to  establish  the  directionality  and  causal  order  of  the  different  relationships
proposed for studying these constructs. On the other hand, the need for greater exploration of  the factors
related  to  employees’  emotional  intelligence  and  their  influence  on  the  generation,  introduction,  and
materialization of  innovative ideas that translate into concrete products should be emphasized. In addition to
the above, in line with some of  the analyzed authors’ suggestions, we propose involving various variables in
IWB research, such as knowledge exchange (Aldabbas et al., 2021), personality (Sabahattin, 2020), as well as
transactional  leadership  and  cultural  intelligence  (Işık  et  al.,  2021),  among  other  cognitive  determinants.
Finally, guiding research efforts toward diversity and inclusion in the workplace and studies in teleworking,
remote, virtual, and home-work contexts, would be valuable. These investigations can consider the impact of
personality traits, information, and communication technologies on employee creativity. Collectively, these
suggestions  offer  promising  avenues  for  advancing  the  understanding  and  promotion  of  IWB  in  the
constantly evolving landscape of  work.
Declaration of  Conflicting Interests 
The  authors  declared  no  potential  conflicts  of  interest  with  respect  to  the  research,  authorship,  and/or
publication of  this article. 
Funding 
The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of  this article.
References
Abdullah, H., Ahmad, A., Ahmad, M., Mohd, M., Khatijah, O., Fazida, K. et al. (2019). How does employees’ big
five personality traits explain innovative work behavior? An original needs theory approach from McClelland 
and Maqasid Al Sharia. International Journal of  Innovation, Creativity and Change, 7(7), 212-227.
Abukhait, R., Bani-Melhem, S., & Mohd-Shamsudin, F. (2020). Do employee resilience, focus on opportunity, 
and work-related curiosity predict innovative work behaviour? the mediating role of  career adaptability. 
International Journal of  Innovation Management, 24(7), 1-30. https://doi.org/10.1142/S136391962050070X 
Afsar, B., Al-Ghazali, B.M., Cheema, S., & Javed, F. (2020). Cultural intelligence and innovative work behavior: 
the role of  work engagement and interpersonal trust. European Journal of  Innovation Management, 24(4), 
1082-1109. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-01-2020-0008 
Afsar, B., & Badir, Y . (2017). Workplace spirituality, perceived organizational support and innovative work 
behavior: The mediating effects of  person-organization fit. Journal of  Workplace Learning, 29(2), 95-109. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JWL-11-2015-0086 
Agarwal, U.A. (2014). Linking justice, trust and innovative work behaviour to work engagement. Personnel Review, 
43(1), 41-73. https://doi.org/10.1108/PR-02-2012-0019 
Aldabbas, H., Pinnington, A., & Lahrech, A. (2021). The mediating role of  psychological empowerment in the 
relationship between knowledge sharing and innovative work behaviour. International Journal of  Innovation 
Management, 25(2). https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919621500146 
-82-
<<<PAGE=24>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Alessa, H.S., & Durugbo, C.M. (2021). Systematic review of  innovative work behavior concepts and 
contributions. Management Review Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-021-00224-x 
Almulhim, A.F. (2020). Linking knowledge sharing to innovative work behaviour: The role of  psychological 
empowerment. Journal of  Asian Finance, Economics and Business, 7(9), 549-560. 
https://doi.org/10.13106/JAFEB.2020.VOL7.NO9.549 
Alnajjar, M., & Hashim, J. (2020). Innovative work behaviour induced by transformational leadership through 
altruism. International Journal of  Work Innovation, 2(4), 257-283. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJWI.2020.10034083 
Amabile, T. (1988). A model of  creativity and innovation in organizations. Research in Organizational Behavior, 10, 
123-167. Available at: https://web.mit.edu/curhan/www/docs/Articles/15341_Readings/Group_Performance/
Amabile_A_Model_of_CreativityOrg.Beh_v10_pp123-167.pdf 
Anderson, N., Potočnik, K., & Zhou, J. (2014). Innovation and Creativity in Organizations: A State of  the 
Science Review, Prospective Commentary, and Guiding Framework. Journal of  Management, 40(5), 1297-1333. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206314527128 
Anser, M., Yousaf, Z., Yasir, M., Sharif, M., Nasir, M., Rasheed, M. et al. (2022). How to unleash innovative work 
behavior of  SMEs’ workers through knowledge sharing? Accessing functional flexibility as a mediator. 
European Journal of  Innovation Management, 25(1), 233-248. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-11-2019-0332 
Anser, M., Yousaf, Z., Khan, A., & Usman, M. (2020). Towards innovative work behavior through knowledge 
management infrastructure capabilities: Mediating role of  functional flexibility and knowledge sharing. 
European Journal of  Innovation Management, 24(2), 461-480. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-09-2019-0250 
Arbeláez, M.C., & Onrubia, J. (2014). Análisis bibliométrico y de contenido. Dos metodologías complementarias 
para el análisis de la revista colombiana Educación y Cultura. Revista de Investigaciones UCM, 14(23), 14-31. 
Available at: https://bit.ly/31A2xbH 
Arsawan, I.W .E., Rajiani, I., Wirga, I., & Suryantini, N. (2020). Harnessing knowledge sharing practice to enhance
innovative work behavior: The paradox of  social exchange theory. Polish Journal of  Management Studies, 21(2), 
60-73. https://doi.org/10.17512/pjms.2020.21.2.05 
Asurakkody, T., & Kim, S. (2020). Effects of  knowledge sharing behavior on innovative work behavior among 
nursing Students: Mediating role of  Self- leadership. International Journal of  Africa Nursing Sciences, 12. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijans.2020.100190 
Bantha, T., & Nayak, U. (2020). The relation of  workplace spirituality with employees’ innovative work 
behaviour: the mediating role of  psychological empowerment. Journal of  Indian Business Research, 13(2), 
223-235. https://doi.org/10.1108/JIBR-03-2020-0067 
Bawuro, F.A., Shamsuddin, A., Wahab, E., & Usman, H. (2019). Mediating Role of  Meaningful Work in the 
Relationship between Intrinsic Motivation and Innovative Work Behaviour. International Journal of  Scientific & 
Technology Research, 8(09). Available at: https://www.ijstr.org 
Betancur, R.R., Pardo del Val, M., & Martínez-Pérez, J.F. (2022). Strategic orientation to educational innovation: 
A systematic review and conceptual model. Intangible Capital, 18(3), 442-468. https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.1686 
Bibi, A., & Afsar, B. (2020). Behavioural courage and its effect on innovative work behaviour of  public sector 
employees: the role of  managerial position and gender. En International Journal of  Public Sector Performance 
Management, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1504/IJPSPM.2020.105092 
Bin, S.M., & Kassim, E.S. (2019). Factors of  innovative behavior in Malaysia. Academy of  Strategic Management 
Journal, 18(6), 1-5. Abailable at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/350106400 
Bin-Saeed, B., Afsar, B., Shahjehan, A., & Imad-Shah, S. (2019). Does transformational leadership foster 
innovative work behavior? The roles of  psychological empowerment, intrinsic motivation, and creative 
process engagement. Economic Research-Ekonomska Istrazivanja, 32(1), 254-281. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1331677X.2018.1556108 
-83-
<<<PAGE=25>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Bos-Nehles, A., Renkema, M., & Janssen, M. (2017). HRM and innovative work behaviour: a systematic literature
review. En Personnel Review, 46(7), 1228-1253. Emerald Group Publishing Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/PR-09-2016-0257 
Bos-Nehles, A., & Veenendaal, A. (2017). Perceptions of  HR practices and innovative work behavior: the 
moderating effect of  an innovative climate. International Journal of  Human Resource Management, 30(18), 
2661-2683. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2017.1380680 
Botha, L., & Steyn, R. (2020). Psychological contract breach and innovative work behaviour: Systematic literature
review. Southern African Journal of  Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management, 12(1), 2522-7343. 
https://doi.org/10.4102/SAJESBM.V12I1.333 
Chen, C.J., & Huang, J.W . (2009). Strategic human resource practices and innovation performance - The 
mediating role of  knowledge management capacity. Journal of  Business Research, 62(1), 104-114. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.11.016 
Clarke, N., & Higgs, M. (2020). Political Skill and Role Overload as Antecedents of  Innovative Work Behavior in 
the Public Sector. Public Personnel Management, 49(3), 444-469. https://doi.org/10.1177/0091026019863450 
Colombelli, A., Haned, N., & Le Bas, C. (2013). On firm growth and innovation: Some new empirical 
perspectives using French CIS (1992-2004). Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 26, 14-26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.strueco.2013.03.002 
Cropanzano, R., Anthony, E.L., Daniels, S.R., & Hall, A.V . (2017). Social exchange theory: A critical review with 
theoretical remedies. Academy of  Management Annals, 11(1), 479-516. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2015.0099 
Crossan, M.M., & Apaydin, M. (2010). A multi-dimensional framework of  organizational innovation: A 
systematic review of  the literature. Journal of  Management Studies, 47(6), 1154-1191. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2009.00880.x 
De Jong, J., & Den-Hartog, D. (2010). Measuring innovative work behaviour. Creativity and Innovation Management, 
19(1), 23-36. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8691.2010.00547.x 
Deci, E.L., & Ryan, R.M. (2000). The “What” and “Why” of  Goal Pursuits : Human Needs and the 
Self-Determination of  Behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11(4), 37-41. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327965PLI1104_01 
Derin, O.B., Toker, K., & Gorener, A. (2021). The Relationship between Knowledge Sharing and Innovative 
Work Behaviour: The Mediating Role of  Ethical Climate. Knowledge Management Research and Practice, 00(00), 
1-14. https://doi.org/10.1080/14778238.2020.1860666 
Díaz, S., Demissew, S., Carabias, J., Joly, C., Lonsdale, M., Ash, N. et al. (2015). The IPBES Conceptual 
Framework - connecting nature and people. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 14, 1-16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2014.11.002 
Hafeez, M., Panatik, S.A., Rahman, A.A.A., Rajab, A., Abu-Bakar, S., & Norazman, I. (2019). Ambidextrous 
leadership and innovative work behavior: Mediating role of  emotional intelligence. International Journal of  
Recent Technology and Engineering, 8(2S9), 906-910. https://doi.org/10.35940/ijrte.B1186.0982S919 
Hair, J.F., Hult, T.M., Ringle, C., & Sarstedt, M. (2017). A Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling
(PLS-SEM) (2nd ed.). SAGE Publications Inc. Available at: https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/a-primer-on-
partial-least-squares-structural-equation-modeling-pls-sem/book244583 
Hammond, M.M., Neff, N.L., Farr, J.L., Schwall, A.R., & Zhao, X. (2011). Predictors of  Individual-Level 
Innovation at Work: A Meta-Analysis. Psychology of  Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 5(1), 90-105. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018556 
Helmy, I., Adawiyah, W .R., & Setyawati, H.A. (2020). Fostering Frontline Employees’ Innovative Service 
Behavior: The Role of  Workplace Friendship and Knowledge Sharing Process. Organizacija, 53(3), 185-197. 
https://doi.org/10.2478/orga-2020-0012 
-84-
<<<PAGE=26>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Helmy, I., Rabiatul, A., & Banani, A. (2019). Linking Psychological Empowerment, Knowledge Sharing, and 
Employees’ Innovative Behavior in Indonesian SMEs. The Journal of  Behavioral Science Psychologic, 14(2), 66-79.
Hernández, R., Fernández, C., & Baptista, M. (2014). Metodología de la Investigación (sexta edic). 
McGraw-Hill/Interamericana Editores, S.A.
Hosseini, S., & Haghighi, R. (2021). Towards teacher innovative work behavior: A conceptual model. Cogent 
Education, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2020.1869364 
Hülsheger, U.R., Anderson, N., & Salgado, J.F. (2009). Team-Level Predictors of  Innovation at Work: A 
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Spanning Three Decades of  Research. Journal of  Applied Psychology, 94(5), 
1128-1145. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015978 
Idris, M.C., & Durmuşoğlu, A. (2021). Innovation management systems and standards: A systematic literature 
review and guidance for future research. Sustainability (Switzerland), 13(15). https://doi.org/10.3390/su13158151 
Işık, C., Aydın, E., Dogru, T., Rehman, A., Alvarado, R., Ahmad, M. et al. (2021). The nexus between team 
culture, innovative work behaviour and tacit knowledge sharing: Theory and evidence. Sustainability 
(Switzerland), 13(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/su13084333 
Jan, G., & Zainal, S.R.M. (2020). Linking cooperative psychological climate, harmonious passion, and servicing 
empowerment with innovative work behaviour. Asian Academy of  Management Journal, 25(2), 189-213. 
https://doi.org/10.21315/aamj2020.25.2.8 
Jan, G., Zainal, S.R.M., & Lata, L. (2021). Enhancing innovative work behaviour: the role of  servant leadership 
and creative self-efficacy. On the Horizon, 29(2), 33-51. https://doi.org/10.1108/OTH-12-2020-0044 
Janssen, O. (2000). Job demands, perceptions of  effort-reward fairness and innovative work behaviour. Journal of  
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 73(3), 287-302. https://doi.org/10.1348/096317900167038 
Kanter, R.M. (1988). When a Thousand Flowers Bloom: Structural, Collective, and Social Conditions for Innovation in 
Organizations. Research in Organizational Behavior.
Khorakian, A., Mohammadi-Shahroodi, H., Jahangir, M., & Nikkhah-Farkhani, Z. (2019). Innovative Work 
Behavior in Public Organizations: The Roles of  Ethical and Knowledge Sharing Behaviors. Creativity Research 
Journal, 31(2), 164-173. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2019.1607444 
Kim, W ., & Park, J. (2017). Examining structural relationships between work engagement, organizational 
procedural justice, knowledge sharing, and innovative work behavior for sustainable organizations. 
Sustainability (Switzerland), 9(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/su9020205 
Kmieciak, R. (2020). Trust, knowledge sharing, and innovative work behavior: empirical evidence from Poland. 
European Journal of  Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-04-2020-0134 
Koroglu, Ş., & Ozmen, O. (2021). The mediating effect of  work engagement on innovative work behavior and 
the role of  psychological well-being in the job demands-resources (JD-R) model. Asia-Pacific Journal of  Business
Administration. https://doi.org/10.1108/APJBA-09-2020-0326 
Kostoff, R.N., Tshiteya, R., Pfeil, K.M., Humenik, J.A., & Karypis, G. (2005). Power source roadmaps using 
bibliometrics and database tomography. Energy, 30(5), 709-730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2004.04.058 
Kustanto, H., Hamidah, Eliyana, A., Santri-Mumpuni, J.H., & Gunawan, D.R. (2020). The Moderation Role of  
Psychological Empowerment on Innovative Work Behaviour. Systematic Reviews in Pharmacy, 11(8).
Laguna, M., Mielniczuk, E., & Gorgievski, M.J. (2021). Business Owner-Employees Contagion of  Work-Related 
Affect and Employees’ Innovative Behavior in Small Firms. Applied Psychology, 70(4), 1543-1571. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/apps.12288 
Lee, H.W ., Pak, J., Kim, S., & Li, L.Z. (2019). Effects of  Human Resource Management Systems on Employee 
Proactivity and Group Innovation. Journal of  Management, 45(2), 819-846. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316680029 
-85-
<<<PAGE=27>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Linh, T.P ., Tran, N.M., Doan, X.H., & Van Nguyen, H. (2020). The impact of  knowledge sharing on innovative 
work behavior of  Vietnam telecommunications enterprises employees. Management Science Letters, 10(1), 53-62. 
https://doi.org/10.5267/j.msl.2019.8.016 
Liu, Y ., Xu, S., & Zhang, B. (2020). Thriving at Work: How a Paradox Mindset Influences Innovative Work 
Behavior. Journal of  Applied Behavioral Science, 56(3), 347-366. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021886319888267 
Malik, S. (2021). Emotional intelligence and innovative work behaviour in knowledge-intensive organizations: 
how tacit knowledge sharing acts as a mediator? VINE Journal of  Information and Knowledge Management Systems, 
52(5), 650-669. https://doi.org/10.1108/VJIKMS-09-2020-0158 
Maqbool, S., Černe, M., & Bortoluzzi, G. (2019). Micro-foundations of  innovation: Employee silence, perceived 
time pressure, flow and innovative work behaviour. European Journal of  Innovation Management, 22(1), 125-145. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-01-2018-0013 
Mariz-Perez, R.M., Teijeiro-Alvarez, M.M., & Garcìa-Alvarez, M.T. (2012). The relevance of  human capital as a 
driver for innovation. Cuadernos de Economia (Spain), 35(98), 68-76. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0210-0266(12)70024-9 
Migdadi, M.M. (2022). Knowledge management processes, innovation capability and organizational performance.
International Journal of  Productivity and Performance Management, 71(1), 182-210. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-04-2020-0154 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G., Altman, D., Antes, G. et al. (2009). Preferred reporting items 
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. En PLoS Medicine, 6(7). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097 
Mustafa, M., Coetzer, A., Ramos, H.M., & Fuhrer, J. (2021). Exploring the effects of  small- and medium-sized 
enterprise employees’ job satisfaction on their innovative work behaviours: the moderating effects of  
personality. Journal of  Organizational Effectiveness, 8(2), 228-250. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOEPP-07-2020-0133 
Nguyen, T.P .L., Nguyen, K.N., Do, T.D., & Nguyen, T.T.M. (2019). Knowledge sharing and innovative work 
behavior: The case of  Vietnam. Uncertain Supply Chain Management, 7(4), 619-634. 
https://doi.org/10.5267/j.uscm.2019.5.001 
Nöhammer, E., & Stichlberger, S. (2019). Digitalization, innovative work behavior and extended availability. 
Journal of  Business Economics, 89(8-9), 1191-1214. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11573-019-00953-2 
Obeidat, S.M. (2021). Do high-performance work practices induce innovative work behaviour? the case of  the 
Qatari banking sector. International Journal of  Innovation Management, 25(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919621500031 
Pérez-Peñalver, M.J., Aznar-Mas, L.E., & Montero-Fleta, B. (2018). Identification and classification of  
behavioural indicators to assess innovation competence. Journal of  Industrial Engineering and Management, 11(1), 
87-115. https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.2552 
Phung, V .D., Hawryszkiewycz, I., & Chandran, D. (2019a). How knowledge sharing leads to innovative work 
behaviour: A moderating role of  transformational leadership. Journal of  Systems and Information Technology, 21(3),
277-303. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSIT-11-2018-0148 
Phung, V .D., Hawryszkiewycz, I., Chandran, D., & Ha, B.M. (2019b). Promoting knowledge sharing amongst 
academics: A case study from Vietnam. Journal of  Information and Knowledge Management. https://doi.org/10.1142/
S0219649219500321 
Ren, F., Zhang, Q., & Wei, X. (2021). Work Autonomous and Controlled Motivation on Chinese Employees’ 
Work Performance and Innovative Work Behaviour: The Moderating Role of  Financial Stress. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.676063 
Sabahattin, E. (2020). The Personality Traits in the Defense Industry: The Mediating Role of  Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior. SAGE Open, 10(4). https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244020982289 
-86-
<<<PAGE=28>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Saether, E.A. (2019). Motivational antecedents to high-tech R&D employees’ innovative work behavior: Self-
determined motivation, person-organization fit, organization support of  creativity, and pay justice. Journal of  
High Technology Management Research, 30(2). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hitech.2019.100350 
Saraih, U., Wei, O.C., Razali, R., Zuraini, Z.A.A., Amlus, M., & Abd-Razak, N.A. (2019). Factors affecting 
innovative work behavior: A case of  manufacturing company in Malaysia. International Journal of  Advanced 
Science and Technology, 28(8), 645-652. Available at: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85081190308&partnerID=40&md5=1bf84f780db48f61b9af6e09a56b93c2 
Scott, S.G., & Bruce, R.A. (1994). Determinants of  innovative behavior: a path model of  individual innovation in
the workplace. Academy of  Management Journal, 37(03), 580-607. https://doi.org/10.5860/choice.32-1325 
Sifatu, W .O., Sjahruddin, H., Fajriah, Y ., Dwijendra, N.K.A., & Santoso, A. (2020). Innovative work behaviors in 
pharmacies of  Indonesia: Role of  employee voice, generational diversity management and employee 
engagement. Systematic Reviews in Pharmacy, 11(2), 725-734. https://doi.org/10.31838/srp.2020.2.105 
Siregar, Z.M.E., Sujana, F.R., Pranowo, A.S., & Supriadi, Y .N. (2021). Job autonomy and innovative work 
behavior of  marketing employees in the automotive industry in Indonesia: The mediating role of  
organizational commitment. Quality - Access to Success, 22(180), 97-102. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/350954013 
Stock, R., Groß, M., & Xin, K.R. (2019). Will Self-Love Take a Fall? Effects of  Top Executives’ Positive 
Self-Regard on Firm Innovativeness. Journal of  Product Innovation Management, 36(1), 41-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12443 
Swaroop, P ., & Dixit, V . (2018). Employee engagement, work autonomy and innovative work behaviour: An 
empirical study. International Journal of  Innovation, Creativity and Change, 4(2), 158-176. Available at: 
http://www.ijicc.net 
Tajeddini, K., & Martin, E. (2020). The importance of  human-related factors on service innovation and 
performance. International Journal of  Hospitality Management, 85, 102431. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhm.2019.102431 
Tett, R.P ., & Burnett, D.D. (2003). A personality trait-based interactionist model of  job performance. Journal of  
Applied Psychology, 88(3), 500-517. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.3.500 
Thornhill, S. (2006). Knowledge, innovation and firm performance in high- and low-technology regimes. Journal 
of  Business Venturing, 21(5), 687-703. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2005.06.001 
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P . (2003). Towards a Methodology for Developing Evidence-Informed 
Management Knowledge by Means of  Systematic Review. British Journal of  Management, 14(3), 207-222. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375 
Ummi, N., Razali, R., Zuraini, A., Amlus, H., & Razak, N. (2019). Factors Affecting Innovative Work Behavior: 
A Case of  Manufacturing Company in Malaysia. International Journal of  Advanced Science and Technology, 28(8), 
645-652. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336799657 
Wang, Z., Gao, M., & Panaccio, A. (2021). A Self-Determination Approach to Understanding Individual Values 
as an Interaction Condition on Employees’ Innovative Work Behavior in the High-Tech Industry. Journal of  
Creative Behavior, 55(1), 183-198. https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.444 
West, M.A., & Farr, J.L. (1989). Innovation at work: Psychological perspectives. American Psychological Association. -
Available at: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1989-31447-001 
Widmann, A., Messmann, G., & Mulder, R.H. (2016). The Impact of  Team Learning Behaviors on Team 
Innovative Work Behavior: A Systematic Review. Human Resource Development Review, 15(4), 429-458. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484316673713 
Wilt, T.J., & Fink, H.A. (2007). Systematic reviews and meta-analyses. En Clinical Research Methods for Surgeons, 
20(1), 311-325. https://doi.org/PMCID: PMC3024725 
-87-
<<<PAGE=29>>>
Intangible Capital – https://doi.org/10.3926/ic.2389
Woods, S.A., Mustafa, M.J., Anderson, N., & Sayer, B. (2018). Innovative work behavior and personality traits: 
Examining the moderating effects of  organizational tenure. Journal of  Managerial Psychology, 33(1), 29-42. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JMP-01-2017-0016 
Yasir, M., Majid, A., Yousaf, Z., Nassani, A.A., & Haffar, M. (2021). An integrative framework of  innovative 
work behavior for employees in SMEs linking knowledge sharing, functional flexibility and psychological 
empowerment. European Journal of  Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-02-2021-0091 
Yuan, F., & Woodman, R.W . (2010). Innovative behavior in the workplace: The role of  performance and image 
outcome expectations. Academy of  Management Journal, 53(2), 323-342. 
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.49388995 
Intangible Capital, 2024 (www.intangiblecapital.org)
Article’s contents are provided on an Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 Creative commons International License. Readers are
allowed to copy, distribute and communicate article’s contents, provided the author’s and Intangible Capital’s names are
included. It must not be used for commercial purposes. To see the complete license contents, please visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
-88-