<<<PAGE=1>>>
Building capacity for water, sanitation, and hygiene programming:
Training evaluation theory applied to CLTS management training in
Kenya
Jonny Crockera, *, 1, Katherine F. Shieldsa, 1, Vidya Venkataramanana, Darren Saywellb,
Jamie Bartrama
a The Water Institute at UNC, Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB #7431, 135 Dauer
Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7431, USA
b Plan International USA, 1255 23rd Street NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20037, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 3 February 2016
Received in revised form
6 July 2016
Accepted 6 August 2016
Available online 8 August 2016
Keywords:
Kenya
Water
Sanitation
CLTS
Training evaluation
Capacity building
Conceptual framework
Sustainable development goals
abstract
Training and capacity building are long established critical components of global water, sanitation, and
hygiene (WaSH) policies, strategies, and programs. Expanding capacity building support for WaSH in
developing countries is one of the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals. There are many training
evaluation methods and tools available. However, training evaluations in WaSH have been infrequent,
have often not utilized these methods and tools, and have lacked rigor. We developed a conceptual
framework for evaluating training in WaSH by reviewing and adapting concepts from literature. Our
framework includes three target outcomes: learning, individual performance, and improved program-
ming; and two sets of inﬂuences: trainee and context factors. We applied the framework to evaluate a
seven-month community-led total sanitation (CLTS) management training program delivered to 42
government ofﬁcials in Kenya from September 2013 to May 2014. Trainees were given a pre-training
questionnaire and were interviewed at two weeks and seven months after initial training. We qualita-
tively analyzed the data using our conceptual framework. The training program resulted in trainees
learning the CLTS process and new skills, and improving their individual performance through appli-
cation of advocacy, partnership, and supervision soft skills. The link from trainees' performance to
improved programming was constrained by resource limitations and pre-existing rigidity of trainees’
organizations. Training-over-time enhanced outcomes and enabled trainees to overcome constraints in
their work. Training in soft skills is relevant to managing public health programs beyond WaSH. We make
recommendations on how training programs can be targeted and adapted to improve outcomes. Our
conceptual framework can be used as a tool both for planning and evaluating training programs in WaSH.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Globally 2.4 billion people lack access to improved sanitation,
and 946 million lack access to any sanitation facility and practice
open defecation (OD) (WHO/UNICEF, 2015). Poor sanitation and
hygiene together cause an estimated 577,000 deaths annually
(Prüss-Ustün et al., 2014 ), and half of child stunting can be
explained by OD (Spears, 2013). Sanitation can lead to improved
social status and dignity (Jenkins and Curtis, 2005; Jenkins and
Scott, 2007 ), gender-equity bene ﬁts ( Mahon and Fernandes,
2010), and increased school attendance for girls. Human resource
development has been recognized as critical to global water, sani-
tation, and hygiene (WaSH) progress since 1982 (Carefoot and
Gibson, 1984; WHO, 1982). A 2014 global assessment found only
one-third of countries had human resource strategies for WaSH,
despite a lack of capacity constraining the sector (WHO, 2014). The
capacity gap in WaSH includes a lack of soft skills among program
managers such as partnership and supervision (WHO, 2010), which
are increasingly important given a shift in WaSH interventions
towards participatory behavior-change approaches that necessitate
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jonny.crocker@unc.edu (J. Crocker), kshields@email.unc.edu
(K.F. Shields), vidyaram@live.unc.edu (V. Venkataramanan), darren.saywell@
planusa.org (D. Saywell),jbartram@email.unc.edu (J. Bartram).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Social Science & Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/l ocate/socscimed
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.008
0277-9536/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76
<<<PAGE=2>>>
these skills (Evans et al., 2014). This gap is partly due to training that
is not matched to needs, and to ill-equipped training institutions
(Cavill et al., 2011). Responsibility for WaSH programs is frequently
decentralized to local government without suf ﬁcient staff and
ﬁnancial resources (IWA, 2013). Training in soft skills has the po-
tential to bene ﬁt public health programs beyond WaSH, by
improving program planning ( Pappaioanou et al., 2003 ), and
strengthening health systems (Rowe et al., 2010). With population
growth and the United Nations ’ adoption of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), which expand national WaSH targets to
include universal access and increased quality of WaSH services
(UN General Assembly, 2015), the gap between human resource
capacity and targets will grow. In response, SDG Target 6a is to“ …
expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to
developing countries in water and sanitation related activities and
programmes …” (UN General Assembly, 2015).
There are few training evaluations in WaSH, and those that do
exist tend to lack rigor. A review of 104 WaSH organizations found
that over 60% do not monitor or report on their training programs,
and only 15% monitor beyond simple process indicators such as
number of trainees (Ngai et al., 2013). The review also found
widespread duplication of efforts, and negligible long-term trainee
tracking. There are many training evaluation frameworks and tools
outside the WaSH sector; however, they require adaptation and
expansion for use in the complex WaSH sector, as they tend to focus
on ideal trainees and isolated environments, and assess clearly
deﬁned and easily measured learning and behavior outcomes such
as performance in ﬂight simulators and building Lego models
(Adams et al., 1999; Blume et al., 2009). Evaluations of training and
capacity building in WaSH tend to focus on real-world settings, but
few draw on the extensive evidence, tools, and theory outside
WaSH. Despite a large and growing capacity shortfall, training in
WaSH is insufﬁcient and poorly evaluated. There is opportunity to
increase beneﬁcial impact by applying well-developed theory to
increase learning, behavior change, and program outcomes arising
from investments in training.
We reviewed and adapted training evaluation theory, developed
a conceptual framework for use in evaluating training in WaSH, and
applied it to a community-led total sanitation (CLTS) management
training program for government ofﬁcials in Kenya. CLTS is an
adaptive, participatory approach, and managing CLTS requires a
diverse set of skills and collaboration between sectors. This pro-
vided an opportunity to explore the value and relevance of our
conceptual framework. Our study provides new tools for use in the
WaSH sector, as well as new evidence on building capacity within
local government for managing WaSH programs.
2. Methods
This study involved the development of a conceptual framework
for evaluating training in WaSH, a CLTS management training
program delivered by Plan International Kenya (Plan) to govern-
ment ofﬁcials in Kenya, and an evaluation of the training program
in Kenya using the conceptual framework.
2.1. Context
CLTS emerged in the year 2000 as a participatory approach to
address OD ( Kar and Chambers, 2008 ), and is now a well-
established approach that has been implemented in over 50
countries (IDS, 2011). CLTS was introduced to Kenya in 2007. At the
inception of this project in 2011, CLTS in Kenya was focused on
policies, strategies, and institutional arrangements nationally; and
on village-level implementation locally (Crocker and Rowe, 2015).
The government adopted CLTS into national sanitation policy and
published CLTS guidelines (Government of Kenya et al. (2011);
Kenya Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation (2011)). The Min-
istry of Public Health and Sanitation (MOPHS) was tasked with
managing CLTS programs (Crocker and Rowe, 2015). The govern-
ment initiated an Open Defecation Free (ODF) Rural Kenya 2013
campaign, and contracted a non-governmental organization (NGO),
the Kenya Water and Health Organization, to independently verify
ODF communities.
In 2013, a new constitution was enacted, in which government
decision-making was devolved to 47 newly designated counties
comprising 290 sub-counties. County and sub-county re-
sponsibilities are still developing and some confusion persists. The
MOPHS was merged with the Ministry of Health (MoH), while other
ministries are being combined or phased out.
Multilaterals and NGOs such as UNICEF, Plan, and World Vision
support CLTS in Kenyaﬁnancially and through training and guid-
ance. Public health ofﬁcers (employees of the MoH) and volunteer
community health workers facilitate CLTS activities. However,
training local government of ﬁcials to manage CLTS programs,
including coordinating a diverse range of organizations, has largely
been overlooked (Crocker and Rowe, 2015). A lack of local gov-
ernment capacity to manage programs can lead to a lack of support
and guidance to communities.
2.2. Program description
Plan identiﬁed local government (the“ sub-county” in Kenya) as
critical to improving CLTS programs, due to its roles in advocating
to county government for policies and funding, and coordinating
implementation byﬁeld ofﬁcers and NGOs. Plan developed a CLTS
management training program (Fox et al., 2013), and invited ofﬁ-
cials with a direct or indirect role in sanitation to participate. Plan
trained ofﬁcials from two sub-counties in Kiliﬁ County, and two in
Homa Bay County.
The training program comprised an initialﬁve-day training, and
“ training-over-time” activities over the following seven months,
which is less common than one-time training (Baldwin et al., 2009).
Ofﬁcials were trained by county. The initial training covered CLTS
implementation with a ﬁeld demonstration, and management
skills in partnership, supervision, resource mobilization, and
monitoring. Training was participatory, inter-ministerial, and
included group work. Training-over-time activities incorporated
training and application, and included CLTSﬁeld training, resource
mobilization, work planning, monitoring, advocacy, training
division-level staff, and sensitizing county ofﬁcials. A majority of
trainees attended the majority of activities. Advocacy training and
sensitizing county ofﬁ
cials were not completed in Kiliﬁ County due
to government training for polio vaccination and terrorism
response taking priority. A timeline of activities with the number of
trainees at each is inSupplement 1. A description of the training
program is available online (Plan International Kenya, 2015).
2.3. Study design
We used a qualitative study design to evaluate the CLTS man-
agement training program, and developed a conceptual framework
to guide the evaluation. The conceptual framework is presented in
section 3.
2.3.1. Data collection
Data collection tools (Supplement 3) were designed to identify
the target outcomes of the training program (Fox et al., 2013), in-
ﬂuences, and the links between them, following our conceptual
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76 67
<<<PAGE=3>>>
framework (Fig. 1). Research Guide Africa (RGA), a Kenyan social
research agency, was hired to recruit study participants and
administer surveys and interviews. During interviewer training, the
tools were tested and reﬁned for clarity and cultural appropriate-
ness. Four local interviewers were trained for two days, and two
were hired based on performance during training. The researchers'
had no interactions with trainees. All government ofﬁcials who
participated in the initial training were eligible for inclusion in the
study. RGA obtained informed consent in person before training
began. IRB approval was obtained from the University of North
Carolina and from the Kenya National Council for Science and
Technology. There were three interactions with trainees: 1) a pre-
training questionnaire to understand trainees' background and
expectations; 2) round-one interviews two weeks after initial
training to assess learning, attitudes, motivations, ability, and the
quality of the training design; and 3) round-two interviews seven
months later after training-over-time activities to assess trainee's
performance, and organizational and external factors that inﬂu-
enced their performance.
Individual in-depth interviews were conducted in trainees ’
workplaces for 20 e75 min. Interviews were in English with
explanation in Swahili when necessary. Interviews were recorded
and transcribed verbatim by the interviewer, with Swahili trans-
lated into English, then checked in full by the second interviewer.
During round-one, interviewers did not always have time for the
last few questions, so the round-two interview guide included
more instructions, prompts, and timing guidance.
2.3.2. Analysis
Interview transcripts were coded using Atlas.ti by the second
author, and a sample was reviewed by theﬁrst author. Transcripts
were coded ﬁrst by interview section, then by inductive and
deductive themes. The second author did not contribute to the
conceptual framework until after coding to reduce the potential for
bias during inductive coding. Themes were systematically catego-
rized into outcomes and inﬂuences from the conceptual framework
through discussion between the ﬁrst and second authors until
consensus was achieved (Fig. 1), then the framework was used to
interpret themes and understand links between outcomes and in-
ﬂuences. Selected interview quotes appear in-text with additional
quotes inSupplement 4.
Knowledge gained was assessed by looking for training concepts
recalled during interviews. Skills are not easily measured by
interviewing, sopotential skills were assessed from round-one in-
terviews by asking trainees to describe how and why they planned
to change their work practices. Changes made to work practices
were assessed from round-two interviews administered seven
months later. To avoid positive bias, trainees were prompted for
detailed examples of planned or actual changes to work practices,
and why they made these changes. For the purposes of analysis,
general descriptions and examplesdwhen trainees could not pro-
vide details on the how and whydwere considered a lack of evi-
dence. Factors that inﬂuenced trainees and training outcomes were
assessed in two ways: by asking trainees about them directly, and
by coding inﬂuencing factors when they arose naturally. Findings
are not intended to comprehensively describe training outcomes
and inﬂuences; rather, the most important outcomes and critical
inﬂuences are revealed by this analysis.
3. Conceptual framework
We reviewed the literature for training evaluation frameworks,
tools, and concepts, and combined and adapted them to develop a
conceptual framework as a tool for identifying outcome, trainee,
and context indicators, and to relate training to outcomes (Fig. 1).
We also assessed the relationship between inﬂuences and out-
comes in order to make recommendations for adapting future
training programs to local context.
3.1. Literature review
We ﬁrst searched for any published articles that evaluated
training or capacity building in WaSH, and that used any
framework, model, or guideline for the evaluation. We were
looking speciﬁcally for concepts applicable to training evalua-
tion, so included capacity building and development in our
search as training is often a component of these. We foundﬁve
articles that evaluated training in WaSH. Two of the studies did
not use a framework or follow an evaluation guideline or pro-
tocol (Barat et al., 2014; Gunawardana et al., 2013). Two others
mentioned frameworks, though they did not thoroughly describe
their use (Mvulirwenande et al., 2013; Ngai et al., 2014). Theﬁfth
study proposed an approach to evaluating capacity development
partnerships (Pascual Sanz et al., 2013), but was not well-suited
for training evaluation. None of these ﬁve studies described
analysis, and only one included their survey guides and made the
link between data and results explicit ( Gunawardana et al.,
2013).
We did not use any of theseﬁve articles to inform our concep-
tual framework. We turned to training evaluation literature from
outside WaSH to develop our conceptual framework. We searched
for any published articles with an explicit focus on training evalu-
ation or transfer of training. In order to cover many different
evaluation approaches we only reviewed articles that present new
frameworks or concepts and reviews. We began with the most cited
and earliest published articles, then continued to review articles
until we reached saturation (i.e. reviewing additional articles did
not yield new concepts). We reviewed a total of 30 articles. The full
literature review and complete deﬁnitions from our conceptual
framework are presented inSupplement 2.
3.2. Conceptual framework
WaSH training programs are implemented to improve man-
agement and implementation of programs that construct infra-
structure, deliver WaSH services, or target behavior change. Our
conceptual framework includes three categories of “ target out-
comes,” which relate to the objectives of the organization leading
the training program, and six categories of“ inﬂuences,” which are
factors that affect outcomes. We use the termtarget to convey that
training programs should be evaluated against the target outcomes
(objectives) of the organization leading the training, and that other
outcomes of training may occur. This also requires that the orga-
nization leading the training sets objectives in advance. The broad
outcome and inﬂuence categories and their interactions are pre-
sented in Fig. 1.D eﬁnitions of each category, including sub-
categories or constructs, are presented in Table 1. Additional
explanation of the conceptual framework and commentary on
measurement of each outcome and inﬂuence are presented in
Supplement 2.
We include three target outcomes of training: learning, indi-
vidual performance, and improved programming. Improved pro-
gramming leads to impacts, which are not included in the
framework, because they may occur long after training ends, and
the causal link is confounded by many factors that cannot be
measured or accounted for (Schmidt, 2014).
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e7668
<<<PAGE=4>>>
We include six in ﬂuences in the framework: attitude and
motivation, ability, knowledge sharing, training design, organiza-
tional factors, and external factors. Theﬁrst three are“ trainee in-
ﬂuences” (characteristics of trainees), and the last three are
“ context inﬂuences” (characteristics of the training program and
work environment).
4. Results
4.1. Trainee characteristics
All 42 eligible trainees enrolled. One trainee each from Homa
Bay and Kiliﬁ Counties did not participate in the second interview.
Table 2presents trainee characteristics.
4.2. Evaluation ﬁndings: learning outcomes and inﬂuences
Learning outcomes and inﬂuences were assessed from round-
one interviews, so pertain only to initial training. Learning from
training-over-time activities is revealed through changes in indi-
vidual performance (section4.3). Target learning outcomes of the
training program were understanding the CLTS process, critical
thinking around CLTS, and development of four management skills:
partnership, supervision, resource mobilization, and monitoring
(Fig. 2).
4.2.1. Learning outcomes
Trainees were taught the CLTS steps (pre-triggering, triggering,
follow-up, veriﬁcation, and celebration) during initial training, and
participated in triggering a community. In round-one interviews,
nearly all trainees recalled the triggering that they had seen in the
ﬁeld, and half gave detailed examples of triggering activities. Only a
quarter of the trainees recalled details on pre-triggering and follow-
up. Recall of triggering details may have been higher because
trainees had seen these activities in practice. No trainees gave
detailed descriptions of CLTS veriﬁcation or celebration. While
trainees’ descriptions of CLTS triggering indicate understanding of
the theory of CLTS and the activity they observed in theﬁeld,
comprehensive recall of the entire CLTS process was found to be
low.
During initial training, favorable and challenging conditions for
implementing CLTS were presented to trainees (Fox et al., 2013).
From these, trainees frequently recalled environmental and
geographic conditions; however, government structure and re-
sponsibility were infrequently mentioned in interviews. Some
trainees described conditions that were not covered in training,
indicating trainees were thinking critically about what they had
learned. For example, they described how human andﬁnancial
resources, culture, and socioeconomic status could affect CLTS
success, which they had not been explicitly taught. Trainees also
observed conditions favorable for CLTS during theﬁeld visit:“ there
Table 1
Deﬁnitions of terms in the conceptual framework for WaSH training evaluation.
Category Term De ﬁnition
Outcomes Learning Knowledge and skills gained by trainees.
Individual
performance
Changes made to work activities by trainees through application of learning.
Improved
programming
Increased scale, duration, or quality of the outcomes of the programs in question. Increased scale refers to an increase in the number of
communities or people beneﬁting from the programs.
Trainee
inﬂuences
Attitude and
motivation
Motivation to learn, and attitudes toward learning, training material, and their work.
Ability As ability inﬂuences learning:cognitive ability and prior learning.
As ability inﬂuences individual performance:ability to transfer training content into work activities, which includes understanding the
relevance of training content to their work, and ability to see opportunities to apply learning in their work.
Knowledge
sharing
Trainees passing learning on to colleagues within their organization or within partner organizations.
Context
inﬂuences
Training design Training structure (e.g. setting, sequence of training material), and methods and tools (e.g. communicating training objectives,ﬁeld
work).
Organizational
factors
Characteristics of trainee organizations that inﬂuence trainees' application of learning to their work activities, or that inﬂuence the
links between individual performance and improved programming. These can be split into people-related and work system factors.
These can include within-and between-organization factors, such as Memorandums of Understanding, and coordinating committees.
External factors Factors beyond the training program, trainees, and their organizations that inﬂuence programming.
Fig. 1. Conceptual framework for evaluating training programs in WaSH. This framework is an adaptation of concepts from training evaluation literature for practical use in
WaSH studies.
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76 69
<<<PAGE=5>>>
is need to work closely with the Provincial Administration, the
opinion leaders, and also walking there earlier and walking around
physically in the area, to see if that problem (OD) exists, and of
course familiarizing yourself with the area.” Through recognition of
these conditions, trainees demonstrated their understanding of the
importance of context for success of CLTS programs. Complete
trainee-identiﬁed success and challenge factors are inSupplement
5.
Potential skills learned were seen when trainees planned to
apply skills to their workdwhich is a proxy for skills learned. While
some trainee responses suggested learning of skills (n¼ 15/42), the
majority of trainees could not articulate how they planned to apply
new skills to their work practices. Supervision and partnership
plans included forming an inter-ministerial committee to coordi-
nate supervision ofﬁeld staff (n¼ 1/42) and creating a forum for
CLTS coordination (n¼ 3/42). Resource mobilization plans included
approaching a new funding source (n ¼ 1/42), and increasing
follow-up and face-time with funders after submitting a proposal
(n ¼ 1/42). Monitoring plans included moving to consistent in-
dicators across ministries (n¼ 1/42), and adding new indicators
such as water committee feedback (n¼ 1/42). Two trainees said
they would just continue to ask Plan for support, indicating they
had not gained new resource mobilization skills.
4.2.2. Inﬂuence on learning: attitude and motivation
What motivated trainees in their work was complex and varied
in round-one interviews, ranging from helping people (n¼ 15/42)
and seeing changes such as health improvements in communities
(n ¼ 6/42), to seeing broad environmental, societal, or economic
change (n ¼ 8/42). Some trainees mentioned being motivated by
interacting with others (n¼ 9/42). Delayed funding or lack of re-
sources was commonly cited as discouraging (n¼ 21/42), as was
feeling that their work was hectic, stressful, or overwhelming
(n ¼ 5/42).
Some trainees revealed discomfort talking about sanitation and
feces. A few trainees were embarrassed when describing CLTS:
Table 2
Trainee characteristics.
County Ministry Total County/sub-county CLTS experience
conﬁrmed or likely
>10 years in profession
Homa Bay Health 8 1/7 7 3
Education 4 0/4 2 4
Water, Environment, Natural Resource 3 0/3 2 1
Devolution and Planning 2 1/1 0 0
Gender and Social Development (defunct) 2 1/1 1 1
Interior and Coordination of National Government 2 1/1 0 0
Labour, Social Security and Services 1 0/1 0 1
National Treasury 1 0/1 0 1
Youth and Sports 1 0/1 1 0
Kiliﬁ Health 5 1/4 4 3
Education 1 0/1 0 0
Water, Environment, Natural Resource 5 1/4 0 3
Interior and Coordination of National Government 1 0/1 0 1
Labour, Social Security and Services 1 1/0 0 0
Youth and Sports 3 1/2 3 1
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries 2 1/1 1 0
Fig. 2. Findings on learning outcomes and inﬂuences from evaluating a training program in Kenya, organized by the conceptual framework. Broad categories (learning,
attitudes and motivation, ability, and training design) are from the conceptual framework. Text within these broad categories are selectedﬁndings from the Kenya evaluation. Red
arrows indicate a negative inﬂuence, and green indicate a positive inﬂuence.
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e7670
<<<PAGE=6>>>
“ [The] triggering process is when the community has now
realized that this thing is bad for them … they draw their
community and show the houses and where they live and put
where they do the thing… (laughter).”
4.2.3. Inﬂuence on learning: ability
Twenty-one trainees either indicated in the pre-training ques-
tionnaire (Supplement 3) that they had prior training in CLTS
(n ¼ 13/42), or were likely to have prior training given their posi-
tion and level (n¼ 8/42) (Table 2). Prior CLTS training was more
common among trainees from the MoH than from other ministries.
Trainees who already possessed some CLTS knowledge and skills
had less potential to learn from training. This was most evident for
trainees from the MoH, many of whom perceived the highest value
of the training program to be bringing staff from other ministries
into a CLTS training, whereas those outside the MoH (with no prior
CLTS exposure) saw value in learning the CLTS content itself.
4.2.4. Inﬂuences on learning: training design
Most trainees spoke positively about initial training. Trainees
liked the participatory structure (n¼ 10/42) and inter-ministerial
group work, which allowed knowledge sharing across different
sectors. One trainee explained that the sitting arrangement allowed
different levels of staff to work together:“ we were like in the same
wave length and we could interact freely and share freely.” The
frequent group work allowed trainees to practice their partnership
skills.
Many trainees remembered a video about CLTS from Bangladesh
(n ¼ 19/42), describing how it helped them think about CLTS
principles such as community engagement and use of local re-
sources. Trainees frequently cited theﬁeld activity as an opportu-
nity to gain practical knowledge (n ¼ 7/42). Seeing training
concepts applied in the Bangladesh video and in theﬁeld in Kenya
helped trainees to think critically about how CLTS could work in
their counties. Higher recall of the CLTS steps that were demon-
strated in theﬁeld suggests the importance of practical experience
for increasing target learning outcomes.
Negative feedback on initial training primarily concerned
duration. Some trainees thought the initial training should have
been longer (n¼ 11/42), whereas a few thought it was too long
(n ¼ 3/42). Some trainees expressed a wish for higher daily cash
allowances (n¼ 7/42).
4.3. Evaluation ﬁndings: individual performance outcomes and
inﬂuences
The target individual performance outcomes of the training
program were application of the four management skills to work
activities, and increased ownership of sanitation programs (Fig. 3).
4.3.1. Individual performance outcomes
The most commonly reported changes to work practices con-
cerned partnership (n¼ 21/40) e a skill trainees practiced during
inter-ministerial group work in initial training. When asked about
partnerships in round-one interviews, trainees tended to list NGOs,
while inter-ministerial partnerships featured prominently in
round-two interviews (n ¼ 9/40). Inter-ministerial partnerships
can lead to improved coordination of CLTS programs. Trainees also
described improved communication and planning with partners
(n ¼ 6/40), new methods of forming partnerships (n¼ 2/40), and
increased collaboration on programs, such as tree planting cam-
paigns and Global Handwashing Day (n¼ 2/40). One trainee noted:
“ [the training program] bonded us so much that nowadays
when you are calling colleagues for an activity, these are people
that you are already working with and you are comfortable with
them. Recently, a new NGO was coming in to collect baseline
data, I simply cross over to [name] here at water ofﬁce [who]
immediately knows what kind of information I need.”
After initial training, trainees discussed plans for an inter-
ministerial committee to supervise ﬁeld staff and appraise each
other's work. In round-two interviews, trainees reported they had
improved communication and engagement with their supervisees
in decision making (n¼ 4/40). One trainee reported learning new
conﬂict resolution strategies from training.
Several trainees recalled training in resource mobilization and
commented on how helpful it was (n¼ 7/40). Trainees experienced
with CLTS made connections between resource mobilization and
partnership, speaking about joint-budget planning with county
government and other ministries (n¼ 2/40). Those without CLTS
experience gave examples unrelated to CLTS, such as writing their
ﬁrst proposal (n¼ 1/40), and using new mechanisms to request
funding (n ¼ 4/40). No one mentioned mobilizing resources from
Plan in round-two interviews, despite having planned to. This shift
indicates that trainees were thinking about resource mobilization
beyond their established mechanisms.
In round-two interviews, three trainees reported monitoring
with increased frequency.
Increased ownership of sanitation programs manifested as
trainees identifying ways they had, or planned to, apply CLTS
knowledge in their work (n¼ 10/40). Some suggested they would
spread CLTS and sanitation messages while visiting communities
(n ¼ 5/40). Others added sanitation activities to their work (n¼ 5/
40), for example by including public toilets in a funded irrigation
plan. One trainee suggested they would monitor OD while visiting
communities for other projects.
Trainees also showed other signs of taking ownership of CLTS,
like drafting a sanitation policy to secure long-term institutional
support for CLTS. A quote from one trainee demonstrated their
ownership of CLTS:
“ [it] always worries me if a project ends, what will then drive
the community, and there now you will need the service of the
health promotion ofﬁcer. Everybody will leave. Every other
department will say‘that Plan thing came to an end and we are
waiting for it if it comes back! But now as a health promotion
ofﬁcer it is my burden to see that this continues, enablement of
people's health issues continues, so what has been started, it has
to move on!… if I pack up and say that‘Plan mentorship went!
EGPAF went! UNICEF went! ’ Then I will be killing the
community!”
The increased coordination and collaboration between minis-
tries described above was another indication of increased owner-
ship of CLTS.
4.3.2. Inﬂuences on individual performance: attitude and
motivation
The attitudes and motivations that inﬂuence learning also in-
ﬂuence individual performance.
4.3.3. Inﬂuences on individual performance: ability
Following our conceptual framework, we looked for ways in
which trainees were able to make connections between training
and their work (n¼ 18/40), which can lead to improved individual
performance. Trainees saw connections in four areas: links to their
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76 71
<<<PAGE=7>>>
ministry's focus area (n ¼ 8/40), creating healthy populations
(n ¼ 8/40), supporting Kenya's development (n ¼ 2/40), and
applicability of the CLTS approach to their work (n¼ 3/40).
Several trainees made ministry-speci ﬁc connections. One
trainee working in agriculture noted that CLTS can improve hygiene
behavior, allowing food crops to be sold more widely. A high-level
administrator saw a connection between reduced OD and improved
security for women and girls. Three trainees in the Ministry of
Water linked reduced OD to improved water quality. Some trainees
(such as those in education) noted their work depends on having
healthy populations, which can depend on sanitation. One trainee
demonstrated the ability to link the training to their work,
describing how they used their new understanding of the
sanitation-health link to motivate their colleagues:
“ … we work with targets in government and we sign perfor-
mance contracts, so even if you assign them these [sanitation]
duties, the ofﬁcers will say that it’s not within their performance
contracts … But when they are taken through this process, they
realize that this [sanitation] problem is affecting health issues in
communities. They then realize that as an ofﬁcer, when people
are often sick in an area, they won't be able to mobilize them for
any activities, and that he too won't achieve his targets, so that
connection needs to be established.”
A few noted that CLTS is good for Kenya's development, and that
sanitation is recognized as a right in their constitution. Others
noted they could use triggering and participatory techniques from
CLTS for other behavior change programs. For those in the MoH
already working on CLTS, links between training and their work
were clearer.
4.3.4. Inﬂuences on individual performance: organizational factors
Organizational factors can be categorized into people-related
factors and work system factors. Having an inﬂexible supervisor
was found to be an important people-related organizational
constraint. Some trainees were motivated to pursue CLTS, but found
it difﬁcult, because it was not part of their core functions (n¼ 3/40).
One commented that:
“ …at times when the trainings are organized they tend to clash
… my supervisor is sometimes not willing to let go because he
wonders that this is not my core function and not in my job
description.”
Two training activities were directed at this constraint: Plan
sensitized trainees’ supervisors at the county level to the impor-
tance of sanitation and CLTS (Fig. 3), and also trained trainees in
advocacy. The sensitization modiﬁed the organizational constraint
by encouragingﬂexibility by the supervisors so that trainees could
apply their learning, while advocacy training empowered trainees
to argue for increasedﬂexibility directly. These two activities only
occurred in Homa Bay county.
Rigid organizational guidelines were a work system factor that
constrained changes in monitoring. One trainee commented that
monitoring community-level outcomes had not changed because
they always followed existing guidelines.
Insufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources were a frequently referenced
work system factor constraining the application of new knowledge
and skills (n ¼ 10/40). Plan's training program included two ac-
tivities directed at this constraint: lobbying county government to
commit 0.5% of the following year's budget to sanitation (Fig. 3),
and resource mobilization training so that trainees could raise
Fig. 3. Findings on individual performance outcomes and inﬂuences from evaluating a training program in Kenya, organized by the conceptual framework. Broad categories
(individual performance, attitudes and motivation, ability, and organizational factors) are from the conceptual framework. Red arrows indicate anegative inﬂuence, green a positive
inﬂuence, and gray both positive and negative inﬂuences. Purple arrows indicate where training activities modiﬁed organizational factors.
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e7672
<<<PAGE=8>>>
funds themselves. However, several trainees cited their lack of
authority and inability to changeﬁxed budgets as preventing them
from applying their new resource mobilization skills (n¼ 4/40),
indicating additional organizational factors constraining individual
performance.
The 2013 devolution in Kenya was an important work system
organizational factor, as an enabler and constraint. For one trainee,
decentralized decision-making allowed better communication
with supervisors who had relocated from the capital city to regional
centers. For others, devolution meant lacking a supervisor for
several months (n¼ 3/40). Uncertainty regarding renewal ofﬁeld
staff contracts also discouraged trainees from applying new su-
pervision skills (n¼ 2/40).
4.4. Evaluation ﬁndings: improved programming outcomes and
inﬂuences
4.4.1. Improved programing outcomes
Assessment of improved programming is often difﬁcult and
inconclusive, as outcomes can occur long after training and are
inﬂuenced by many factors. Increased scale and duration of CLTS
programs may only occur after our seven-month evaluation time-
frame, and cannot always be linked to training when many external
factors are present. We did not attempt to evaluate programming
outcomes, but instead looked for preliminary indications of
improved programming (Fig. 4), and asked trainees to reﬂect on
programming. A few trainees thought the government could
independently scale-up CLTS in their county (n¼ 10/40), though
the majority thought that support from Plan or other NGO partners
would be necessary. Trainees outside the MoH suggested inte-
grating CLTS into school and agricultural programs, and youth and
women's groups as mechanisms for scale-up.
4.4.2. Inﬂuences on improved programming: knowledge sharing
Both interview rounds included questions on knowledge shar-
ingdtrainees taking the initiative to transfer learned knowledge
and skills to their colleagues and supervisees. Many trainees re-
ported sharing knowledge (n¼ 20/40), and one elaborated on its
importance:
“ If you don't share knowledge, it is like it is not there. So when
you share knowledge, you ease the work… you cannot carry
everything on your shoulders. You need to leave some of the
work to others, so you delegate such that work continues even
without you.”
Another trainee described how knowledge sharing can lead to
training outcomes being more resilient to staf ﬁng changes: “ I
would like when I leave any other person who is coming inﬁnds a
system that is working, not an individual's job!” Knowledge sharing
can improve programming by facilitating institutionalization and
sustainability of training outcomes.
4.4.3. Inﬂuences on improved programming: organizational factors
There were several work system organizational factors that
inﬂuenced improved programming. Trainees from several organi-
zations cited insuf ﬁcient stafﬁng (n ¼
10/40), competing re-
sponsibilities (n ¼ 3/40) and uncertainty resulting from changing
personnel and ministry restructuring during devolution (n¼ 16/40)
as programming challenges. For example, Ministry of Education
ofﬁcials were unable to receive county funding for sanitation, as
their ministry was not yet decentralized. Insufﬁcient ﬁnancing was
described as constraining scale-up and duration of CLTS programs
(n ¼ 7/40). Plan lobbied county government directly and trained
trainees in resource mobilization to addressﬁnancial constraints
(Fig. 4).
People-related organizational factors also inﬂuenced improved
programming. Lack of trust prevented the establishment of a col-
lective bank account for CLTS, when trainees were unable to agree
on who would control the account. One trainee described tension
with trainees from the MoH:
“ … people have been seeing sanitation as a Ministry of Health
kind of issue, so if they don't incorporate these other people
who are not at the Ministry of Health and they want to go by
themselves, I don't see them succeeding…all of us are targeting
Fig. 4. Findings on improved programming outcomes and inﬂuences from evaluating a training program in Kenya, organized by the conceptual framework. Broad cate-
gories (improved programming, knowledge sharing, organizational and external factors) are from the conceptual framework. Text within these broadcategories are selected
ﬁndings from the Kenya evaluation. Purple arrows indicate training activities.
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76 73
<<<PAGE=9>>>
the community as a client and when it's all-inclusive that is the
strength.”
Another described trainees from different ministries disagree-
ing about incorporating environmental impact assessment into
CLTS. Trainees also noted that NGOs rely on government staff and
expect them to drop other responsibilities to implement NGO
programs (n ¼ 2/40). While trainees were able to improve their
individual performance, these organizational constraints may
reduce the impact of training on improved sanitation
programming.
4.4.4. Inﬂuences on improved programming: external factors
External factors enable or constrain trainees and their organi-
zations. Several trainees recognized the national policy environ-
ment as broadly enabling CLTS programs, noting that CLTS is
included in the sanitation policy, and that policy can empower
communities to act on their own. A few trainees described policy as
constraining CLTS programs, particularly the conﬂict between CLTS
being “ community-led” and the government having a national ODF
target and top-down policies. The security situation in Kiliﬁ was an
external factor that directly affected the training program, as all
government ofﬁcials in Kiliﬁ were required to attend meetings on
terrorism response, which delayed some training activities, and
resulted in advocacy training being dropped in Kiliﬁ.
5. Discussion
We developed a conceptual framework for evaluating training in
WaSH (Fig. 1) and used it to evaluate a CLTS management training
program for government ofﬁcials in Kenya. The framework includes
three categories of outcomes (learning, individual performance,
and improved programming) which we evaluated against the
training objectives (Fig. 5). The framework also sets out six cate-
gories of inﬂuences on outcomes.
5.1. Outcomes
The target learning outcomes of the training program in Kenya
we evaluated were an understanding the CLTS process, critical
thinking about CLTS, and development of management skills. After
the initial training, few trainees understood the entire CLTS process,
although most demonstrated critical thinking about implementing
CLTS in their counties. Round-one interviews also indicated that the
initial training resulted in limited learning of new skills. However,
trainees later demonstrated they had gained new skills when they
applied them to their work.
Target individual performance outcomes were application of
management skills to work activities, and increased ownership of
sanitation programs. There were frequent examples of trainees
improving their work by applying new partnership skills. Improved
coordination between ministries and supervision ofﬁeld staff were
particularly apparent. Application of other skills were less com-
mon: a few trainees had used new resource mobilization and
monitoring skills. Trainees, including those with no prior CLTS
experience, also demonstrated increased ownership of sanitation
programs in a variety of ways such as incorporating sanitation into
existing work activities.
Target improved programming outcomes were increased scale,
duration, and quality of CLTS programs. No interview questions
directly focused on these programming outcomes, as a longer term
evaluation with comparison groups would be needed to assess
them. Nevertheless, increased ownership of sanitation among
trainees, and increased coordination and collaboration between
ministries were indications that improved programming was likely
to occur.
5.2. Inﬂuences on outcomes
By using our conceptual framework to guide our evaluation, we
identiﬁed characteristics of trainees and the context in which they
work that both constrained and enhanced the training outcomes.
We discuss inﬂuences and recommendations for training together,
as improving outcomes involves identifying inﬂ
uences in advance,
then adapting training to reﬂect these inﬂuences (see “ training
needs assessment literature” for sample methodologies:Goldstein
and Ford, 2002; Moore and Dutton, 1978; Rossett, 1987).
We found that a variety of aspects of the training design
enhanced training outcomes. The trainers improved learning out-
comes by conveying training objectives, focusing on practical
knowledge and skills, and actively involved trainees, all of which
are adult learning principles that should be incorporated into
training of public health professionals (Bryan et al., 2009). We
found that incorporation of learning-by-doing activities such as
hands-on ﬁeld training can positively inﬂuence trainees’ motiva-
tion, knowledge recall, and critical thinking. Videos and examples
from unfamiliar settings can foster creative thinking. Group dis-
cussions and brainstorming can help trainees identify or create
ways to apply their learning to their work. Participatory training
emphasizing group work can improve relationships between
trainees and reduce tensions between ministries. Training-over-
time activities enhanced learning of new skills that were not fully
developed during the initial ﬁve-day training session. Training-
over-time also enhanced application of skills, consistent with
non-WaSH studies which recommend unstructured, on-the-job
Fig. 5. Achievement of the target outcomes of a CLTS management training program for 42 trained government ofﬁcials in Kenya.
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e7674
<<<PAGE=10>>>
learning opportunities as a“ post-training intervention” (McCauley
et al., 1994; Paradise, 2007). Training-over-time is an underutilized
approach (Baldwin et al., 2009) that should be used to improve
learning and performance outcomes.
A number of organizational factors negatively in ﬂuenced
trainees' individual performance, and constrained the link between
individual performance and improved programming. A lack of
ﬂexibility on the part of trainees' supervisors, insufﬁcient human
and ﬁnancial resources allocated to sanitation, slow-to-evolve re-
lationships between organizations, and uncertain roles following
devolution all initially prevented trainees from introducing new
activities into their work. Organizational constraints can be
addressed by empowering trainees or by having the organization
delivering training modifying constraints directly. For example, we
found that resource mobilization and advocacy training empow-
ered trainees to advocate for increased ﬂexibility and ﬁnancial
support. Plan also directly lobbied trainees’ supervisors (county
government) for increased ﬂexibility and budget commitments.
However, direct modiﬁcation of constraints does not necessarily
result in increased learning or sustainable outcomes, and should be
used in combination with training activities to empower trainees to
address these constraints themselves. The link from individual
performance to improved programming was supported by trainees
sharing knowledge with colleagues, which could be encouraged as
a way to reinforce learning and cost-effectively spread learning
beyond trainees.
While enhancing outcomes by targeting training to favorable
individuals and contexts may seem appealing, and indeed may be
effective for some types of training (Crocker et al., 2016), we
recommend against this strategy for management training of gov-
ernment ofﬁcials. Managers should be trained as teams for multi-
sectoral WaSH programs, and unfavorable contexts often align
with the greatest need. For example, targeting only ofﬁcials without
prior CLTS training would have excluded MoH ofﬁcials, whose
presence provided trainees an opportunity to practice cross-
sectoral partnership skills. Additionally, some studies have found
that “ overlearning” (repeating training content to embed learning)
is beneﬁcial (Burke and Hutchins, 2007).
5.3. Conceptual framework
The conceptual framework can be used to support the design of
training programs (by implementing organizations) and their
evaluation (by researchers, ideally with data collected indepen-
dently of the implementing organizations to minimize bias). The
three outcome categories can be used to set and organize training
goals, which should be done before training begins so that they can
be communicated to trainees at the outset, and so that they can be
evaluated. The six inﬂuences can be assessed during a situational or
needs assessment prior to training, so that the training program can
be adapted to reﬂect these inﬂuences. Modiﬁable organizational
constraints can be addressed in parallel to or as part of training
(Baldwin et al., 2009; Eddy and Tannenbaum, 2003 ). To our
knowledge, this is theﬁrst framework developed speciﬁcally for
evaluating training in WaSH.
Our intent was to develop conceptual framework that can be
used across training in the WaSH sector. The outcome and inﬂuence
categories can apply universally, although the speci ﬁc factors
relevant within each category will vary between training programs.
The tools and analysis methods used here should be adapted,
modiﬁed and replaced as others feel is appropriate for different
applications. For example, we focused on learning and individual
performance outcomes, so only interviewed the trainees and used a
seven-month evaluation period. Those wishing to focus on
improved programming outcomes and external factors should
consider interviewing trainees’ peers as well. While this framework
is a tool to support evaluation of training, it is not a substitute for an
appropriate study design, quality data collection, and analytical
rigor.
5.4. Limitations
This evaluation had a seven-month timeframe, so long-term
outcomes, such as increased scale and duration of CLTS programs,
were not seen. We did not interview anyone beyond trainees. In-
terviews did not include questions to elucidate all inﬂuences on
training outcomes. Impacts on beneﬁciaries’ health and wellbeing
are inﬂuenced by a wide range of factors that are not all measurable
and cannot be linked to training, and thus were not included in this
study.
6. Conclusions
There is a substantive human resources capacity gap in WaSH,
which will only widen with population growth and heightened
service quality benchmarks and coverage targets introduced with
the SDGs. In response, the need for training in WaSH will also in-
crease. The few published training evaluations in WaSH tend to lack
rigor, and do not draw on the extensive evidence that exists outside
of WaSH. We reviewed training evaluation literature, developed a
conceptual framework, and used it to evaluate a CLTS management
training program in Kenya.
Ultimately, the training did not achieve its target outcomes
among the majority of trainees. However, innovation is often the
result of a few champions or opinion leaders (Rogers, 1983; Valente
and Davis, 1999), so it still seems promising that there was a dra-
matic shift toward integration of participatory techniques and
democratic management styles among several trainees, and an
increased awareness of sanitation issues among a majority. Training
programs for government ofﬁcials should include soft skills appli-
cable across public health sectors such as advocacy, partnership,
and supervision, to increase the value of training and justify time
spent away from other responsibilities.
A growing need for capacity building in WaSH combined with
limited prior evaluation presents both a risk of misdirecting in-
vestments in training, and an opportunity to inﬂuence training for
improved outcomes. We suggest that our conceptual framework
can support design of effective training programs and more
rigorous training evaluations in WaSH.
Ethics statement
This study was reviewed and approved by the UNC Ofﬁce of
Human Research Ethics (study #13-0937) and by Kenya National
Council for Science and Technology (reference #NCST/5/002/R/173/
4). Informed consent was received from all participants.
Acknowledgements
The fundings in this article are a result of a sub-agreement to the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from Plan International
USA, which was a recipient of a grant from the Bill& Melinda Gates
Foundation (OPP1028953). Additional funding from a National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Training Grant
(T32ES007018) supported the primary author's time. Neither
funder had any role in study design, execution, or preparation of
this article.
The authors would like to thank the study participants; Plan
International Kenya for implementation, and for supporting data
collection and interpretation of ﬁndings; Samuel Musyoki and
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e76 75
<<<PAGE=11>>>
David Owuor for contributing to proposal development and study
design, Research Guide Africa for administering and transcribing
interviews; and Clarissa Brocklehurst for reviewing the data
collection tools and paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found athttp://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.008.
References
Adams, R.J., Klowden, D., Hannaford, B., 1999. Virtual training for a manual assembly
task. Haptics-e 2, 1e7.
Baldwin, T.T., Ford, J.K., Blume, B.D., 2009. Transfer of training 1988e2008: an
updated review and agenda for future research. In: Hodgkinson, G.P., Ford, J.K.
(Eds.), International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. John
Wiley & Sons, pp. 41e71.
Barat, M.A., Bhandari, B., Wali, S., 2014. Capacity building and training services in
the WASH sector in Afghanistan. In: 37th WEDC International Conference.
Hanoi, Vietnam, pp. 1e5.
Blume, B.D., Ford, J.K., Baldwin, T.T., Huang, J.L., 2009. Transfer of training: a meta-
analytic review. J. Manag. 36, 1065 e1105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0149206309352880.
Bryan, R.L., Kreuter, M.W., Brownson, R.C., 2009. Integrating adult learning princi-
ples into training for public health practice. Health Promot. Pract. 10, 557e563.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1524839907308117.
Burke, L.A., Hutchins, H.M., 2007. Training transfer: an integrative literature review.
Hum. Resour. Dev. Rev. 6, 263 e296. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
1534484307303035.
Carefoot, N., Gibson, H., 1984. Human Resource Development Handbook: Guidelines
for Ministries and Agencies Responsible for Water Supply and Sanitation. WHO.
Cavill, S., Parkinson, J., de Vette, K., 2011. Meeting the Water and Sanitation Mil-
lenium Development Goals: a Study of Human Resource Development Re-
quirements in Five Countries.
Crocker, J., Geremew, A., Atalie, F., Yetie, M., Bartram, J., 2016. Teachers and sani-
tation promotion: an assessment of community-led total sanitation in Ethiopia.
Environ. Sci. Technol.http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b01021.
Crocker, J., Rowe, R., 2015. Community-led Total Sanitation in Kenya: Findings from
a Situational Assessment (Chapel Hill, NC),http://waterinstitute.unc.edu/ﬁles/
2015/03/situational-assessment-kenya-2015-02.pdf.
Eddy, E.R., Tannenbaum, S.I., 2003. Transfer in an e-learning context Francis. In:
Holton III, E.F., Baldwin, T.T. (Eds.), Improving Learning Transfer in Organiza-
tions. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, pp. 161e194.
Evans, W.D., Pattanayak, S.K., Young, S., Buszin, J., Rai, S., Bihm, J.W., 2014. Social
marketing of water and sanitation products: a systematic review of peer-
reviewed literature. Soc. Sci. Med. 110, 18 e25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.socscimed.2014.03.011.
Fox, J., Chepleting, S., Owuor, D., 2013. Managing CLTS: a facilitator's resource pack.
Plan. Int. Kenya 76.http://waterinstitute.unc.edu/ﬁles/2015/03/managing-clts-
facilitators-resource-pack.pdf.
Goldstein, I.L., Ford, J.K., 2002. Training in Organizations: Needs Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation, fourth ed. Cengage Learning.
Government of Kenya, UNICEF, Kenya Water and Health Organization, INTOUCH,
2011. A Practitioners Guide for ODF Certiﬁcation in Kenya.
Gunawardana, I., Leendertse, K., Handoko, W., 2013. Monitoring outcomes and
impacts of capacity development in the water sector: a Cap-Net UNDP expe-
rience. Water Policy 15, 226e241. http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wp.2013.121.
IDS, 2011. The CLTS Approach [WWW Document]. URL. http://www.
communityledtotalsanitation.org/page/clts-approach (accessed 2.1.15).
IWA, 2013. Human Resource Capacity Gaps in Water and Sanitation: Main Findings
and the Way Forward.
Jenkins, M.W., Curtis, V.A., 2005. Achieving the“ good life” : why some people want
latrines in rural Benin. Soc. Sci. Med. 61, 2446e2459.
Jenkins, M.W., Scott, B., 2007. Behavioral indicators of household decision-making
and demand for sanitation and potential gains from social marketing in
Ghana. Soc. Sci. Med. 64, 2427 e2442. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.socscimed.2007.03.010.
Kar, K., Chambers, R., 2008. Handbook on Community-led Total Sanitation. Plan UK
and Institute of Development Studies.
Kenya Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, 2011. Training Manual for Training
of Trainers in Community-led Total Sanitation.
Mahon, T., Fernandes, M., 2010. Menstrual hygiene in South Asia: a neglected issue
for WASH (water, sanitation and hygiene) programmes. Gend. Dev. 18, 99e113.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13552071003600083.
McCauley, C.D., Ruderman, M.N., Ohlott, P.J., Morrow, J.E., 1994. Assessing the
developmental components of managerial jobs. J. Appl. Psychol. 9, 544e560.
Moore, M.L., Dutton, P., 1978. Training needs analysis: review and critique. Acad.
Manag. Rev. 3, 532e545.
Mvulirwenande, S., Alaerts, G., de Montalvo, U.W., 2013. From knowledge and ca-
pacity development to performance improvement in water supply: the
importance of competence integration and use. Water Policy 15, 267e281.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wp.2013.023.
Ngai, T.K.K., Coff, B.E., Manzano, E., Seel, K., Elson, P., 2014. Evaluation of education
and training in water and sanitation technology: case studies in Nepal and Peru.
In: 37th WEDC International Conference. Hanoi, Vietnam, pp. 1e7.
Ngai, T.K.K., Mills, O., French, G., De Oliveira, R., Lepore, C., Mattens, M., Sibanda, T.,
Sweet, M., Graves, A., 2013. A global review of capacity building organizations in
water, sanitation, and hygiene for developing countries. In: 36th WEDC Inter-
national Conference. 36th WEDC International Conference, Nakura, Kenya.
Pappaioanou, M., Malison, M., Wilkins, K., Otto, B., Goodman, R.A., Churchill, R.E.,
White, M., Thacker, S.B., 2003. Strengthening capacity in developing countries
for evidence-based public health: the data for decision-making project. Soc. Sci.
Med. 57, 1925e1937. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0277-9536(03)00058-3.
Paradise, A., 2007. ASTD State of the Industry Report, American Society of Training
and Development (Alexandria, VA).
Pascual Sanz, M., Veenstra, S., de Montalvo, U.W., van Tulder, R., Alaerts, G., 2013.
What counts as“ results” in capacity development partnerships between water
operators? A multi-path approach toward accountability, adaptation and
learning. Water Policy 15, 242e266. http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wp.2013.022.
Plan International Kenya, 2015. CLTS Management Capacity Building for District-
level Ofﬁcials: Implementation Narrative. https://www.planusa.org/docs/clts-
gates-kenya-2015.pdf.
Prüss-Ustün, A., Bartram, J., Clasen, T.F., Colford, J.M., Cumming, O., Curtis, V.A.,
Bonjour, S., Dangour, A.D., De France, J., Fewtrell, L., Freeman, M.C., Gordon, B.,
Hunter, P.R., Johnston, R.B., Mathers, C., M€ausezahl, D., Medlicott, K., Neira, M.,
Stocks, M., Wolf, J., Cairncross, S., 2014. Burden of disease from inadequate
water, sanitation and hygiene in low- and middle-income settings: a retro-
spective analysis of data from 145 countries. Trop. Med. Int. Heal 19, 894e905.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/tmi.12329.
Rogers, E.M., 1983. Diffusion of Innovations, third ed. Newyork Free Press. The Free
Press, New York. doi:citeulike-article-id:126680.
Rossett, A., 1987. Training Needs Assessment, second ed. Educational Technology.
Rowe, L.A., Brillant, S.B., Cleveland, E., Dahn, B.T., Ramanadhan, S., Podesta, M.,
Bradley, E.H., 2010. Building capacity in health facility management: guiding
principles for skills transfer in Liberia. Hum. Resour. Health 8.http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1478-4491-8-5.
Schmidt, W.-P., 2014. The elusive effect of water and sanitation on the global burden
of disease. Trop. Med. Int. Heal 19, 522 e527. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
tmi.12286.
Spears, D., 2013. How Much International Variation in Child Height Can Sanitation
Explain? (No. 6351), Policy Research Working Paper. Washington, DC.
UN General Assembly, 2015. Draft Outcome Document of the United Nations
Summit for the Adoption of the Post-2015 Development Agenda. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199560103.003.0005.
Valente, T.W., Davis, R.L., 1999. Accelerating the diffusion of innovations using
opinion leaders. Ann. Am. Acad. 566, 55 e67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
000271629956600105.
WHO, 2014. UN-water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-
water (GLAAS) 2014 Report: Investing in Water and Sanitation: Increasing Ac-
cess, Reducing Inequalities.
WHO, 2010. UN-water Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-water
(GLAAS): Targeting Resources for Better Results.
WHO, 1982. Strategy Document on Human Resources Development: Recommen-
dations of the Task Force on Human Resources Development of the IDWSSD
Steering Committee for Cooperative Action. EHE/82.35.
WHO/UNICEF, 2015. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2015 Update and
MDG Assessment (Geneva, Switzerland).
J. Crocker et al. / Social Science & Medicine 166 (2016) 66e7676