<<<PAGE=1>>>
The 
Equitable 
Evaluation 
FrameworkTM
May 2023 Expansion
<<<PAGE=2>>>
May 22, 2023
dear Equitable Evaluation Initiative community and beyond, 
It’s spring in the United States, and with the season comes change, growth, expansion. 
The original offering of a set of principles and orthodoxies is known among those curious about 
and connected to the Equitable Evaluation FrameworkTM (EEF). The EEF is grounded primarily in 
the experience of institutional foundations within the United States from 2019—2023. 
During the past four and a half years the Equitable Evaluation Initiative (EEI) engaged with 44 
foundations in practice of the EEF. Alongside these foundations, consultants, philanthropic 
support organizations (PSOs), nonprofits, and public sector agencies contributed to the 
expanded version of the EEF we offer here. 
Today, the EEF includes the following elements: 
• Principles, as foundational guideposts;
• Orthodoxies to be questioned/challenged;
• Mindsets, as established set(s) of attitudes to be shifted;
• Tensions inherent in change processes to be named, navigated, and normalized; and
• Sticking Points, as opportunities to work through obstacles and perceived barriers to
progress.
It looks, sounds, and feels different. It evolved. It will continue to do so. 
Our heartfelt gratitude to EEI Investment Partners, EEF Practice Partners & Practitioners, 
Consultant and Nonprofit/Public Sector Pilot Participants, Coaches, and Knowledge Curators. 
This is a collective effort rooted in relationship, trust, reciprocity, and respect among humans 
striving to be more human. EEI’s commitment and intention remains steadfast: to seed a field 
and sow a practice of EEF practitioners. 
We invite you to explore this latest version of the EEF and engage with those in the practice.
Jara Dean-Coffey, MPH
Founder & Director
Marcia Coné, PhD
Director of Practice Engagement + Evolution
<<<PAGE=3>>>
table of contents
Overview 
& 
Grounding
01
 Elements of 
the Equitable 
Evaluation
FrameworkTM
02
Closing
&
Gratitude
13
 Origin
&
Methodology
15
Acknowledgments
&
Attributions
18
<<<PAGE=4>>>
praxis: how theory 
informs practice 
and how practice 
informs theory3
1
overview & grounding
gentle guidance
The aim and intention of the Equitable Evaluation Initiative (EEI) is to seed and grow a field of EEF 
Practitioners, sustained by the individuals and organizations in the practice, who bring heart and 
humanity into the work. Experience in the practice has provided some insight and wisdom on how 
to approach the EEF. 
Individuals and organizations often attempt to apply the entire Framework all at once—as an “all or 
nothing” Mindset. Be assured, this will result in frustration and a return to default practices. Not all 
of these elements will be in play all the time. 
We intentionally call this a practice because unlearning and learning takes time, and muscle memory 
evolves. As such, varying aspects of the elements may be applicable and useful at different times 
and moments, while others do not feel present or possible.
The invitation is to practice the EEF with intention and attention—to consider where there may be an 
entry point or opportunity to explore one of the EEF Principles. We invite curiosity and exploration 
about stated and unstated beliefs. How do these get in the way of what you are attempting to do? 
What if that weren’t true or is not always true? What might be possible? 
There may be a Mindset shift that offers or opens new ways of framing, or a Sticking Point that 
surfaces that feels challenging for which conversation may invite new perspectives, or a Tension 
that, once named, can support movement and exploration. 
Space and grace are needed—are, in fact, necessary—in the practice of the EEF. Practice allows 
for change—individual and organizational. Through practice, we align our stated values with our 
actions. Who we are in this work and how we show up in it are the difference that will make a 
difference.
actors include: 
foundations, 
their nonprofit partners, 
consultants/evaluators, 
and philanthropic serving 
organizations (PSOs)
You are the 
instrument of change.
The Equitable Evaluation FrameworkTM (EEF) invites alignment of purpose, practices, processes, and 
policies with stated values and intentions, specifically within the context of the U.S. philanthropic sector. 
EEF challenges us to be explicit and intentional about axiology (what we determine to be right), ontology 
(what we believe to be true/reality), and epistemology (what is evidence/knowledge). It expands 21st century 
definitions of validity, objectivity, rigor, and embraces complexity.1 It challenges cultural norms that 
continue to place preference for a singular type of truth, knowing, and evidence. The EEF changes the 
nature of methodologies, as well as offers a starting place for new or conventional ones. 
Actors in the philanthropic sector are invited to reimagine 
how to approach their work.2 The Framework offers space to 
ask questions and learn from and with each other in ways that 
inform our recommendations, actions, and decisions to align 
with aims and intentions.
The deepening of the EEF, steeped in practice and praxis, 
will continue to evolve.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Generally, the Orthodoxies, and their related and highly nuanced 
attitudes, behaviors, beliefs, policies, and processes, surface 
themselves in response to new ideas related to advancing the 
Principles in practice. These moments surface, and often stall, the 
change process. The Mindsets, Tensions, and Sticking Points 
provide entry points for conversation and connection and 
opportunities for reflection, reflexion, and realignment. 
EEF Principles are foundational guideposts to advance equity 
and challenge singular type of truth, knowing, and evidence. 
2
the elements of the Framework
The Orthodoxies are deeply held beliefs that get in the way of 
advancing the Principles. 
equity as ends: 
The absence of avoidable or 
remediable differences among groups 
of people, whether those groups 
are defined socially, economically, 
demographically, or geographically.5
The Mindsets, Tensions, and Sticking Points
provide support in traversing the Orthodoxies. 
The EEF is a set of Principles, Orthodoxies, Mindsets, Tensions, and Sticking Points
equity as means: 
working toward outcomes in ways that 
model dignity, justice, and love without 
re-creating harm in our structures, 
strategies, and working relationships.4
reflexion: 
examining oneself, heightening critical 
awareness of self in action, knowledge 
as social construction, and curiosity 
of what is “known and unknown.”6
<<<PAGE=6>>>
principles
3
Foundational guideposts of the Equitable Evaluation Framework™ (EEF)
Principle One 
Evaluation and evaluative work should be in service of equity:
• Production, consumption, and management of evaluation and evaluative work
should hold at its core a responsibility to advance progress towards equity.
Principle Two
Evaluative work should be designed and implemented commensurate with the 
values underlying equity work: 
• Multi-culturally valid, and
• Oriented toward participant ownership.
Principle Three
Evaluative work can and should answer critical questions about the: 
• Ways in which historical and structural decisions have contributed to the condition
to be addressed,
• Effect of a strategy on different populations, on the underlying systemic drivers of
inequity, and
• Ways in which cultural context is tangled up in both the structural conditions and
the change initiative itself.
The EEF Principles have application to all actors in the philanthropic ecosystem and are relevant no 
matter foundation typology, organizational assets, size, or structure. Over time, as these Principles are 
internalized into habits, they become (or align with) values and foster the creation of a wide variety of 
practices for varying contexts. 
The EEF includes a commitment to three Principles. These foundational guideposts support 
reconceptualization of evaluative work, evaluative thinking,
7 and decision-making. As such, the EEF 
Principles offer examination of the why and how and what of evaluation.
1
2
3
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Over time, the philanthropic sector developed a set of “orthodoxies,” or tightly held beliefs, about 
evaluative practice.8 Orthodoxies are often invisible and unspoken, masquerading as “common sense.” 
They are believed to be foundational and affect the undercurrents of organizational culture. They are 
shaped by the actors in the philanthropic ecosystem. 
Many of the Orthodoxies act like a drag on any evaluation effort and, even more so, on those efforts 
related to equity. In some cases, they reinforce inequities. They reflect a mix of capitalism and white 
dominant framing. As evidenced in practice and praxis, these get in the way of advancing the EEF 
Principles. 
In reflecting on these Orthodoxies, six areas surfaced:
These areas are expressed and experienced differently based on the actor in the philanthropic ecosystem. 
4
objectivity,
rigor,
evidence
resources:
money, time, people expectations, roles
definitions,
decisions,
perceptions
relationships, trust
productivity,
accountability
orthodoxies
Tightly held beliefs to be questioned/challenged that can undermine EEF Principles
<<<PAGE=8>>>
orthodoxies (continued)
objectivity, rigor, evidence
Evaluators are objective.
Credible evidence comes from quantitative data and experimental research.
Grantees and strategies are the focus of the evaluation, but not the 
foundation.
Objectivity is necessary for consultant credibility.
There are specific methods and tools for evaluation that center equity.
Stories are the best evidence of our impact. Numbers strip away the 
complexity and humanity of what we do.
Programs are the focus of evaluation, not the organization.
Credible evidence comes from program attendance.
resources: money, time, people
Evaluation funding primarily goes to data collection, analysis, and reporting.
Evaluation resources primarily support data collection, analysis, and reporting.
Centering equity requires resources (time, money, humanity, etc.) often not 
tended to sufficiently in evaluation.
Resources go into evaluation, but not much comes out of it.
Evaluating the real impact of our work is beyond our capacity and no one 
wants to fund it.
Evaluation requires money, expertise, and time we don't have.
We are competing for funding with community-based organizations (scarcity 
mindset).
expectations, roles
Evaluators are the experts and final arbiters, grantees are beneficiaries.
Evaluators should be selected based on credentials that reflect conventional 
notions of expertise.
Evaluations should provide generalizable lessons.
Consultants must specialize in certain areas or approaches to remain 
competitive.
The foundation holds all of the power and decision-making authority.
The responsibility to support consulting practices that center equity rests 
on consultants alone.
Evaluation is something we have to do to obtain or maintain funding.
What people are willing to pay for and show up for is what matters most.
We are both gatekeepers and grantees and need to keep both in mind.
We are so far removed from impact that we can't attribute change to our work.
5
<<<PAGE=9>>>
definitions, decisions, perceptions
The foundation is defines what “success” looks like.
Evaluation in service of foundation brand.
The foundation is the primary user of evaluation.
Consultants accept/perpetuate definitions and norms that pit rigor against 
equity rather than understanding how they are intertwined.
Consultants are often motivated by the desire to help/save communities.
Consultants conceal personal and/or business values to be successful.
Evaluation is a gamble, and we could lose.
Evaluation is expensive, time consuming, and takes away from our mission 
work.
We could influence what success looks like, but could also 
perpetuate foundation truth.
Conferences and publications change the field.
relationships, trust
Trust/relationships come from doing the work, but are not the starting point.
Relationships are secondary to the technical responsibilities that consultants 
hold.
We shouldn't work together.
productivity, accountability
Timeframes/short-term outcomes serve as indicators of good stewardship.
The ways in which business models are often exercised in capitalism are at 
odds with knowledge sharing, co-creation, and collaboration.
Funder satisfaction matters.
Accountability is a one-sided set of expectations rooted in compliance, generally 
expressed as foundation sets expectations and contractual obligations of grant 
partners, consultants, etc.
The fast-paced production of deliverables demonstrates “impact” and 
“outcome.” 
orthodoxies (continued)
6
<<<PAGE=10>>>
7
mindsets
An established set of mental attitudes to be shifted toward
A Mindset is an established set of mental attitudes held by someone. They play a significant 
role in how one interprets and responds to situations—whether consciously or unconsciously. 
Thoughtfully assessing and shifting mindsets allows one to fundamentally (and intentionally) 
change how they interpret and respond to situations. Examining and shifting mindsets offers an 
entry point for creativity, innovation, and opens up new pathways toward desired change.
An important note is the inclusion of the directionality moving from an existing mindset toward 
a new mindset. The aim here is to surface ongoing movement, potential, and expansion 
through continual practice.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
mindsets (continued)
8
from Doing toward Being
• How might you pause, invite reflection,
question urgency?
• How might you move from transactional
toward relational?
• What are the ways in which tendency towards
action/reacting impedes responding?
from Scarcity toward Abundance
• What might be possible?
• How might you seek entry points and
realign resources?
• What/where are the assets, joy, and
potential?
from Fixed toward Growth9 
• What do you need to unlearn? Learn?
• What might you try, play with, pilot?
• How might you allow for complexity to
unfold and emerge?
from Rigidity toward Fluidity
• How might unsettling and setbacks allow
space to create new ideas?
• How might you invite flexibility (in timelines,
strategy, etc.) to allow emergence?
• How might you release the need for certainty
and invite creativity and innovation?
from Binary toward Multiplicity
• What might be possible when you release
“either/or” thinking and embrace “both/and”?
• How might you explore different perspectives
and options to expand ways of knowing?
• How might you allow for diversity of opinion,
contexts, social locations, backgrounds, etc. to
inform your thinking?
from Extraction toward Offering
• How might you transform ways of engaging 
that extract intellectual property/ownership 
toward reciprocal processes?
• How might you disentangle our expectations 
that partners owe (data, participation, etc.) as 
uncompensated?
• How might you move into relationship with 
partners, and create opportunities and 
access?
from Participatory toward Reciprocity
• How might you step into conversation that
acknowledges interdependence?
• How might you co-create accountability and
allow for mutual benefit?
• How might relationship, trust, and shared
understanding be fostered?
from Revolutionary toward Evolutionary10
 
• How might you allow movement and
progression in alignment over time?
• What if you allow ample time, space, and
support needed to bring folks alongside?
• What if you understand and accept that
small changes over time sustained can lead to
sustainable change?
from 
“All or Nothing” toward Possibilities
• How might you disrupt beliefs that unless
everyone is on board we cannot move
forward?
• How might you open space for wonder,
creativity, vulnerability, playfulness and
courage?
• What if you let go of old patterns, processes,
policies and allow new ways of being,
thinking, and doing?
from 
Judgment toward Curiosity
• What if you let go of preconceived notions,
expectations, and assumptions?
• What might be possible when you invite
conversation, connection, and shared
sense-making?
• How might you shift dynamics of power and
“solving” toward puzzling together?
<<<PAGE=12>>>
tensions
Tensions are inherent in change processes, but they need not become breaking points. 
Tensions can cause emotional, cognitive, or relational strain, requiring deft attention and 
navigation. As individuals expand their being, thinking, and doing, opposition between existing 
practices and processes and emerging possibilities can create resistance, frustration, and 
confusion. 
Rather than getting stuck in either/or, embracing a both/and approach recognizes complexity. 
Tensions provide a way to notice and surface the interrelationship of varying levels and issues 
in the practice of the EEF at differing perspectives. Tensions provide opportunities to name and 
address the dissonance (opposing ideas/approaches driven by different values and fears) and 
shift toward consonance (flow between one another). The aim and intention is not to “solve” 
tensions; rather it is to recognize, name, normalize, and navigate them.
Inherent strains to be named, navigated, and normalized
9
<<<PAGE=13>>>
tensions (continued)
10
social positions 
& roles
Deference to hierarchy and 
social status 
influence, organize, 
mobilize
One’s sphere of influence to 
step in or bring others along
a thing
A project, program, study, etc. 
done in isolation or a vacuum
a body of work
An expansive view that offers 
through lines and ah-ha’s 
connecting intentions and 
concepts
individuals
Individual competencies, 
needs, desires, and 
values 
 organizations
Organizational 
capacities, culture, 
and mission 
 systems
Structural conditions 
and underlying 
systemic drivers at play
technical 
approaches
A focus or priority on detailed 
tactical tools and approaches
conditions 
for change
The support and nurture of 
relationship, trust, and related 
factors that invite possibility 
use & 
adaptation
Application and modification of 
information and insights from 
people and sources for one’s 
own credit 
acknowledgment & 
attribution
Recognition of the work that 
supports or informs your work 
with citation 
urgent & 
reactive
Pressures of deadlines, dockets, 
deliverables and decisions that 
revert to default practices
aligned & 
responsive
Time to pause and think 
about how the work might 
strategically integrate and 
advance aims and intentions
<<<PAGE=14>>>
sticking points
Sticking Points are opportunities to remove obstacles and/or perceived barriers to progress. 
Often, these arise when there is pushback, a hiccup, or slowing down, which may be 
interpreted as a lack of commitment, resistance to change, or a shift to other priorities. This 
point of inflection can serve as a moment to pause and explore. The Sticking Points offer ways 
to move through, over, under, or around iterative and generative conversation. 
Obstacles or barriers to be moved through, over, under, or around
11
<<<PAGE=15>>>
sticking points (continued)
12
Inviting Vulnerability and Risk
This considers how you show up and are open to possible implications and comfort with change.
• What happens when how you’re seen or perceived changes (e.g., as an expert knowing all the
answers and that is no longer the case)?
•
What might that change your sense of identity and competence?
•
How comfortable are you in trying something new? Not being perfect?
• How might you demonstrate more humility and transparency?
Willing to Stay in Conversation
Dialogue requires a relationship with trust, proximity, history, and context as key factors. 
• What is the nature of your evaluative work? Do you have a relationship where you can be different,
say things, and try things you have not before?
•
What is your understanding of the role of race and racism (and all the “isms”) in evaluative practice?
•
How do you fare with openness?
•
What is your comfort with discomfort? How might you navigate?
Defining Equity (as means and ends)
Clarity and a shared understanding with others on what you mean and how equity is defined.
• How are you defining equity and getting on the same page with others? Does this consider equity as
both a means (processes) and ends?
•
How might you invite and engage in conversations about disparities and institutional and structural
barriers?
• How might you shift from single axis to intersectional? How might you talk about race, gender,
ability, sexual orientation—all the identities—and how they shape how you are in the world and how
that, in turn, shapes how you see the world?
• How might this be the same or different from talking about justice, liberation, equality, or
anti-racism?
Reframing Current Asymmetrical Evaluation Discourse
This moves toward being more balanced and nuanced and recognizes power and related dynamics at play.
•
What are the ways you can talk about evaluative work so that it is in closer relationship to how
program and strategy unfolds? How does it respond?
• How might you explore and address power and how it manifests in the processes, protocols, and
practices of evaluation?
• How might a relational approach allow for long term mutual benefit and reciprocity?
•
How might a shift in who is acknowledged and invited as having expertise, including voices of those
closest/most affected, enhance validity and rigor and embrace complexity across all phases of
evaluative work?
Staying in Practice Over Time
Resists defaults and recognizes shifts (including small ones) as indications of progress and possibility. 
•
How might you acknowledge desire for or choice of default practices (that are reactive/misaligned
with your values) that are no longer the ways in which you work?
• How might you continue to be purposeful in your practices over time in ways that support bringing
others alongside?
•
What might shift as you embrace and engage in practices that impart equity as both means and
ends? How might you explore and align your processes along the way?
• When do you recognize and acknowledge small changes and shifts as progress (to build on and help
stay in practice)? How might you invite possibility?
• How might you dedicate time between your internal reaction and your external response/action?
What practices are required/necessary as a staff/organization? What practices do you want to be in
with your partners/community? How do you hope your partners/community experience you?
<<<PAGE=16>>>
closing & gratitude
It is an honor to witness and walk alongside these individuals and organizations, who co-created this 
expansion while in the practice. This is a collective offering of many hearts and minds. We are grateful 
for the willingness to explore new ways of being, thinking, and doing in the practice of the EEF. We 
acknowledge and attribute the expansion of the EEF to our Practitioners, Practice Partners, Pilot 
Participants, EEI Knowledge Curators, and EEF Coaches. Our gratitude and appreciation. 
We ask you to credit EEI and cite the EEF and the work that flows from EEF Practice Partner and 
Practitioner offerings (such as conferences, blogs, publications), to make it easier to join and trace the 
conversation about this work.
11 
EEF practice partners & practitioners
EEF Practice Partners are individuals and institutions exploring the EEF through a two-year practice 
experience. EEF Practitioners completed the two-year experience and continue to engage in 
practice alongside other individuals and organizations. 
Akonadi Foundation
Barr Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative
Community Foundation of Snohomish County
Conrad N. Hilton Foundation
Democracy Fund
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
Fairfield County’s Community Foundation
GHR Foundation
Greater Milwaukee Foundation
Hartford Foundation for Public Giving
Health Forward Foundation
Health Foundation for Western & Central New York
HealthSpark Foundation
Heising-Simons Foundation
Kansas Health Foundation
King County
Los Altos Mountain View Community Foundation
Lumina Foundation
Margaret A. Cargill Philanthropies
McKnight Foundation 
Michigan Fitness Foundation 
Minneapolis Foundation
Missouri Foundation for Health
Northwest Area Foundation
Oregon Community Foundation
Rhode Island Foundation
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
Seattle Foundation
Silicon Valley Community Foundation
Sisters of Charity Foundation of Cleveland
Skoll Foundation
Stupski Foundation
The Annie E. Casey Foundation
The California Endowment
The Colorado Health Foundation
The Colorado Trust
The Community Foundation of Greater New Haven
The Greater Clark Foundation
The James Irvine Foundation 
The Kresge Foundation
Tipping Point Community 
William & Flora Hewlett Foundation
13
equitableeval.org/acknowledgment
equitableeval.org/our-community#eef-partners
<<<PAGE=17>>>
EEI investment partners
Investment Partners contribute financial resources to advance field-wide practice of the Equitable 
Evaluation Framework™.
Barr Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
California Health Care Foundation
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative
Conrad N. Hilton Foundation
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
Ford Foundation
Fund for Shared Insight
Lumina Foundation
MacArthur Foundation
McKnight Foundation 
National Philanthropic Trust 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
S.D. Bechtel, Jr. Foundation
San Francisco Foundation
Seattle Foundation
The California Endowment
The David & Lucile Packard Foundation
The James Irvine Foundation
The Omidyar Group
Walton Family Foundation
William & Flora Hewlett Foundation
EEI knowledge curators
Kerry McHugh
Linda W. Helstowski, MA
EEF coaches
Matteah Spencer Reppart, MA
Rachel Mosher-Williams, MPA
Yen Chau, PhD
14
consultant/nonprofit/public sector pilot participants
C. Camman Evaluation
Emergence Collective
Equal Measure
Frey Evaluation, LLC
Funders Together to End Homelessness
Hopelab
JLI Consulting
NineFold
Omidyar Network
PEAK Grantmaking
Project Evident
Proponents LLC
Southern California Grantmakers
Spectrum 
Health Lakeland (a division of Spectrum Health)
STEAM Workgroup
Terraluna Collaborative
consultant & PSO orthodoxies advisors
Anna Salzman 
Ciaran Camman 
Clare Nolan 
Cristina Whyte 
Eve Weiss 
Jessica Xiomara Garcia
Lauren Beriont 
Nitya Venkateswaran
Pilar Mendoza 
Veena Pankaj
Funders Together to End Homelessness 
Grantmakers for Effective Organizations
Peak Grantmaking
Southern California Grantmakers
<<<PAGE=18>>>
15
origin & methodology
EEI and the practice of the EEF acknowledge the historical and post-positivist evaluation norms that 
tend to preference and privilege a singular—and often simplified—type of truth, knowing, and evidence. 
The EEF shows the possibility of prioritizing high-quality design and methods of evaluation that are 
both valuable to the end user and in service of strategy. In doing so, ways of knowing, data gathering, 
and sense-making are expanded and new definitions of validity, rigor, and objectivity that acknowledge 
multiplicities, different truths, and complexities are embraced.  
EEI’s multimodal methods approach is rooted in the adoption and application of these 21st century 
definitions, which supports our practice of the EEF and the advancement of the EEF Principles. The ideas 
and frames that inform the Equitable Evaluation Framework™ (EEF) predate the Equitable Evaluation 
Initiative (EEI). Exploration, experimentation, and evolution along the way includes a mix of approaches 
and avenues, notably fifteen 4-6 month Making the Case Collaboratories (228 organizations, 537 
participants), six Classes (2-year experience arc) of Foundation EEF Practice Partners/Practitioners (44 
foundations, 180 participants), a Consultant pilot (9 entities, 12 participants) and a Nonprofit/Public 
Sector pilot (8 organizations, 40 participants).
early grounding
The first expression of the EEF emerged through the article What’s Race Got to Do With It? Equity 
and Philanthropic Practice, evolving from the Equitable Evaluation project and the EEF Framing 
Paper. In 2018, in conversation with very early Practice Partners (individuals representing 
foundations), the EEF first expanded and was shared through Shifting the Evaluation Paradigm: 
The Equitable Evaluation Framework, published in partnership with Grantmakers For Effective 
Organizations in 2019. Raising the Bar—Integrating Cultural Competency and Equity: Equitable 
Evaluation (Dean-Coffey, Casey, & Caldwell, 2014) introduced the term “equitable evaluation” to U.S. 
philanthropy. 
emergent relational evaluation, research, & learning design
EEI is in development12 of an emerging relational evaluation, research, and learning design which 
shifts away from the conventional and transactional nature of evaluation and research relationships, 
methods, and approaches toward relationship, trust, reciprocity, and respect, while noticing and 
learning alongside. Real-time learning supports ongoing practice of the EEF. Relational evaluation, 
research, and learning design allows space and time for meaning-making and learning to emerge 
organically. It aligns or realigns methods or approaches that support deeper engagement and 
connection to noticings and surfacings as the EEF unfolds. 
EEI methods incorporate elements of embodied inquiry, which encourages a myriad of approaches 
and lenses to generate data and process embodied lived experiences and expertise. Embodied 
Inquiry13 is guided by three foundational principles: the first sets out the what; the second answers 
why; and the third expresses the how. Together, they support the way in which the methods are 
thought about and carried out. The practice of the EEF acknowledges that who we are in this work 
matters (being), which informs and shifts how we think about, construct, and engage with evaluative 
practice (thinking), which allows for the alignment in the practice (doing). EEI employs a process of 
reflection, re
flexion, and realignments.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
timeline of the EEF
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Equitable Evaluation (EE) Project 
is launched.
Focused exploration of the ways in which 
foundations with explicitly named work 
related to equity were thinking about and 
engaging in evaluation.
What’s Race Got to Do With It? Equity 
and Philanthropic Evaluation Practice 
is published 
in American Journal of Evaluation
EEI, a timebound initiative (2019-2024), 
is launched 
to seed a field of practitioners in the EEF
Mindsets, Sticking Points, and Tensions 
begin to emerge
Making the Case Collaboratories begin
Shifting the Evaluation Paradigm 
is released 
in partnership with GEO
Class 1 of Foundation EEF Practice 
Partners is launched 
Consultant & Nonprofit/Public Sector 
Pilots are launched
Orthodoxies are expanded for 
consultants, nonprofits/public sector, and 
PSOs
Sixth & Final EEF Practice Partner Class is 
launched for a total of 44 foundations 
Framework is expanded
to include additional Mindsets and 
Orthodoxies
Some Practice Partners transition to 
Practitioners
Expanded EEF
is released
Equitable Evaluation FrameworkTM 
Framing Paper introduced
Principles and original Orthodoxies
<<<PAGE=20>>>
the EEF practice: conversation, practice, community
The EEF Practice Partner experience has three organizing and emerging pillars: conversation, 
practice, community. These support and serve as through-lines across the EEF Practice Partner/
Practitioner spaces and places held by EEI. The methods and modalities intentionally weave and 
thread within, between, and among these. This includes embodied inquiry, which continually 
encourages, models, and asks, “What does this look like, sound like, feel like, then do?” The emergent 
relational design allows for flexibility and recalibration and accommodates organic growth. It 
supports a living expression of the EEF that evolves alongside those in the practice. 
17
conversation
Speaking directly 
and authentically 
and listening deeply 
have the capacity to 
transform and bring 
about change. 
EEI conversations 
create a unique 
environment 
designed to guide 
how we show up, 
think about, and 
practice evaluation 
through collective 
inquiry on advancing 
the EEF.
practice
The focus in the 
practice of the EEF 
is on process, 
individuals, 
organizations, and 
systems—
not only the product. 
What we pay attention 
to and what we 
practice is what we 
value. Practice makes 
us vulnerable and 
pushes us to the edge 
of our current skill set 
and beyond. 
community
Our Equipping for 
Transformation (EFT) 
community in practice 
is made up of 
individuals, 
who are active 
practitioners of 
the EEF and share 
what they are learning 
with and alongside 
others. 
When we are in 
community and 
relationship with each 
other, we learn how to 
be and do better.
expanded ways of knowing
EEI invites exploration of other ways of knowing: sense perception, intuition, emotion, memory, 
reason, imagination, and faith.14 The EEF acknowledges and expands multiple and interdependent 
ways of knowing. Since 2020, EEI has had a Resident Artist (and engages with additional artists) 
to craft graphic recordings, animated video, and other visual iconography to support EEI 
communications and the practice of EEF. Art is an ancient and honored way of knowing. 
Bloom’s Taxonomy15 invites exploration of learning from multiple levels: remembering, 
understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. Conventional ways of knowing exclude 
tradition, superstition, storytelling, and emotion, which offer important dimensions of the learning 
process.16 EEI’s intention, use, and modeling of different forms of experiences, expressions, and 
examples of ways in which we are noticing and surfacing the practice of the EEF is guided by these 
theoretical underpinnings. It is further informed and influenced by Paulo Freire’s17 seminal work 
on adult learning which invites adults to act and assert themselves as agents of change. This has 
relevance to creating a new paradigm around knowledge—which evaluation is a part of or entry to—
and about the “to what end”—be it equity, liberation, justice, and/or freedom. 
data generation & meaning
A variety of modalities—such as podcasts, blogs, poetry, video, and more—are offered to inform 
conversation and support different ways of knowing and expression. From these diverse and unique 
conversations, reflections, noticings, and surfacings reveal ideas and relationships among and 
between concepts and the identified EEF elements: Orthodoxies, Mindsets, Tensions, and Sticking 
Points.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
acknowledgments & attribution
18
1. Equitable Evaluation Initiative & Grantmakers for Effective Organizations (GEO). (2021). Shifting the
Evaluation Paradigm: The Equitable Evaluation Framework™
equitableeval.org/_files/ugd/21786c_7db318fe43c342c09003046139c48724.pdf
2. Equitable Evaluation Initiative. (2020). Theory of Change.
equitableeval.org/_files/ugd/21786c_aebd734f430e4f21838fbe8e2f0ccc24.pdf
3. Shaikh, Sobia & Macias, Teresa. (2022). Critical Social Work Praxis. Edited by Sobia Shaheen Shaikh,
Brenda LeFrancois and Teresa Macias. Fernwood Publishing.
fernwoodpublishing.ca/book/critical-social-work-praxis
4. ChangeElemental, formerly MAG, changeelemental.org/
5. World Health Organization, www.who.int/
6. D’Cruz, Heather & Gillingham, Philip & Melendez, Sebastian. (2005). “Reflexivity, its Meanings and
Relevance for Social Work: A Critical Review of the Literature.” British Journal of Social Work.
7. Vo, Anne T., Jacob S. Schreiber, and Ashley Martin. (2018). “Toward a conceptual understanding of
evaluative thinking.” New Directions for Evaluation: 29-47
Wehipeihana, Nan, and Kate McKegg. (2018). “Values and culture in evaluative thinking: Insights from
Aotearoa New Zealand.” New Directions for Evaluation: 93-107.
8. Monitor Institute brought the term “orthodoxies” into the philanthropic sector’s thinking on 
evaluation
through a large-scale project to redesign foundation evaluation to improve use. They define
orthodoxies as “deeply held beliefs about ‘how things are done’ that often go unstated
and unquestioned. You can find them everywhere—in the mind of an individual, the protocols of an
organization, even the best practices of an entire industry.”
Evans, Rhonda, Siesfeld, Tony, and Kasper, Gabriel. “Challenging Orthodoxies,” Deloitte.
deloitte.com/us/en/pages/monitor-institute/articles/re-imagining-measurement-redefining-standard-practices.html
9. Dweck, Carol S. Mindset. (2008). Ballantine Books.
10. The Change Leader, Inc. Evolution vs. Revolution: Do You Know the Diff
erence?
changinghighered.com/evolution-vs-revolution-do-you-know-the-difference/
11. Equitable Evaluation Initiative. (2023). Acknowledge, Attribute, Align, and Amplify.
equitableeval.org/acknowledgment
12. Coné, Marcia and Helstowski, Linda W. (2023). In Development.
13. Leigh, Jennifer and Brown, Nicole. (2021). Embodied Inquiry: Research Methods. Bloomsbury.
14. Soane Perry, Elissa and Couchois Duncan, Aja. (2017) “Multiple Ways of Knowing: Expanding What
We Know.” Nonproff it Quarterly.
nonprofitquarterly.org/multiple-ways-knowing-expanding-know/
15. Lorin W. Anderson and David R. Krathwohl. (2000). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing;
a Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. New York: Pearson.
16. Lindsay, James. (2020). “Ways of Knowing,” New Discourses.
newdiscourses.com/tftw-ways-of-knowing/
17. Freire, Paulo. (1973). Education for Critical Consciousness. New York: Seabury Press.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
The Equitable Evaluation Initiative (EEI) is a time-bound initiative (2019-2024), that seeks to 
seed a field and sow a practice of Equitable Evaluation Framework™ (EEF) practitioners. The 
Equitable Evaluation Initiative (EEI) is a fiscally-sponsored project of Seattle Foundation. Both 
EEI and the EEI logo are their trademarks. The Equitable Evaluation Framework™ (EEF) is a 
trademark of jdcPARTNERSHIPS. 
about EEI
equitableeval.org