<<<PAGE=1>>>
Optimizing Use in the Field of Program Evaluation 
by Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field 
   Catherine   Donnelly   
 Queen’s University 
   Michelle   Searle   
 Independent Consultant     
 Abstract: It has been almost 20 years since Shulha and Cousins (1997) published 
their seminal paper exploring evaluation use. Th e paper examined a decade, 1986 to 
1996, of theory, practice, and research on evaluation use. Since that time there have 
been signifi cant developments related to the phenomenon of evaluation use. Outside 
of evaluation a new and burgeoning fi eld has focused on the use of research in practice 
and policy; in health care the term  knowledge translation  has been used and in social 
sciences  knowledge mobilization . Despite the rapidly growing body of research from 
the knowledge fi eld, the diff erent terminology used in evaluation, health care, and the 
social sciences has created siloed bodies of knowledge, even when working on similar 
change processes. Th is may be one of the factors why the large body of literature on 
evaluation use has received little attention in health care and vice versa. Th e aim of this 
article is threefold: fi rst, to examine the developments in evaluation use since Shulha 
and Cousins’s (1997) paper; second, to explore how the knowledge fi elds, focusing on 
knowledge translation and mobilization, can help to further refi ne and develop our 
understanding of use; and third, to imagine what future research that interweaves the 
knowledge fi eld with the fi eld of program evaluation might look like and how it has the 
potential to serve the contexts where this research would be conducted. 
 Keywords: evaluation use, knowledge mobilization, knowledge translation 
 Résumé :  Il y a presque 20 ans que Shulha et Cousins (1997) ont publié leur 
article phare sur l’utilisation de l’ évaluation. Leurs travaux ont examiné une 
décennie, de 1986 à 1996, de théorie, pratique et recherches sur l’utilisation de 
l’ évaluation. Depuis lors, il y a eu d’importants développements liés au phénomène 
de l’utilisation de l’ évaluation. Au-delà de l’ évaluation, un nouveau domaine s’ est 
développé sur l’utilisation de la recherche dans la pratique et les politiques; en 
santé, le terme transfert des connaissances a été utilisé et en sciences sociales, 
on parle de mobilisation du savoir. Malgré le corpus rapidement grandissant 
de recherches dans le domaine des connaissances, les diff  érentes terminologies 
Corresponding Author: Catherine Donnelly, School of Rehabilitation Th erapy, Louise D. 
Acton Building, 31 George Street, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6 Canada; 
catherine.donnelly@queensu.ca
© 2017   Canadian Journal of Program Evaluation / La Revue canadienne d’évaluation de programme
31.3 (Special Issue / Numéro spécial), 305–327 doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=2>>>
306 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
utilisées dans les domaines de l’ évaluation, des sciences de la santé et des sciences 
sociales ont créé des silos, alors ce sont les mêmes processus de changement qui 
sont analysés. Ceci pourrait en partie expliquer pourquoi les écrits sur l’utilisation 
de l’ évaluation ont reçu peu d’ écho dans le domaine de la santé, et vice-versa. Cet 
article a trois objectifs : premièrement, d’ examiner les développements en utilisa-
tion de l’ évaluation depuis l’ article de Shulha et Cousins (en 1997) ; deuxièmement, 
d’ explorer la façon dont les domaines de connaissance, axés sur le transfert des con-
naissances et la mobilisation du savoir, peuvent nous aider à mieux comprendre 
l’utilisation; et troisièmement, d’imaginer les pistes de recherche à cheval sur le 
domaine de l’utilisation des connaissances et celui de l’ évaluation de programme, et 
d’ analyser leur intérêt pour les contextes dans lesquels ces travaux seraient menés. 
 Mots clés : utilisation de l’ évaluation, mobilisation du savoir, transfert de connaissances 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Use has been an object of scholarly writing and empirical research in the fi eld of 
evaluation for almost four decades ( Alkin & Taut, 2003 ;  Greene, 1988 ;  King & 
Pechman, 1984 ;  Patton, 2007 ;  Shulha & Cousins, 1997 ;  Suchman, 1967 ;  Weiss, 
1972 ). Evaluators are concerned with the way information from an evaluation 
process and/or the products are used in practice and decision making. Christie 
(2007) stated that “evaluation utilization is arguably the most researched area of 
evaluation and it also received substantial attention in the theoretical literature” 
(p. 8). Similarly, Contandriopoulos and Brousselle (2012) commented that “use 
is at the core of every evaluation endeavour” (p. 61). We considered multiple 
defi nitions in exploring this concept; three defi nitions that resonated for us are 
positioned here. 
 •  Alkin and Taut (2003)  reported that use is “the ways in which an evalu-
ation and information from the evaluation impacts the program that is 
being evaluated” (p. 1). 
 •  Patton (2008)  identifi  ed use as “how real people in the real world apply 
evaluation fi ndings and experiences” (p. 37). 
 •  Johnson et al. (2009)  described use as “the application of evaluation 
process, products, or fi ndings to produce an eff ect” (p. 378). 
 Much could be said about the diff erences or the scholars who have put forth these 
ideas; however, common to all these defi nitions is the notion that use includes 
results or fi ndings from an evaluation as well as the process of the evaluation. 
 Outside of evaluation is a burgeoning fi eld focused on the use of research in 
practice and policy. In health care the term  knowledge translation  (KT) has been 
used and in social sciences  knowledge mobilization  (KMb); recently the term K* 
has been used capture this fi eld of research. Th is fi eld is fundamentally interested 
in how knowledge, in the form of ideas, innovation, or skills, moves in some di-
rection among a group of stakeholders as they are situated within their specifi ed 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  307
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
contexts. In this article, we explore the recent developments in the area of evalu-
ation use to consider how work drawn from the fi  eld of K* contributes to new 
understandings and actions in evaluation contexts. Integrating learning from the 
study of use in the fi eld of evaluation as well as solutions from the knowledge fi eld 
may better equip evaluators to improve access to evidence and encourage the use 
of evidence in decision making. 
 BACKGROUND 
 Th e seminal paper published by  Shulha and Cousins (1997)  is an apt starting place 
for exploring evaluation use in this special issue that is dedicated to Dr. L. M. 
Shulha. Th e paper examined a decade, 1986 to 1996, of theory, practice, and re-
search on evaluation use. Since that time there have been signifi cant developments 
related to the phenomenon of evaluation use. In 1996 process use had recently 
been introduced and now, 20 years later, is a well-accepted concept. Consideration 
of context, which was just emerging, is now seen as fundamental to evaluation 
use.  Th e Program Evaluation Standards  ( Y arbrough, Shulha, Hopson, & Caruthers, 
2011 ) are now in their third edition, and Lyn’s commitment to the area of use can 
be seen in the  Standards  where utility is placed as the fi rst standard due to its sig-
nifi cance in determining the worth of evaluation process, fi ndings, and products. 
Notably, Lyn has made signifi cant contributions to the initial evaluation literature 
on use and has made progressive contributions to the study of use since then. 
 During Lyn’s time as a faculty member at Queen’s University she mentored 
both authors of this article in thinking about how to enhance the use of evalu-
ation in their respective areas of inquiry: health and education. Understanding 
evaluation scholarship that is accessible to a range of stakeholders is a passion 
and commitment that Lyn Shulha championed. Returning to graduate school 
aft er time invested as practitioners strengthened our desires to engage in program 
evaluation as a form of applied research that provided reciprocal and transdisci-
plinary benefi ts in our respective professional fi elds. In other words, both authors 
felt strongly that our evaluation scholarship should inform and be informed by the 
communities in which we practice as well as the research communities beyond 
the specifi c disciplines of evaluation, health, or education. As associate members 
of the Queen’s University Assessment and Evaluation group, the authors were 
mentored on diverse projects that focused on using collaborative and participa-
tory models to enhance stakeholder engagement and draw out multiple forms of 
evidence. As we started to think about the contributions of our work with Lyn 
and beyond, we began to wonder about the interconnections between evaluation 
use, the knowledge fi eld, and our respective disciplines. 
 Th e aim of this article is threefold: fi  rst, to examine the developments in 
evaluation use since  Shulha and Cousins’s (1997)  paper; second, to explore how 
the knowledge fi elds, focusing on knowledge translation and mobilization, can 
help to further refi ne and develop our understanding of use; and third, to im-
agine what future research that interweaves the knowledge fi  eld with the fi eld 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=4>>>
308 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
of program evaluation might look like and how it has the potential to serve the 
contexts where this research would be conducted. 
 SITUATING EVALUATION USE: AN OVERVIEW OF KEY 
DEVELOPMENTS 
 We draw on several literature reviews on evaluation use that have been completed 
over the past 20 years (e.g.,  Johnson et al., 2009 ) to identify two key developments 
in the area of evaluation use. Th e fi  rst key development focuses on individual 
and organizational learning and encompasses process use, the infl uence of stake-
holder involvement, and the oft -resulting evaluation capacity building. A second 
major development stems from the thinking about evaluation use and evaluation 
infl uence. Within each key area of development we identify the conceptual sig-
nifi cance, establish its current positioning, and show how this development has 
readied the fi eld of program evaluation to draw from the fi eld of K*. 
 Key Development One: Individual and Organizational Learning 
 Process Use 
 In 1997 there was agreement that use was a multidimensional phenomenon and 
one that was an iterative process.  Weis s (1998)  emphasized, “originally all we 
thought about was fi ndings” and expected that people would use them (p. 21). 
Process use brought an emergent gaze that required attentiveness to the qualities 
that unfold during an evaluation.  Cousins and Shulha (2006)  stated: 
 possibly the most signifi cant development of the past decade in both research and 
evaluation communities has been a more general acceptance that  how  we work with 
clients and practitioners can be as meaningful and consequential as  what  we learn 
from our methods. (p. 277; emphasis in original) 
 Evaluation scholars have established that we can learn as much from the process 
of evaluation as we can learn from the fi ndings. 
 Th e fi eld of evaluation conceptualizes process use as the types of learning that 
take place, intentionally and unintentionally, by stakeholders who are involved 
in a program evaluation.  Amo and Cousins (2007)  have referred to process use 
as a “by-product of evaluation” (p. 6). During involvement, participants might 
increase their knowledge, skills, or understanding. Credited with being the fi rst 
evaluator to defi ne process use,  Patton (2008)  called it: 
 [i]ndividual changes in thinking, attitudes, and behaviour, and program or organiza-
tional changes in procedures and culture that occur among those involved in evalua-
tion as a result of the learning that occurs during the evaluation process. (p. 15) 
 Notable in this defi nition is the recognition that change occurs at both the 
individual and organizational level. Process use is now recognized as a central 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  309
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
feature in collaborative, participatory, and utilization-focused approaches to 
evaluation (e.g.,  Alkin & Taut, 2003 ;  Cousins, Goh, Clark, & Lee, 2004 ;  Preskill, 
Zuckerman, & Matthews, 2003 ). Th  e connection between process use and 
participant-oriented approaches is not surprising, since these approaches each 
focus on the learning that occurs during an evaluation ( Patton, 2007 ). 
 Stakeholder Involvement 
 Stakeholder involvement is another area that has received increasing attention 
in the past two decades and is closely related to process use ( Brandon & Fuku-
naga, 2013 ;  Preskill & Boyle, 2008 ). While the evaluation use literature has long 
recognized that including stakeholders increased the likelihood of evaluation 
utilization (e.g.,  Cousins & Earl, 1992 ;  House & Howe, 1999 ;  Patton, 1998 ;  Rich, 
1997 ), a literature review on evaluation use highlights that  research  examining 
the impact of stakeholder involvement on evaluation use is more recent.  Johnson 
and colleagues (2009)  reviewed the empirical literature on evaluation use from 
1986 to 2005 and applied  Cousins and Leithwood’s (1986)  original framework for 
categorizing studies on use. Based on the nature of studies that were identifi  ed, 
 Johnson et al. (2009)  added a category,  stakeholder involvement,  to capture the 
increased focus of this dimension in supporting evaluation use. Of their included 
studies, 23 of the 41 addressed stakeholder involvement. 
 Evaluation theorists and practitioners now resoundingly agree about the benefi ts 
in involving stakeholders. A survey of American Evaluation Association (AEA) mem-
bers found that 98% of respondents felt that one of the primary roles of evaluators is 
to engage stakeholders ( Fleischer & Christie, 2009 ). Stakeholder involvement, which 
encourages process use, is now seen as critical in both supporting the learning func-
tion of evaluation (Preskill, Zuckerman, & Matthews, 2003) and fostering “results that 
stakeholders understand and use” ( Cousins, Whitmore, & Shulha, 2013 , p. 14). Y et, 
more information about how stakeholder involvement occurs in practice is needed. 
 Brandon and Fukunaga (2013)  conducted a systematic review of the literature on 
stakeholder involvement and found that research in this area is limited, relying on 
simple designs and data collection and occurring in only a handful of disciplines. 
 Evaluators and evaluation scholars recognized the need to develop new/
diff erent skills to support stakeholder involvement.  Cousins and Earl (1992)  
underscore one of the key tensions when involving stakeholders: evaluators need 
to balance being responsive with also possessing technical sophistication and 
managing for biases while establishing credibility. Th is echoes  Shulha and Cous-
ins’s (1997)  caution about the ability of evaluators to maintain a bias-free stance. 
Ongoing empirical research continues to look at the intended and unintended 
consequences of stakeholder involvement to provide evidence and ideas that 
enhance the advantages while minimizing limitations. As  Taut (2008)  states, “we 
need even more rich, detailed descriptions of successful and unsuccessful evalu-
ations involving stakeholders” (p. 229). 
 Conversations at AEA suggest that we need clarifying frameworks for 
thinking about stakeholder involvement ( Cousins, Whitmore, & Shulha, 2013 ; 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=6>>>
310 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
 Fetterman, Rodríguez-Campos, Wandersman, & O’Sullivan, 2014 ). More recently, 
 Shulha et al. (2016)  proposed eight principles to guide collaborative approaches 
to evaluation: (a) clarify motivation for collaboration, (b) foster meaningful re-
lationships, (c) develop a shared understanding of the program, (d) promote ap-
propriate participatory processes, (e) monitor and respond to resource availability, 
(f) monitor evaluation progress and quality, (g) promote evaluative thinking, 
(h) follow through to realize use. Going forward, empirical testing of these prin-
ciples can reveal the relationship between forms of stakeholder involvement, 
instances of process use, and use of both intentional and unintentional processes 
for building evaluation capacity. 
 Evaluation Capacity Building 
 Evaluation capacity building (ECB) has become an important topic in the 
evaluation community over the past decade ( Preskill & Boyle, 2008 ;  Taylor-
Powell & Boyd, 2008 ). We highlight ECB as a major development that brings 
together the concepts discussed so far: evaluation use, process use, participatory 
approaches, and collaborative frameworks for stakeholder involvement.  Labin, 
Duff y, Meyers, Wandersman, and Lesesne (2012)  defi ne ECB as “an intentional 
process to increase individual motivation, knowledge, and skills, and to enhance 
a group or organization’s ability to conduct or use an evaluation” (p. 2). Oth-
ers have also proposed defi nitions of ECB, and each includes the core features 
about the intentionality of practice and levels of change ( Preskill & Boyle, 2008 ; 
 Stockdill, Baizerman, & Compton, 2002 ). To understand the implications of 
ECB to evaluation use and the knowledge fi eld, it is important to note that ECB 
is not only about capacity to  do  evaluation but also to  use  evaluation. Th erefore 
organizations not only engage in ongoing inquiry but also continually use the 
emerging and contextual fi ndings. 
 While process use also results in individuals and organizations learning 
about evaluation, ECB is unique in that it includes “clearly identifi ed objectives” 
( Preskill & Boyle, 2008 , p. 450). It is this intentionality that ensures maximum 
learning both from and about the evaluation ( Harnar & Preskill, 2007 ). A grow-
ing body of empirical evidence has demonstrated support for the role of ECB in 
engaging in evaluation activities ( Duff y & Wandersman, 2007 ), building evalua-
tion skills ( Arnold, 2006 ;  Taylor-Powell & Boyd, 2008 ), increasing individual and 
organizational commitment to evaluation ( Compton, Baizerman, Preskill, Rieker, 
& Miner, 2001 ), creating positive attitudes toward evaluative inquiry ( Atkinson, 
Wilson, & Avula, 2005 ), and enhancing use of evaluation fi  ndings ( Compton 
et al., 2001 ;  Lawrenz, Th omas, & Clarkson, 2008 ). 
 In a systematic review,  Labin and colleagues (2012)  examined the strategies 
used to support ECB and the outcomes at both individual and organizational 
levels. Th ey found that 80% of ECB strategies were regularly based in some theory 
or principle, most notably theories and principles related to active learning ( Labin 
et al., 2012 ). Several direct (workshops, training programs) and indirect strategies 
(participating in the evaluation) were used, and the importance of using strategies 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  311
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
tailored to the context was highlighted. In terms of the outcomes of ECB, the 
authors found that 92% of the articles reported change at the level of individual 
change and 77% of the cases demonstrated organizational change. Unfortunately, 
the exact outcomes used to determine change were not reported in the study, and 
the authors acknowledge the very limited reporting of measures and quantitative 
data as a weakness of the study. 
 In 2007, Compton and Baizerman stated, “the ECB tent is still big, it is 
still open, and there is still room to conceptualize, implement, assess, analyze, 
and write” (p. 199). Similarly,  Labin and colleagues (2012)  believe there is 
room for continued sophistication, while Preskill and Boyle point to ECB as a 
“social epidemic of evaluation” (   Preskill & Boyle, 2008 , p. 14) where diffusion 
is used for evaluation learning to flow within and across different dimensions, 
through networks that transfer and even enhance the evaluation thinking and 
practice. 
 Key Development Two: Evaluation Use and Infl uence 
  Th eory of Infl uence.  A second key development is related to the concept of infl u-
ence. Some have suggested that use looks at direct impact whereas infl uence looks 
at the indirect forms of use.  Kirkhart (2000) , however, positions infl uence as an 
expanded form of use that off ers more precise language to describe the impact 
of evaluations. Infl uence, she asserts, “can be examined from multiple vantage 
points” (p. 6). She off ers an integrated model built on prior concepts and conver-
sations that calls for a more comprehensive understanding about the eff  ects of 
program evaluation. 
  Kirkhart (2000)  is not the fi rst or only evaluator to note the need to attend 
to language.  Patton (2000)  highlighted the importance of language in our under-
standing and perceptions of concepts and contexts. Twenty years ago evaluation 
was shift ing away from the term “utilization”—a term that  Weiss (1981)  felt con-
noted “inappropriate imagery”—to the term “use. ”  Kirkhart (2000)  countered 
that “use” also does not account for the many ways both evaluation fi  ndings 
and processes may aff ect individuals and organizations. She proposed the term 
“infl uence” along with an Integrated Th eory of Infl uence to enable a more mul-
tifaceted look at the eff ects of evaluation. In her theory,  Kirkhart (2000)  includes 
three dimensions: (a) source, (b) intention, and (c) timeframe. Th e dimensions 
of infl uence are seen as nonlinear, multifactorial, and interactive.  Jonson, Guet-
terman, and Th ompson (2014)  suggest that  Kirkhart’s (2000)  reconceptualization 
“extends the purposes of aims of assessment and evaluation beyond problem 
solving that leads to decision making to also include learning, that is, new or 
enhanced understandings that facilitate meaning making . . . for improving . . . 
practices and policies” (p. 21). Th ey have linked, as we do, her theory of infl uence 
to social learning theory of constructivism and identifi  ed changes at individual 
and organizational levels. 
 At about this same time  Henry and Mark (2003)  also agreed that infl  u-
ence was a better term but focused on the need for evaluation to examine the 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=8>>>
312 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
change processes “through which evaluation fi ndings and process may translate 
into steps toward social betterment” (p. 294). Th  ey off  ered a framework that 
articulates multiple levels, pathways, and mechanisms to explain the infl  uence 
of evaluation ( Henry & Mark, 2003 ;  Mark & Henry, 2004 ). A key foundation of 
their work is that the ultimate goal of evaluation is social betterment. To achieve 
social betterment, changes resulting from an evaluation need to be linked back 
to the evaluation processes.  Henry and Mark (2003)  view evaluation as an inter-
vention and off er a framework to understand the infl uence of evaluation at three 
levels: individual, interpersonal, and collective (organizational). Pathways link 
evaluation activities and infl uence. Th e use of pathways provides a mechanism 
to explore causal relationships and would enable the identifi  cation of change 
processes that may occur during evaluation, allow researchers to understand 
the more specifi c dimensions of evaluation infl  uence and interactions at each 
level, and lastly support a variety of research, including quantitative studies on 
context and processes. 
  Herbert (2014)  completed a review of the literature on evaluation infl uence, 
and articles that referenced either  Kirkhart’s (2000)  or  Mark and Henry’s (2004)  
models of infl uence were included. Th e objective of the review was to examine 
the current state of evaluation infl uence research and understand how infl uence 
has been used as a concept to consider the impact of evaluations. Th  e review 
identifi ed 28 articles, and while the concept of infl uence has been adopted in the 
literature, the empirical evidence is considerably lacking. Much of the research 
was descriptive in the sense that infl uence was used to describe the evaluation and 
only 4 studies had specifi c hypotheses that they sought to test. Overall the studies 
were of poor methodological quality, and Herbert concluded that the research 
to date has done little to build a body of evidence on infl uence that can support 
evaluation practice. 
 Th e integration of ideas about stakeholder involvement, ECB, and infl uence 
brings us full circle.  Kirkhart (2000)  built on  Shulha and Cousins’s (1997)  ideas “to 
recognize how a more inclusive view of evaluation infl uence has positive implica-
tion for the evaluation profession as a whole” (p. 20). We now build on these ideas 
collectively, to see how two key developments provide insight into the continued 
evolution of the concept of use in the fi  eld of evaluation. Th e evolution has led 
to transformations in evaluation thinking and practice. As  Daugherty (2007)  
stated, “transformation is taking action to move beyond our current form. True 
transformation requires true willingness, converted into action” (p. xxi). Because 
of the transformations in the fi eld of program evaluation, evaluators and scholars 
are poised to continue to use as broad a lens as they can, to innovate within the 
evaluation contexts. Innovation is an opportunity to act as  bricoleurs , pulling 
from ideas and techniques to shape new understandings.  Denzin and Lincoln 
(2005)  described a bricoleur as one who blends together many pieces for use in 
new and unconventional ways. We propose a bricolage, which brings together 
key developments related to the study of use in evaluation with theory from the 
knowledge fi eld. 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  313
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
 THEORY FROM THE KNOWLEDGE FIELD 
 K* is an overarching term used to describe the body of literature aimed at un-
derstanding knowledge-sharing activities. While many terms have been used to 
articulate the similar activities that encompass this fi eld it is benefi cial to explore 
two common terms used in Canada. In health care KT is largely the term used and 
in social sciences, including education, KMb. A more in-depth investigation of the 
diff erent terms from the knowledge fi eld can be found in the fi elds of health (e.g., 
 Graham et al., 2006 ;  Greenhalgh & Wieringa, 2011 ;  Grimshaw, Eccles, Lavis, Hill & 
Squires, 2012 ) and education (e.g.,  Bennet & Bennet, 2007 ;  Cooper, 2014 ;  Cooper & 
Levin, 2013 ;  Fenwick & Farrell, 2011 ). Th e following section will introduce KT and 
KMb and examine how this body of work can inform evaluation and evaluation use. 
 Knowledge Translation 
 Th e fi rst article to be published using the KT term has been traced to 1971 ( Green-
halgh & Wieringa, 2011 ). While the concept of knowledge translation is not new, 
there has been a rapid proliferation of research and literature on KT in the past 
two decades. Evaluation use and KT have similar roots; however, the literature has 
largely been developed in parallel ( Amo & Cousins, 2009 ) with little crossover in 
either literature. In 2009 two special issues sought to bring these fi elds together. 
An issue of  New Directions for Evaluation  ( Ottoson, 2009 ) reported on the role 
of change theories in evaluation, and in the same year the  Canadian Journal of 
Program Evaluation  examined how knowledge use theories could help support 
evaluation use ( Amo & Cousins, 2009 ). In Europe there is also evidence that 
KT is beginning to infl uence evaluation. A recent report ( Bossuyt, Shaxson, & 
Datta, 2014 ) examined the uptake of evaluations in European Union development 
cooperation, and one of four key learning points was that “uptake of evidence is 
improved by considering how knowledge is translated and brokered within an 
organization” (p. 7). 
 In Canada knowledge translation is defi  ned as a “dynamic and iterative 
process that includes the synthesis, dissemination, exchange, and ethically sound 
application of knowledge to improve the health of Canadians, provide more 
eff ective health services and products, and strengthen the healthcare system” 
( Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 2016 ). Th is defi nition is broadly used, 
and both the World Health Organization (WHO) and United States Centre for 
Dissemination of Disability Research have adopted similar defi nitions ( Bowen & 
Graham, 2013 ). KT is used extensively in the health fi eld and is closely linked to 
the evidence-based practice movement ( Greenhalgh & Wieringa, 2011 ). Th e KT 
literature makes frequent reference to the gap between what is known, as deter-
mined by researchers, and what is observed in practice; this is oft en referred to as 
the evidence-to-practice gap ( Kitson & Straus, 2010 ). 
 Within Canada, and in particular health care, the Knowledge to Action (KTA) 
cycle ( Graham et al., 2006 ) is used to conceptualize knowledge translation. Th e 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has adopted the KTA cycle as 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=10>>>
314 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
described by  Graham et al. (2006)  to support knowledge translation research, a 
fundamental part of the organization’s mandate. Th e KTA cycle is divided into 
two components: knowledge creation and action. Knowledge creation includes 
three phases. Th e fi rst represents knowledge obtained through primary research 
studies. Th e second involves knowledge synthesis or the systematic collection of 
existing knowledge. Th e fi nal and third phase consists of tools or products that 
present knowledge in a way that meets the needs of identifi ed stakeholders. It is 
important to note that synthesized knowledge is the core unit of the knowledge 
creation phase ( Straus, Tetroe, & Graham, 2009 ). Ultimately it is this synthesized 
knowledge that becomes packaged and presented to the knowledge users, indi-
cating the start of the action phase. Th e action phase represents activities used to 
assist in the application of knowledge, with eight specifi c processes including the 
evaluation of outcomes. It is here that the literature on both evaluation and KT 
currently conceptualize the role for evaluation: the evaluation of KT interven-
tions. Th e KTA cycle is not without its criticisms. From an evaluation perspective 
this narrow conceptualization essentially views evaluation in terms of outcomes 
rather than considering the role process evaluation may play in an earlier phase 
of the KTA cycle, that is, adapting kn owledge to the environment and assessing 
barriers to knowledge use. Second, evaluation and not only research can be seen 
as a mechanism to transfer knowledge to individuals and organizations. 
 Two broad forms of KT exist: end-of-grant KT and integrated KT ( Gagnon, 
2009 ). End-of-grant KT refers to the dissemination of research fi ndings upon pro-
ject completion; most of the literature has focused on this form of KT ( CIHR, 2011 ). 
From an evaluation perspective this is similar to the use of evaluation results. Th ere 
is a signifi cant body of research examining the eff ectiveness of specifi c KT strate-
gies on health outcomes ( Grimshaw et al., 2012 ); however, the evidence continues 
to remain inconclusive. In contrast, in evaluation literature there is relatively little 
primary research dedicated to examining what strategies support the use of evalu-
ation results, although much theoretical literature has explored concepts related 
to use ( Cousins & Leithwood, 1986 ;  Johnson et al., 2009 ). Integrated knowledge 
translation, the second broad form of KT, refers to the “active collaboration between 
researchers and research users in all parts of the research process” ( Graham et al., 
2006 , p. 21). Th e assumption is that research fi  ndings will be more relevant and 
therefore implemented by the end users if they are actively involved in all phases of 
the research process ( Bowen & Graham, 2013 ;  Gagnon, 2009 ). 
 Knowledge Mobilization 
 Th e concept of mobilizing knowledge relates to the activities and outputs of a 
process or project that builds awareness and enables the use of fi ndings. Th e Social 
Sciences and Humanities Council ( SSHRC, 2009 ) suggests that knowledge mobi-
lization allows researchers to connect within and beyond academia to maximize 
the cultural, intellectual, social, and economic impacts of their work. Th e more re-
cent SSHRC plan emphasizes maximizing the impact of research for the purposes 
of capturing and communicating as widely as possible. Opportunities for KMb 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  315
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
activities exist within all of the phases or stages of a research or evaluation project 
and can be leveraged with thoughtful planning for purposeful actions focused on 
engagement. Engagement activities facilitated in participatory and collaborative 
approaches to program evaluation are simultaneously aspects of KMb. Th e focus 
of both KMb and participatory or collaborative approaches to evaluation is the 
bringing together of stakeholders, who work responsively to design and, to some 
extent, carry out projects within a given context. Both share a goal of creating 
and distributing knowledge in ways that are accessible and purposeful. SSHRC’s 
Community-University Research Alliances Program that ran for over a decade 
highlights the principles of KMb through collaboration with communities and 
researchers ( Kishchuk, 2003 ). 
 Th ere are many other descriptions of KMb; one of the diffi   culties already 
mentioned is connected to the medley of terminology associated with knowledge 
mobilization activities. Th ere are subtle diff  erences, but they are all terms and 
activities that focus on the connections between research and practice/policy. 
Beyond this diffi  culty, considerable challenges exist in explaining and promoting 
the utilization of fi ndings into practice, and even when these are translated, there 
exist diffi  culties in getting fi ndings taken up in practice settings ( Graham et al., 
2006 ). Two central KMb activities include using diverse strategies for promoting 
the knowledge, resources, and expertise, while also reinforcing decision making 
and problem solving in applied practice. KMb functions within and across com-
munities, eff ectively joining academic scholarship with communities of practice; 
therefore, it is imperative that those who are mobilizing knowledge are attuned to 
the contexts of the areas they operate in. 
 KMb is oft en represented as consisting of four domains: creating (e.g., di-
alogue, community building), brokering (e.g., informing, linking, matching), 
exchanging (e.g., workshops, conferences, mentoring), and disseminating (e.g., 
social media, websites, blogs, presentations). Each domain is interrelated and 
consists of multiple activities that include informational, relational, and systems 
functions ( Bennet & Bennet, 2007 ). Within the activities of each domain, multiple 
media such as face-to-face, web-based, prin t, video, and/or performance could 
be used. Th ese domains, activities, and media off er a way of thinking about KMb 
activities that can promote evaluation use. Th ere are multiple ways to create, share, 
and use knowledge. Most important in KMb and in program evaluation is having 
a clear purpose and understanding the intended users or audiences. 
 Informing Program Evaluation through K* 
 While KT and KMb are both about the change process, the fundamental diff er-
ence is that the term KT is almost exclusively found in the health fi  eld with the 
ultimate goal of KT being a change in health service delivery and/or patient out-
comes. While KMb terminology is broader, enabling its application to multiple 
sectors, in turn it runs the risk of not having specifi c outcomes. K* has emerged 
as a way of bringing together diverse strategies and approaches in the fi  eld of 
knowledge work. As scholars and practitioners in program evaluation, insights 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=12>>>
316 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
gained from K* off er potential for real sustainable change toward social better-
ment. We suggest that K* has three core applications that can inform evaluation 
use: knowledge synthesis, action, and knowledge brokering. 
  Knowledge Synthesis.  While evaluators create knowledge using systematic 
inquiry processes similar to those used in research, the fundamental diff  erence 
between research and evaluation lies in their purpose. Research creates knowl-
edge that addresses identifi ed gaps in theories or disciplinary knowledge, and 
evaluation creates knowledge for use in practice ( Alkin & Taut, 2003 ). Th is is an 
important distinction, as knowledge that is created and synthesized for action 
within K* is largely research based ( Grimshaw et al., 2012 ;  Shaxson et al., 2012 ). 
Evaluators could gain signifi cant insights from K* by considering how synthesized 
research knowledge could be integrated into evaluations: to inform program 
theory, to consider the evaluation results within the larger body of literature, or to 
potentially support and inform program development and ongoing refi nements. 
 Urban and Trochim (2009)  have described a method they call systems evaluation 
partnership (SEP) to support the integration of research evidence into evalua-
tions. A visual diagram of the program is created, and evaluators make connec-
tions between the program logic and research evidence. Evidence is mapped onto 
the program logic to support the programs theory and link the local program to 
the broader evidence. Th e SEP approach has not gained traction in the evaluation 
literature, but has a clear link to K* and is a model to consider how knowledge 
synthesis can be integrated into evaluation. 
 To eff ectively and effi  ciently integrate research evidence into evaluation, evalu-
ators would need to have content knowledge about the program or allot time and 
resources to identify and synthesize relevant research evidence. With increasing 
emphasis on K* in health and education contexts it might be timely to open this 
discussion. Th ere remains a widespread belief that the key to eff  ective evaluator 
practice is the application of strong methodological skills, and that these skills can 
be equally and aptly applied to a range of contexts, programs, and fi elds of practice. 
Th is view is evident in the discussion regarding evaluator competencies ( King, 
Stevahn, Ghere, & Minnema, 2001 ;  Stevahn, King, Ghere, & Minnema, 2005 ). Th e 
Canadian Evaluation Society has expanded on this notion in requiring the demon-
stration of fi ve broad evaluator competencies to receive a designation of evaluator. 
Th ese competencies are refl ective practice, technical practice, situational practice, 
management, and interpersonal practice competencies ( Canadian Evaluation Soci-
ety, 2013 ). It is particularly relevant to note that there is little if any discussion about 
the need for evaluators to have current content knowledge related to the evaluand 
or its context ( Canadian Evaluation Society, 2013 ). Th e idea of content expertise 
raises a broader question about the role of evaluators, and we acknowledge that 
a KT-informed evaluation may push the boundaries of theorists and evaluators 
who believe that evaluators must maintain a detached orientation, and that evalu-
ation is inherently about making judgements about a program’s merit, worth, and 
signifi cance ( Alkin, 2004 ). If content expertise is not feasible, it would at least be 
expected that the evaluator recognize the importance of using synthesized literature 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  317
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
to inform the program and evaluation. Just as methodological experts might be 
added to the evaluation team, content experts could be identifi ed and included on 
the evaluation team. 
  Action . Th e knowledge fi eld can also inform the strategies or processes evalu-
ators implement to enhance use. Th ere are now dozens of reviews from the dis-
crete areas within the knowledge fi eld that have examined the impact of specifi c 
K* strategies on healthcare practice and outcomes (e.g.,  Greenhalgh & Wieringa, 
2011 ;  Ivers et al., 2012 ;  Sudsawad, 2007 ) and educational outcomes (e.g.,  Fenwick 
& Farrell, 2011 ;  Levin, 2013 ). Th ese reviews are based on high quality research 
and examine dozens of KT and KMb strategies. When compared to the fi  eld of 
K*, there has been relatively little empirical research examining specifi c evaluation 
interventions or approaches to enhance evaluation use. Only a handful of review 
articles on use have been completed.  Cousins and Leithwood (1986)  provided 
the fi rst comprehensive empirical review of use spanning the years 1971 to 1985, 
and  Johnson and colleagues (2009)  updated this review to include the literature 
on evaluation use from 1986 to 2005. Between both of these reviews, only 106 
articles were found spanning more than 30 years, and much of this work was ret-
rospective or descriptive in nature. Consider a recent systematic review on audit 
and feedback ( Ivers et al., 2012 ) as a strategy to improve healthcare practice. Th e 
article included 140 studies, and all were randomized controlled trials. 
 For evaluators, research from the knowledge fi eld could help identify specifi c 
strategies to adopt during and aft er an evaluation to support both process use and 
use of evaluation fi ndings. Th is idea is reinforced if we consider the systematic 
review on audit and feedback where the authors identifi  ed feedback on profes-
sional performance contributing to small but important improvements in practice 
(Ivers et al., 2102). Th e review also outlines ways to optimize feedback to improve 
performance. Research such as this can provide insights for evaluation scholars 
and practitioners by off ering specifi c strategies to optimize ways in which feed-
back can be provided to programs. Th e knowledge fi  eld also provides insights 
and examples of methodologies that could be used to further our understanding 
of evaluation use. 
  Brokering . We have identifi ed how K* can support the integration of research 
knowledge into an evaluation and identify strategies to enhance use. However, 
thinking more broadly than one or two discrete practices, evaluators can draw 
heavily to design a K*-informed evaluation.  Donnelly and colleagues (2014)  have 
provided an example of how such an evaluation can be designed and implement-
ed. Drawing on both the knowledge and evaluation literature, this evaluation was 
designed to be intentional in facilitating the application of emerging evaluation 
knowledge into practice and also attended to the empirical evidence (original 
studies or synthesized knowledge) that grounded the program and the clinicians 
within the program. Th e evaluator in this type of evaluation is cognizant of how 
empirical and formalized knowledge informed each phase of the evaluation, from 
the development of the evaluation questions to understanding emerging and 
fi nal fi ndings in light of current research. Framing this work as a K* approach to 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=14>>>
318 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
evaluation involves the intentional and active development of opportunities for 
a range of stakeholders to develop the skills to engage in knowledge work. A K*-
informed evaluation also looks to facilitate connections and collaborations among 
knowledge networks, local researchers/evaluators, and within communities of 
practice. One of the key elements of Patton’s utilization-focused evaluation is the 
identifi cation of and engagement with intended users of the evaluation. In this ap-
proach the evaluator is connecting and developing relationships with stakehold-
ers to enhance use ( Patton, 2008 ). From a knowledge-brokering perspective, an 
evaluator could identify a broader network of intended users that would include 
researchers or knowledge networks. 
  Urban and Trochim (2009)  identify evaluators as ideally situated to bridge the 
research-practice divide, and in a KT-informed evaluation the role of the evaluator 
becomes one of knowledge broker. Along with content knowledge, evaluators can 
respond to the knowledge needs of the program and organize, identify, summarize, 
and communicate relevant external evidence. Th is evidence may not necessarily be 
limited to published empirical research. Relevant evidence might include forms of 
stakeholders’ explicit and implicit knowledge that, when examined, might inform 
the program, the evaluation process, and results. As a knowledge broker, the evalu-
ator would also be aware of the potential connections between the programs to 
relevant knowledge and research networks/communities of practice. Th ese connec-
tions can lead to two-way relationships where programs gain external knowledge, 
but also have the opportunity to translate program knowledge outward. 
 Th ere are multiple potential benefi ts in using concepts drawn from K*, such 
as assuming a knowledge broker’s role. As organizations gain interest and aware-
ness of K*, evaluators can play a critical role facilitating linkages between research 
and practice. Evaluators can also support their practice by drawing on the growing 
research in K*. 
 DISCUSSION 
 “In theory, there is no diff erence between theory and practice but in practice there 
is. ” Y ogi Berra 
 Evaluation is uniquely positioned as integrating theory and practice in the pur-
suit of systematic forms of inquiry and decision making. Having introduced con-
cepts from the fi eld of K*, it is important to return to the two key developments that 
we have identifi ed in the fi eld of evaluation and reexamine these from the K* lens. 
 Key Theme One: Individual and Organizational Learning 
 Of particular relevance to the domain of individual and organizational learning 
is the concept of IKT—integrated knowledge translation. As evidence for re-
searcher-initiated end-of-grant K* activities remains inconclusive (e.g.,  Grimshaw 
et al., 2012 ;  Grimshaw et al., 2004 ;  Menon, Korner-Bitensky, Kastner, McKibbon, 
& Straus, 2009 ; Mitton, Adair, McKenzie, Patten, & Waye-Perry, 2007), there is 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  319
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
increasing recognition of the need to develop collaborative partnerships between 
researchers and end-users to better understand local context and knowledge 
needs to facilitate knowledge use ( Bowen & Graham, 2013 ;  Kitson & Bisby, 2008 ; 
 Kothari, Birch, & Charles, 2005 ). In evaluation, process use could be considered 
similar to IKT. To date there has been relatively little empirical research conducted 
that has explored the relationship between process use and the use of evaluation 
results ( Amo & Cousins, 2007 ). While there have been many articles about pro-
cess use since being formally described by  Patton (1998) , much of the literature 
is theoretical in nature, with few empirical studies examining the relationship 
between process use and the use of evaluation results.  Amo and Cousins (2007)  
conducted the only known literature review on process use. Th ey identifi ed 18 
studies from 1984 to 2005 and found that process use resulted in enhanced learn-
ing about evaluation, changes in behaviours regarding evaluation, and changes 
in attitudes about evaluation ( Amo & Cousins, 2007 ). More recent literature has 
sought to further understanding types of process use ( Baptiste, 2010 ) and explore 
process use within the larger concept of evaluation capacity building ( Cousins, 
Goh, Elliott, & Bourgeois, 2014 ). However, from a K* perspective it is also critical 
to examine knowledge generation about the program, changes to program deliv-
ery, and changes in attitudes and culture toward new knowledge. 
 Research utilization is situated socially, and “interactive approaches currently 
seem to show most promise in improving the use of research” ( Davies, Nutley, & 
Walter, 2008 , p. 152). If an evaluator adopts a knowledge broker role, stakeholder 
engagement can be broadened beyond immediate program stakeholders to in-
clude broader knowledge networks and communities of practice ( Donnelly et al., 
2014 ). 
 K* can inform ECB in several ways.  Cousins and colleagues (2013)  have 
identifi ed that the most underdeveloped area of ECB theory, practice, and 
research is evaluation use. Th  is is clearly evidenced if we look at a list of 36 
potential ECB objectives categorized by the knowledge, skills (behaviours), and 
aff ective domains that have been developed by  Preskill and Boyle (2008) . Th irty-
three of these objectives focus on building the individual’s or organization’s 
capacity to conduct evaluation, for example, enhancing skills in data collection, 
interpreting results, and developing a logic model. Only three relate to develop-
ing the capacity to  use  the evaluation fi ndings, for example, “communicate and 
report evaluation processes and fi ndings using a variety of strategies” ( Preskill 
and Boyle, 2008 , p. 450). From an ECB and K* perspective, building the capacity 
to use the evaluations is critical.  
 ECB also requires the conscious use of evidence-based strategies to support 
use, and the K* literature, as identifi ed earlier, can off er a rich source of evidence 
to draw upon. Th e intentionality requires a focus on the context of the user, the 
range of stakeholders who might use the information as well as an understanding 
of their needs and interests, and the range of potential uses and misuses. Know-
ing that participatory approaches are fundamental to support use, it is important 
to simultaneously attend to continually supporting the use of emerging and 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=16>>>
320 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
contextual information and the end of project fi ndings. Developing intentional 
processes to support the translation of emerging knowledge to the program and 
use of fi ndings beyond the project completion align with K*. Th ere are multiple 
K* frameworks and models that can be used to support the intentional use of 
strategies and processes to support evaluation use. The KTA cycle ( Graham 
et al., 2006 ) described earlier is just one of many. ECB is much more complex than 
simply looking at stakeholder engagement or process use and is an excellent lens 
through which to consider the complexities of K* in evaluation. Exploring use in 
ECB will be an important line of inquiry in the fi eld of evaluation. 
 Key Theme Two: Evaluation Infl uence 
 When we look at the concept of infl  uence, the evaluation itself is seen as a 
change process with the ultimate goal of social betterment ( Kirkhart, 2000 ; 
 Mark & Henry, 2004 ). For evaluation to support its claim to be a change process, 
the fi eld must begin to identify the specifi  c outcomes that the evaluation will 
infl uence. If we look at the defi  nition of KT, for example, the ultimate goal of 
any KT strategy is to change health delivery or health outcomes ( CIHR, 2016 ), 
akin to social betterment within a healthcare context. KT research, therefore, 
provides evidence to the healthcare fi  eld on what translation strategies change 
health outcomes. 
  Mark and Henry (2004)  off er evaluators a model to identify specifi c pathways; 
an evaluation can infl uence a program at three levels: individual, interpersonal, 
and collective (organizational). Pathways link evaluation activities and infl uence. 
K* is about change processes, and the pathways of infl uence is an excellent gen-
eral model that evaluators can use to explicitly articulate how they anticipate an 
individual evaluation will infl uence one or more levels and then plan evaluation 
activities to support this assertion. For evaluation researchers, social betterment 
needs to be operationalized in each program context, and this framework can help 
develop research designs to examine the impact of specifi c evaluation activities on 
articulated outcomes. While much of the current research on use is descriptive in 
nature or retrospective, this body of work holds much promise to help guide the 
fi eld of evaluation in studying the role of evaluation itself, a strategy to translate 
knowledge. Using K* terminology would help to connect the current silos of work 
on evaluation use and across the knowledge fi eld. 
 CONCLUSION 
 In 1989, Greene, Caracelli, and Graham concluded that “the inevitable organi-
zational, political, and interpersonal challenges of program evaluation mandate 
the use of multiple tools” (p. 255). A similar argument could be made here; an 
understanding of K* is a theoretical positioning that brings with it multiple tools, 
processes, and diff erent ways of thinking about knowledge that can, collectively, 
lead to new understanding. Th e integration of K* is another way of understand-
ing programmatic change and enhancing the use and infl uence of evaluation. As 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  321
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
evaluation considers K* and the impact on both evaluation practice and research, 
two questions can be asked and investigated in the future. 
  Question 1: What can evaluation learn from K*?  First, the evaluation com-
munity has a longstanding interest in use. A focus on K* is a natural extension 
of this interest and can serve as a catalyst to build further skills and knowledge 
to foster use. Second, this question encourages evaluation to consider terms for 
use beyond the evaluation literature. Use of K* terminology can bridge the gap 
between the currently siloed bodies of knowledge on use and KT. Th ird, uniting 
these fi elds enables evaluation to more broadly contribute to the rapidly growing 
fi eld of K*. Fourth, inquiring into K* serves to legitimize evaluation as a system-
atic form of inquiry in health care. Finally, investigating K* and evaluation can 
facilitate research on the area of use. Th  ere is a dearth of quantitative studies 
demonstrating how evaluation changes health outcomes or practice behaviours. 
Evaluation would benefi t from drawing on the stronger methodological stud-
ies found in health care and their high demands for strong empirical evidence. 
  Question 2: What can K* learn from evaluation?  Just as evaluation can benefi t 
from K* literature, so too can evaluation positively aff  ect K*. Evaluation off ers 
another approach to participatory forms of inquiry that may be more accessible 
to healthcare programs and organizations. Research is traditionally carried out in 
separate institutions, while evaluation is conducted in the organizational contexts 
where the programs are operationalized. Evaluation has the knowledge, skill set, 
and practice standards ( Y arbrough et al., 2011 ) to support program-based inquiry. 
A major contribution evaluation can provide to health care and K* are the well-
developed theoretical and conceptual frameworks on use. Specifi cally, the work 
on process use can off er a jumping-off  point for further research on IKT and other 
forms of participatory research. 
 REFERENCES 
   Alkin ,  M. C.  ( 2004 ).   Evaluation roots: Tracing theorists' views and infl uences  .   Th ousand 
Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
   Alkin ,  M. C. , &  Taut ,  S.  ( 2003 ).  Unbundling evaluation use.    Studies in Educational Evalua-
tion  ,    29  ( 1 ),  1 – 12 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0191-491X(03)90001-0   
   Amo ,  C. , &  Cousins ,  J. B.  ( 2007 ).  Going through the process: An examination of the op-
erationalization of process use in empirical research on evaluation.    New Directions for 
Evaluation  ,    2007  ( 116 ),  5 – 26 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.240   
   Amo ,  C. , &  Cousins ,  J. B.  ( 2009 ).  Reconnecting knowledge utilization and evaluation uti-
lization domains of inquiry.    Canadian Journal of Program Evaluation  ,    23  ( 1 ),  81 – 85 .  
   Arnold ,  M. E.  ( 2006 ).  Developing evaluation capacity in extension 4-H fi eld faculty: A 
framework for success.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    27  ( 2 ),  257 – 269 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1098214006287989   
   Atkinson ,  D. D. ,  Wilson ,  M. , &  Avula ,  D.  ( 2005 ).  A participatory approach to building 
capacity of treatment programs to engage in evaluation.    Evaluation and Program Plan-
ning  ,    28  ( 3 ),  329 – 334 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2005.04.012   
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=18>>>
322 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
   Baptiste ,  L. J.  ( 2010 ).  Process use across evaluation approaches: An application of Q meth-
odology in program evaluation  (Doctoral dissertation). Kent State University, Ohio.  
   Bennet ,  A. , &  Bennet ,  D.  ( 2007 ).   Knowledge mobilization in the social sciences and humani-
ties: Moving from research to action  .  Frost, WV :  MQI Press .  
   Bossuyt ,  J. ,  Shaxson ,  L. , &  Datta ,  A.  ( 2014 ). Assessing the uptake of strategic evaluations in 
EU Development Cooperation. European Union. Retrieved from   https://ec.europa.
eu/europeaid/sites/devco/files/strategic-evaluation-uptake-study-1331-main-
report-201406_en.pdf    
   Bowen ,  S. J. , &  Graham ,  I. D.  ( 2013 ).  From knowledge translation to engaged scholarship: 
Promoting research relevance and utilization.    Archives of Physical Medicine and Reha-
bilitation  ,    94  ( 1 ),  S3 – S8 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2012.04.037   
   Brandon ,  P . R. , &  Fukunaga ,  L. L.  ( 2013 ).  Th e state of the empirical research literature on 
stakeholder involvement in program evaluation.    American Journal of Evaluation   ,  
  35 (1) , 1098214013503699.  
   Canadian Evaluation Society . ( 2013 ). Competencies for Canadian evaluation practice. 
  https://evaluationcanada.ca/txt/2_competencies_cdn_evaluation_practice.pdf    
   Canadian Institutes of Health Research . ( 2011 ).  Funding overview .   http://www.cihr-irsc.
gc.ca/e/37788.html    
   Canadian Institutes of Health Research . ( 2016 ).  More about knowledge translation at CIHR: 
Knowledge translation defi nition . Retrieved from   http://www.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/45321.
html    
   Christie ,  C. A.  ( 2007 ).  Reported infl uence of evaluation data on decision makers’ actions: 
An empirical examination.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    28  ( 1 ),  8 – 25 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1098214006298065   
   Compton ,  D. ,  Baizerman ,  M. ,  Preskill ,  H. ,  Rieker ,  P . , &  Miner ,  K.  ( 2001 ).  Developing evalu-
ation capacity while improving evaluation training in public health: Th e American 
Cancer Society’s Collaborative Evaluation Fellows Project.    Evaluation and Program 
Planning  ,    24  ( 1 ),  33 – 40 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0149-7189(00)00045-8   
   Compton ,  D. W . , &  Baizerman ,  M.  ( 2007 ).  Defi ning evaluation capacity building.    American 
Journal of Evaluation  ,    28  ( 1 ),  118 – 119 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214006298172   
   Contandriopoulos ,  D. , &  Brousselle ,  A.  ( 2012 ).  Evaluation models and evaluation use.  
  Evaluation  ,    18  ( 1 ),  61 – 77 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1356389011430371   
   Cooper ,  A.  ( 2014 ).  Knowledge mobilisation in education across Canada: A cross-case anal-
ysis of 44 research brokering organisations .   Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research 
Debate and Practice  ,    10  ( 1 ),  29 – 59 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/174426413X662806   
   Cooper ,  A. , &  Levin ,  B.  ( 2013 ).  Research use by leaders in Canadian school districts.    Inter-
national Journal of Education Policy and Leadership  ,    8  ( 7 ),  1 – 15 .  
   Cousins ,  J. B. , &  Earl ,  L. M.  ( 1992 ).  Th e case for participatory evaluation.    Educational Eval-
uation and Policy Analysis   ,    14  ( 4 ),  397 – 418 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0162373701
4004397   
   Cousins ,  J. B. ,  Goh ,  S. C. ,  Clark ,  S. , &  Lee ,  L. E.  ( 2004 ).  Integrating evaluative inquiry into 
the organizational culture: A review and synthesis of the knowledge base.    Canadian 
Journal of Program Evaluation  ,    19  ,  99 – 141 .  
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  323
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
   Cousins ,  J. B. ,  Goh ,  S. C. ,  Elliott ,  C. J. , &  Bourgeois ,  I.  ( 2014 ).  Framing the capacity to do 
and use evaluation.    New Directions for Evaluation   ,    2014  ( 141 ),  7 – 23 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/ev.20076   
   Cousins ,  J. B. , &  Leithwood ,  K. A.  ( 1986 ).  Current empirical research on evalua-
tion utilization.    Review of Educational Research   ,    56  ( 3 ),  331 – 364 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3102/00346543056003331   
   Cousins ,  J. B. , &  Shulha ,  L. M.  ( 2006 ).  A comparative analysis of evaluation utilization and 
its cognate fi eld of inquiry: Current issues and trends . In  I. F .   Shaw ,  J. C.   Greene , &  M. 
M.   Mark  (Eds.),   Th e Sage handbook of evaluation    (pp.  266 – 291 ).  London, UK :  Sage . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781848608078.n12   
   Cousins ,  J. B. ,  Whitmore ,  E. , &  Shulha ,  L.  ( 2013 ).  Arguments for a common set of prin-
ciples for collaborative inquiry in evaluation.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    34  ( 1 ), 
 7 – 22 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214012464037   
   Daugherty ,  A.  ( 2007 ).   Th e power within: From neuroscience to transformation   .   D u b u q u e ,  
IA :  Kendall/Hunt .  
   Davies ,  H. ,  Nutley ,  S. , &  Walter ,  I.  ( 2008 ).  Why “knowledge transfer” is misconceived for 
applied social research.    Journal of Health Services Research & Policy  ,    13  ( 3 ),  188 – 190 . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/jhsrp.2008.008055   
   Davison ,  C. M.  ( 2009 ).  Knowledge translation: Implications for evaluation . In  J. M.   Ottoson  
and  P .   Hawe  (Eds.),   Understanding utilization, diff usion, implementation transfer, and 
translation: New Directions for Evaluation   ,    80   ,   87 – 105 .   http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.315    
   Denzin ,  N. K. , &  Lincoln ,  Y . S.  ( 2005 ).   Th e Sage handbook of qualitative research  .  London, 
UK :  Sage .  
   Donnelly ,  C. ,  Letts ,  L. ,  Klinger ,  D. , &  Shulha ,  L.  ( 2014 ).  Supporting knowledge translation 
through evaluation: Evaluator as knowledge broker.    Canadian Journal of Program 
Evaluation  ,    29  ( 1 ),  36 – 61 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.3138/cjpe.29.1.36   
   D u ff y ,  J. L. , &  Wandersman ,  A.  ( 2007 ).   A review of research on evaluation capacity-building 
strategies .  Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Evaluation As-
sociation, Baltimore, MD.  
   Fenwick ,  T. , &  Farrell ,  L.  (Eds.). ( 2011 ).   Knowledge mobilization and educational research: 
Politics, languages and responsibilities  .  Abingdon, UK :  Routledge .  
   Fetterman ,  D. ,  Rodríguez-Campos ,  L. ,  Wandersman ,  A. , &  O’Sullivan ,  R. G.  ( 2014 ).  Col-
laborative, participatory, and empowerment evaluation: Building a strong concep-
tual foundation for stakeholder involvement. Approaches to evaluation (A response 
to Cousins, Whitmore, and Shulha (2013).    American Journal of Evaluation   ,    35  ( 1 ), 
 144 – 148 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214013509875   
   Fleischer ,  D. , &  Christie ,  C.  ( 2009 ).  Evaluation use.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    30  ( 2 ), 
 158 – 175 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214008331009   
   Gagnon ,  M. L.  ( 2009 ).  Knowledge dissemination and exchange of knowledge . In  S.   Straus , 
 J.   Tetroe , &  I.   Graham  (Eds.),   KT in health care: Moving from evidence to practice   (pp. 
 235 – 248 ).  West Sussex, UK :  John Wiley .  
   Graham ,  I. D. ,  Logan ,  J. ,  Harrison ,  M. B. ,  Straus ,  S. E. ,  Tetroe ,  J. ,  Caswell ,  W . , &  Robinson , 
 N.  ( 2006 ).  Lost in knowledge translation: Time for a map?    Journal of Continuing 
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=20>>>
324 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
Education in the Health Professions  ,    26  ( 1 ),  13 – 24 . Retrieved from   http://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/chp.47/pdf  .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/chp.47   
   Greene ,  J. ,  Caracelli ,  V . , &  Graham ,  W .  ( 1989 ).  Toward a conceptual framework for mixed-
method evaluation designs.    Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis  ,    11  ( 3 ),  255 –
 274 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/01623737011003255   
   Greene ,  J. G.  ( 1988 ).  Stakeholder participation and utilization in program evaluation.  
  Evaluation Review  ,    12  ( 2 ),  91 – 116 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0193841X8801200201   
   Greenhalgh ,  T. , &  Wieringa ,  S.  ( 2011 ).  Is it time to drop the knowledge translation meta-
phor?: A critical literature review.    Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine   ,    104  ( 12 ), 
 501 – 509 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/jrsm.2011.110285   
   Grimshaw ,  J. M. ,  Eccles ,  M. P . ,  Lavis ,  J. N. ,  Hill ,  S. , &  Squires ,  J. E.  ( 2012 ).  Knowledge 
translation of research fi ndings.    Implementation Science: IS   ,    7  ( 1 ),  1 – 17 . Retrieved 
from   http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/50    http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1748-5908-7-50   
   Grimshaw ,  J. M. ,  Th omas ,  R. E. ,  MacLennan ,  G. ,  Fraser ,  C. R. ,  Ramsay ,  L. ,  Vale ,  L. , . . . 
 Donaldson ,  C.  ( 2004 ).  Eff ectiveness and effi  ciency of guideline dissemination and 
implementation strategies .   Health Technology Assessment  ,    8  ( 6 ),  1 – 7 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3310/hta8060   
   Harnar ,  M. A. , &  Preskill ,  H.  ( 2007 ).  Evaluators’ description of process use: An exploratory 
study . In  J. B.   Cousins  (Ed.),   Process use: Theory, research and practice. No. 116    
(pp.  27 – 44 ).  San Francisco, CA :  Jossey-Bass .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.241   
   Herbert ,  J. L.  ( 2014 ).  Researching evaluation infl uence: A review of the literature.    Evalua-
tion Review  ,    38  ( 5 ),  388 – 419 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0193841X14547230   
   Henry ,  G. T. , &  Mark ,  M. M.  ( 2003 ).  Beyond use: Understanding evaluations’ infl uence on 
attitudes and actions.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    24  ( 3 ),  293 – 314 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/109821400302400302   
   House ,  E. R. , &  Howe ,  K. R.  ( 1999 ).   Values in evaluation and social research  .   Th ousand 
Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
   Ivers ,  N. ,  Jamtvedt ,  G. ,  Flottorp ,  S. ,  Y oung ,  J. M. ,  Odgaard-Jensen ,  J. ,  French ,  S. D.  . .  .  
 Oxman ,  A. D.  ( 2012 ).  Audit and feedback: Eff ects on professional practice and 
healthcare outcomes.    Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews   ,    6  ( 6 ).  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD000259.pub3   
   Johnson ,  K. ,  Greenseid ,  L. O. ,  Toal ,  S. A. ,  King ,  J. A. ,  Lawrenz ,  F . , &  Volkov ,  B.  
( 2009 ).  Research on evaluation use: A review of the empirical literature from 
1986 to 2005.    American Journal of Evaluation   ,    30  ( 3 ),  377 – 410 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1098214009341660   
   Jonson ,  J. L. ,  Guetterman ,  T. , &  Th ompson   Jr ,  R. J.  ( 2014 ). An integrated model of infl u-
ence: Use of assessment data in higher education.  Research & Practice in Assessment, 
9 ,  1 – 13 .  
   King ,  J. A. , &  Pechman ,  E. M.  ( 1984 ).  Pinning a wave to the shore: Conceptualizing evalua-
tion use in school systems.    Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis  ,    6  ( 3 ),  241 – 251 . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/01623737006003241   
   King ,  J. A. ,  Stevahn ,  L. ,  Ghere ,  G. , &  Minnema , J. ( 2001 ).  Toward a taxonomy of essential 
evaluator competencies .   
American Journal of Evaluation  ,    22  ( 2 ),  229 – 247 .  
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  325
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
   Kirkhart ,  K. E.  ( 2000 ).  Reconceptualizing evaluation use: An integrated theory of infl u-
ence .   New Directions for Evaluation  ,    2000  ( 88 ),  5 – 23 .  
   Kishchuk ,  N.  ( 2003 ). Performance report: Phase 1 of the Community-University Research 
Alliances (CURA) program. Retrieved from   http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/about-au_
sujet/publications/cura_e.pdf    
   Kitson ,  A. , &  Bisby ,  M.  ( 2008 ).   Speeding up the spread: Putting KT research into practice and 
developing an integrated KT collaborative research agenda  .  Alberta Heritage Founda-
tion for Medical Research .  http://cihc.ca/fi les/members/pke/SpeedingUpTh eSpread_
KT08.pdf    
   Kitson ,  A. , &  Straus ,  S. E.  ( 2010 ).  Th e knowledge-to-action cycle: Identifying the gaps.  
  Canadian Medical Association Journal  ,    182  ( 2 ),  E73 – E77 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1503/
cmaj.081231   
   Kothari ,  A. ,  Birch ,  S. , &  Charles ,  C.  ( 2005 ).  “Interaction” and research utilization in health 
policies and programs: Does it work?    Health Policy (Amsterdam)  ,    71  ( 1 ),  117 – 125 . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2004.03.010   
   Labin ,  S. N. ,  Duff y ,  J. ,  Meyers ,  D. C. ,  Wandersman ,  A. , &  Lesesne ,  C. A.  ( 2012 ).  A research 
synthesis of the evaluation capacity building literature.    American Journal of Evalua-
tion  ,    33  ( 3 ),  307 – 338 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214011434608   
   Lawrenz ,  F . ,  Th omas ,  K. , &  Clarkson ,  L. C.  ( 2008 ).  Evaluation capacity building in the 
schools: Administrator-led and teacher-led perspectives.    Canadian Journal of Pro-
gram Evaluation  ,    23  ,  61 – 82 .  
   Levin ,  B.  ( 2013 ).  To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use.    Review of Educa-
tion  ,    1  ( 1 ),  2 – 31 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3001   
   Mark ,  M. M. , &  Henry ,  G. T.  ( 2004 ).  Th e mechanisms and outcomes of evaluation infl  u-
ence.    Evaluation  ,    10  ( 1 ),  35 – 57 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1356389004042326   
   Menon ,  A. ,  Korner-Bitensky ,  N. ,  Kastner ,  M. ,  McKibbon ,  K. A. , &  Straus ,  S.  ( 2009 ).  Strate-
gies for rehabilitation professionals to move evidence based knowledge into practice: 
A systematic review.    Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine  ,    41  ( 13 ),  1024 – 1032 .  http://
dx.doi.org/10.2340/16501977-0451   
   Mitton ,  C. ,  Adair ,  C. E. ,  McKenzie ,  E. ,  Patten ,  S. B. , &  Waye Perry ,  B.  ( 2007 ).  Knowledge 
transfer and exchange: Review and synthesis of the literature .   Milbank Quarterly  ,  
  85  ( 4 ),  729 – 768 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2007.00506.x   
   Ottoson ,  J. M.  ( 2009 ).  Knowledge‐for‐action theories in evaluation: Knowledge utilization, 
diff usion, implementation, transfer, and translation.    New Directions for Evaluation  ,  
  2009  ( 124 ),  7 – 20 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.310   
   Patton ,  M. Q.  ( 1998 ).  Discovering process use.    Evaluation  ,    4  ( 2 ),  225 – 233 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/13563899822208437   
   Patton ,  M. Q.  ( 2007 ).  Process use as a usefulism.    New Directions for Evaluation  ,    2007  ( 116 ), 
 99 – 112 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.246   
   Patton ,  M. Q.  ( 2008 ).   Utilization-focused evaluation   ( 4th ed. ).  Los Angeles, CA :  Sage .  
   Patton ,  M. Q. , &  Hopson ,  R. K.  (Ed.) ( 2000 ).  Overview: Language matters .   How and why 
language matters in evaluation, New Directions for Evaluation  ,    2000  ( 86 ),  5 – 16 .  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.1168    
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=22>>>
326 Donnelly & Searle
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366© 2017 CJPE 31.3, 305–327
   Preskill ,  H. , &  Boyle ,  S.  ( 2008 ).  A multidisciplinary model of evaluation capac-
ity building.    American Journal of Evaluation   ,    29  ( 4 ),  443 – 459 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1098214008324182   
   Preskill ,  H. ,  Zuckerman ,  B. , &  Matthews ,  B.  ( 2003 ).  An exploratory study of process use: 
Findings and implications for future research.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    24  ( 4 ), 
 423 – 442 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/109821400302400402   
   Rich ,  R. F .  ( 1997 ).  Measuring knowledge utilization: Processes and outcomes.    Knowledge, 
Technology & Policy  ,    10  ( 3 ),  11 – 24 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02912504   
   Shaxson ,  L. ,  Bielak ,  A. ,  Ahmed ,  I. ,  Brien ,  D. ,  Conant ,  B. ,  Fisher ,  C. ,  . . .  &  Weaving ,  R.  
( 2012 ). Expanding our understanding of K*(Kt, KE, Ktt, KMb, KB, KM, etc.): A 
concept paper emerging from the K* conference held in Hamilton, Ontario, Cana-
da, April 2012. Retrieved from   http://inweh.unu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/
KStar_ConceptPaper_FINALWEB.pdf    
   Shulha ,  L. M. , &  Cousins ,  J. B.  ( 1997 ).  Evaluation use: Th eory, research and prac-
tice since 1986.    American Journal of Evaluation   ,    18  ( 1 ),  195 – 208 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/109821409701800121   
   Shulha ,  L. M. ,  Whitmore ,  E. ,  Cousins ,  J. B. ,  Gilbert ,  N. , &  al Hudib ,  H.  ( 2016 ).  Introducing 
evidence-based principles to guide collaborative approaches to evaluation: Results of 
an empirical process.    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    37  ( 2 ),  193 – 215 .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1098214015615230   
   Social Science Humanities Research Council . ( 2009 ). SSHRC’s Knowledge Mobilization Strat-
egy, 2009–2011.   https://www.ucalgary.ca/research/fi les/research/sshrc_knowledge_
mobilization.pdf    
   Stevahn ,  L. ,  King ,  J. A. ,  Ghere ,  G. , &  Minnema ,  J.  ( 2005 ).  Establishing essential competen-
cies for program evaluators .   American Journal of Evaluation  ,    26  ( 1 ),  43 - 59 .  
   Stockdill ,  S. H. ,  Baizerman ,  M. , &  Compton ,  D.W .  ( 2002 ).  Toward a defi nition of ECB pro-
cess: A conversation with the ECB literature .   New Directions for Evaluation  ,    2002  ( 93 ), 
 7 – 26 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.39    
   Straus ,  S. ,  Tetroe ,  J. , &  Graham ,  I.  (Eds.). ( 2009 ).   Knowledge translation in health care: 
Moving from evidence to practice  .  West Sussex, UK :  John Wiley & Sons .  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/9781444311747   
   Suchman ,  E. A.  ( 1967 ).   Principles and practice of evaluative research: An introduction to 
social research  .  New Y ork, NY :  Appleton-Century-Croft s .  
   Sudsawad ,  P .  ( 2007 ). Knowledge translation: Introduction to models, strategies and meas-
ures.  Austin, TX :  Southwest Educational Development Laboratory, National Center 
for Dissemination of Disability Research .  
   Taut ,  S.  ( 2008 ).  What have we learned about stakeholder involvement in program evalua-
tion?    Studies in Educational Evaluation  ,    34  ( 4 ),  224 – 230 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
stueduc.2008.10.007   
   Taylor-Powell ,  E. , &  Boyd ,  H. H.  ( 2008 ).  Evaluation capacity building in complex organiza-
tions.    New Directions for Evaluation  ,    2008  ( 120 ),  55 – 69 .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ev.276   
   Urban ,  J. B. , &  Trochim ,  W .  ( 2009 ).  Th e role of evaluation in research—Practice integration 
working toward the “Golden Spike. ”    American Journal of Evaluation  ,    30  ( 4 ),  538 – 553 . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1098214009348327   
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Integrating Learning from the Knowledge Field  327
doi: 10.3138/cjpe.366 CJPE 31.3, 305–327 © 2017
   Weiss ,  C. H.  ( 1972 ).   Methods for assessing program eff ectiveness  .  Englewood Cliff s, NJ : 
 Prentice Hall .  
   Weiss ,  C. H.  ( 1981 ).  Measuring the use of evaluation . In  J. A.   Ciarlo  (Ed.),   Utilizing evalu-
ation: Concepts and measurement techniques   (pp.  17 – 33 ).  Beverly Hills, CA :  Sage .  
   Weiss ,  C. H.  ( 1998 ).   Evaluation methods for studying program   .  Upper Saddle River, NJ : 
 Prentice Hall .  
   Y arbrough ,  D. B. ,  Shulha ,  L. M. ,  Hopson ,  R. K. , &  Caruthers ,  F . A.  ( 2011 ).   Th e program 
evaluation standards: A guide for evaluators and evaluation users   ( 3rd ed. ).  Th ousand 
Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
 AUTHOR INFORMATION 
 Catherine Donnelly is an Associate Professor at the School of Rehabilitation Th erapy at 
Queen’s University. Her clinical and research interests are focused on team-based primary 
care, with a focus on understanding how evaluation can support organizational learning 
and knowledge translation. 
 Michelle Searle holds a PhD from Queen’s University and works as an independent edu-
cational researcher and evaluator as well as an instructor at both Western University and 
Queen’s University. Her research is focused on educational evaluations that promote learn-
ing with multiple stakeholders to enhance evaluation use. She draws from her background 
as an arts educator to interweave creative practices into program evaluation contexts.  
  
 https://utppublishing.com/doi/pdf/10.3138/cjpe.366 - Monday, March 17, 2025 12:06:48 PM - IP Address:74.64.138.13