<<<PAGE=1>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE
LEARNING 
AND VALUES
Background paper on EAEA's annual theme 2022
DECEMBER 2022
<<<PAGE=2>>>
The European Association for the Education of Adults (EAEA) is
the voice of non-formal adult education in Europe. EAEA is a
European NGO with 120 member organisations in 43 countries
and represents more than 60 million learners Europe-wide.
EAEA promotes adult learning and access to and participation
in non-formal adult education for all; particularly for groups
that are currently underrepresented.
Funded by the European Union. Views and
opinions expressed are however those of the
author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union or the European
Education and Culture Executive Agency (EACEA).
Neither the European Union nor EACEA can be
held responsible for them.
Publisher: European Association for the Education of Adults (EAEA) 2022
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Introduction 3
Transformative learning as a concept 4
Transformative adult learning and education: 
a pedagogical perspective 5
Transformative learning at the policy level 7
Transformative learning and values 8
Transformative learning in practice 10
Asking the right questions: Kazerne Dossin in Mechelen,
Belgium 10
Challenging ageism: the Ageing Laboratory of the Municipality of
Ílhavo, Portugal 10
Empowering women of all ages: NAHLA, Bosnia and Herzegovina 11
Recommendations 11
References and further reading 15
TABLE OF
CONTENTS
<<<PAGE=4>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 2
<<<PAGE=5>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Why focus on transformative learning and 
education? In times of multiple crises that 
Europe is confronted with, adult citizens need 
to not only be able to react to the challenges 
but also to be enacting meaningful change in 
their own lives, families, and communities. 
Adult learning and education can support 
adults in the process of transformation by 
providing a space for self-reflection and 
dialogue with others; it can also develop 
critical awareness and autonomy.  
Throughout 2022, EAEA together with its 
members looked into the concept of 
transformative learning and its increasing 
relevance as Europe recovers from a global 
pandemic and faces an energy crisis, against 
a background of ambitious objectives of a 
digital and green transition. The mounting 
global and regional challenges have also led 
us to question the role of adult learning as a 
sector, and the values that adult learning is 
promoting or should promote to foster 
change.  
The present paper will introduce the concept 
of transformative learning and its application 
across the adult learning and education 
sector in Europe, ranging from the theoretical 
background to the use of approaches that 
can foster transformative learning. It will also 
summarise key concepts related to 
transformative learning and values and will 
close with a set of recommendations on how 
transformative learning approaches can be 
implemented, targeting both policy and 
practice.  
Our conclusions are drawn from a review of 
existing literature on transformative learning, 
case studies collected through the EAEA 
Grundtvig Award call, and results of the EAEA 
Annual Conference: Transformative Learning 
and Values, which took place in Mechelen, 
Belgium on 31 May.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 4 
 
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AS A CONCEPT 
 
Transformative learning (TL) as a concept has 
been well-established and thoroughly 
analysed over the course of the last four 
decades. Mezirow, himself, has then further 
developed his concept, together with E.W. 
Taylor (Mezirow & Taylor, 2009), which has 
ever since been followed up by many 
reflections, discussions, and adaptations as 
most recently, an edited volume by Kokkos 
(Kokkos, 2020) has presented the dialogue 
between transformative learning and the 
ideas of prominent educationalists.  
Beginning in the late 1970s, however, initially, 
Mezirow had been studying women's re-entry 
programmes in community colleges, 
identifying a feeling of discontent throughout 
his research group. He concluded that this 
discontent is based on the fact that the 
women participating in his study have been 
experiencing a life crisis.  
The crisis was based on the women’s 
realisations that they have been constructing 
their existence, demeanour and behaviour 
solely based on socially prescribed roles 
rather than free choice. This, understandably, 
caused a disruption in their self-perception 
and approach to the world. 
Against this background, Mezirow (1991) 
identified perspective transformation as the 
central process following this crisis through 
realisation and built his ten-step model on this 
observation.  
Broadening his model to all adult learners, he 
underlined the importance of a felt 
predicament to the learning process. As the 
learner would be thrown off their regular path 
of thinking and doing on a fundamental level, 
such a crisis would be resulting in previous 
knowledge and/or skills being insufficiently or 
not at all functioning to resolve said crisis.  
 
 
“But this is a special kind of dilemma. Simply 
learning more, solving problems more 
effectively, or acquiring a skill or new 
behaviour will not resolve it” 
(Mezirow, 1978, p.7) 
To overcome the crisis, the learner will 
eventually go through ten steps of critical 
reflection, progressing and testing of new 
approaches. They will go through phases of 
trial and error and will mentally adjust to a 
degree that goes beyond “learning a new 
trick”. 
However, after over four decades of reflecting 
on and debating about TL, the concept has 
also faced some criticism. As Desapio (2017, 
p. 58-60) has summarised in his most useful 
literature analysis, four trends – as he calls 
them – can be identified when it comes to 
critically reflecting on Mezirow’s concept of 
TL: 
● First Trend: The alternative 
conceptions of the theoretical 
framework, refers to the relative 
vagueness of the model, a defined 
understanding of its central concept 
as well as a formal organisation. This 
led to the tendency to refer to and 
focus on the identity of a learner when 
discussing TL, opposite to Mezirow’s 
original focus on the cognitive 
spectrum. 
● Second Trend: Asking for the actual 
target of Transformative Learning, 
critics mention that TL does not 
clearly define its “thing”, its core, or its 
domain. It creates questions on what 
could be addressed or manipulated to 
support the learner and/or a 
successful learning experience.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 5 
 
● Third Trend: Also, a consequence of 
concrete aspects of the model being 
left undefined, the questions for “What 
are we actually talking about when we 
are discussing TL?” as well as “What 
role does identity play in all of this?”  
have persisted and are yet to be 
answered. 
● Fourth Trend: Lastly, many authors 
are concluding that a solid answer to 
“How?” is missing. How do we use TL 
concretely? How do we alter the 
learning setting we have so that it can 
accommodate TL? How can 
practitioners promote TL in their daily 
praxis? 
Although TL has, as it has been pointed out, 
some vagueness in its concept, leaving room 
for individual interpretations, it simultaneously 
offers its own core approach as the solution: 
namely the use of the idea and concept within 
a self-chosen frame, with a self-chosen 
dedicated purpose and objective. Thus, TL 
will be put in the context of pedagogy, policy, 
and values within the following chapter, 
providing a unique view of its potential and 
challenges. 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATIVE ADULT LEARNING AND 
EDUCATION: A PEDAGOGICAL PERSPECTIVE  
 
Regardless of the differences in the 
understanding of transformative learning as a 
concept, the pedagogical approaches used 
by adult educators that can be described as 
transformative share a lot of similarities. A 
recent report prepared in the framework of 
EAEA’s FutureLabAE project, which looked at 
several adult learning practices described as 
“change-oriented”, found that their most 
important common features consisted of 
“methods that facilitate interaction with others 
(…), seeing things in alternative ways, 
challenging the existing conceptions and 
attitudes, sharing of experiences, critical 
reflection, becoming aware of own and other 
people’s attitudes, beliefs, values, and 
perspectives, and doing things differently” 
(Manninen et al., 2020).  
Similarly, Kroth and Cranton (2014) describe 
discourse or dialogue to be “generally 
considered to be an essential component of 
fostering transformative learning”, as are 
“opportunities for critical self-reflection or 
activities to encourage reflection”. Mezirow 
himself called for learner-centred, 
participatory, and interactive approaches 
(1997).  
Practically speaking, such methods can 
include journals, role-playing, arts-based 
activities, case studies, group projects or 
debates. Participatory methods that 
encourage co-creation can support learners 
in taking ownership of their learning process.  
The FutureLabAE report includes a list of 
several methods that can be used by adult 
educators to foster transformative learning, 
such as fishbowl discussions or a social 
sculpture; Kroth and Cranton (2014) focus on 
storytelling as a method. 
A distinction can be made between 
approaches that focus primarily on raising
<<<PAGE=8>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 6 
 
awareness and changing behaviour at the 
individual level and approaches that 
emphasise the emancipatory side of learning. 
The latter looks primarily at the environment 
and circumstances of learning, as “education 
should above all focus on the kind of capacity 
building and critical thinking that will allow 
citizens to understand what is going on in 
society, to ask critical questions and to 
determine for themselves what needs to be 
done.” (Wals, 2022, p. 179) 
Although this may sound abstract, it has a 
very concrete impact on the 
conceptualisation of learning, especially when 
looking at the goals of transformative learning. 
What is it supposed to achieve? Who or what 
is to be changed, or rather, ‘transformed’, 
why, and how exactly? This question is 
inherently political and has implications for 
whether transformative learning is seen more 
as individual behaviour change or as 
emancipatory learning that is not directly 
controllable and where the outcomes, 
therefore, need to be accepted as 
unpredictable and uncertain to some degree. 
“What a teacher needs to provide is a safe 
space and an understanding that if you go to 
a class, you need to focus on the strengths 
that people bring with them and all their 
experiences and skills. A good teacher 
reminds learners of the strengths that they 
have in themselves.” 
 
Deborah Oniah, adult learner speaking at the 
EAEA Annual Conference 2022 
The empowerment of learners for self-
reflection, autonomy, and self-determination, 
and the focus on collective consciousness-
raising and action are central when learning is 
understood in a social context (Jarvis, 2012). 
This emancipation of learners is fundamental 
not only to design ‘learner-centred’ 
approaches and methods, but also to make 
learning fundamentally about the learners 
themselves and their scope and capacity for 
action. Learning, in this sense, is not only 
limited to methods and curricula to learn 
about certain topics, i.e., to achieve 
educational goals in a prescriptive or 
instrumental way, but learning ultimately 
shapes social, economic, and political life, 
thereby questioning, changing, revising, 
abandoning, and renewing learning 
objectives. 
Increasingly, the topic of transformative 
learning is linked to that of the question of 
spaces for learning. Learning environments 
continue to evolve, not least due to the 
continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
(Koulaouzides, 2021). Online learning 
environments, while seemingly more 
accessible, come with their own constraints in 
terms of methodologies, limiting the use of 
approaches aiming at self-expression, such 
as body or art-based methodologies. 
The necessity of developing safe spaces for 
learning has been especially prominent in the 
recent discourse around inclusion. An 
Erasmus+ project to which EAEA is 
contributing as a partner, Safe Spaces for 
Learning, defines a safe space as “a space 
which, either technically or emotionally, is 
meant to provide equal opportunities, 
representation and communication outlets for 
marginalised groups or persons in an 
environment of respect and understanding 
that eliminate oppressive behaviours, 
recognise the struggle and cultivates 
dialogue.” (SAFE Project, 2022) The project 
has developed the SAFE Learning Guide on 
How to create and maintain a safe space for 
learning, based to a large extent on a series 
of focus groups with learners and educators.  
One key conclusion of the guide is that 
“safety is quite different than comfort”, and 
that the feeling of discomfort can foster 
learning. Similar opinions have been shared 
by participants of the panel discussion at the 
EAEA Annual Conference on Transformative 
Learning and Values, who mentioned that to 
encourage self-reflection and for learning to 
be truly transformative, adults need to be 
challenged to leave their comfort zone.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 7 
 
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AT THE POLICY 
LEVEL 
 
At the European level, several competence 
frameworks have been conceptualised in 
recent years, which demonstrate how a 
holistic approach to adult learning can have a 
transformative impact on adults’ lives.  
In 2016-2018, EAEA together with the Life 
Skills for Europe project consortium 
developed the Life Skills Framework. The 
framework aims to establish a common 
understanding of life skills by defining eight 
key types of capabilities necessary to be an 
active participant in life and work. Drawn to a 
large extent from the experience of the 
Learning and Work Institute in the UK and 
their Citizens’ Curriculum, it emphasizes how 
the framework can support citizens to 
“develop these skills for different purposes 
and in different contexts - in relation to their 
own personal empowerment; in their 
relationships with others, including family, 
friends and their local community; and 
through wider engagement as an active 
citizen” (LSE project, 2018). 
The need for a more holistic understanding of 
key competences did not go unnoticed also at 
the EU policy level. The EU’s Joint Research 
Centre (2019) developed the LifeComp, 
which explores the Personal, Social and 
Learning to Learn competences of the Key 
Competences Framework. Although 
transformative learning is not explicitly 
mentioned in the document, several 
references are made to the importance of 
critical thinking, which makes up part of the 
Learning to Learn competence. Skills for Life 
are now one of the actions of the European 
Skills Agenda, adopted in 2020. 
A recent policy initiative in the field of 
sustainability learning explicitly mentions 
transformative learning: the European Union’s 
GreenComp framework that was published in 
January 2022 considers transformative 
learning as being at the heart of sustainability 
learning, enabling learners to ‘embody’ 
sustainability values by encouraging them to 
reflect on their knowledge and values, 
question knowledge and practices, and act 
for change.  
Since “transformative learning” and 
“transforming education” have also been 
declared the theme of the year 2022 by 
UNESCO and even a “Transforming 
Education Summit” was held within the 
framework of the UN General Assembly in 
September 2022, it can be assumed that 
“transformative learning”" will be one of the 
buzzwords in new policy documents in the 
coming years. What it entails, however, might 
differ from context to context.  
“Reality is always more complex and 
interesting than we think at first sight. 
Transformative allows people to self-reflect 
and act upon new information. This is the way 
to go for big challenges such as climate 
change.” 
Rina Rabau, Deputy Mayor of Mechelen, 
speaking at the EAEA Grundtvig Award 
Ceremony 2022 
Current uses of the term strongly lean onto 
the definition of transformative learning as 
individual change of behaviour and 
empowerment for autonomous and self-
determined learning, but, almost ironically, in 
a rather prescriptive meaning; where they 
mention the emancipatory potential of 
transformative learning, they remain at a 
rather vague level.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 8 
 
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES 
 
Implementing transformative learning 
approaches remains a political choice, and it 
cannot happen without reflecting on the 
broader values that underpin adult learning 
systems. At the EAEA Annual Conference on 
Transformative Learning and Values, 
participants discussed the imposed, 
proclaimed and lived values in adult learning 
and education. The discussions were 
organised from different viewpoints: of 
learners, educators, adult learning providers, 
and policymakers.  
“If we think about transformative learning and 
how it can change our perceptions and 
experiences, we need to start with ourselves 
and think about the values and prejudices 
that we have. Our assumptions are often very 
euro-centric and we need to be ready to 
challenge them.” 
Laura Formenti, Professor of General and 
Social Pedagogy at the University of Milano 
Bicocca, speaking at the EAEA Annual 
Conference 2022
<<<PAGE=11>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 9 
 
Looking at values from learners’ perspective, 
they are frequently context-bound and 
depend not only on the individuals but also 
their families and communities. Some lived 
values require engagement and support; 
balancing work, family and education can be 
a challenge, especially for non-traditional 
learners. Lived and imposed values can be 
interconnected, depending on the system, 
and include for example connectivity or self-
development, but at the same time 
encourage competition.  
The perspective of learners’ is also closely 
connected to that of educators. While equality 
might be proclaimed in a learning 
environment, in practice adult educators 
might have their own biases, and usually, 
there remains a power imbalance between 
learners and educators. Giving up power is 
not easy for educators, even if values such as 
openness, listening or humbleness are 
proclaimed.  
Educators see themselves as an intermediary 
between learners and society, and at the 
same time as both administrators and 
educators. They also feel bound by the 
imposed values, such as the necessity for 
having “infinite knowledge”, delivering results, 
and producing financial gains.  
Looking at the perspective of providers, there 
is a necessity for a shared understanding of 
values; proclaimed values are negotiated 
internally ad; the progress towards achieving 
them can be measured. While they can be 
mostly aspirational and seen as a good wish, 
more often than not they are also connected 
to what is happening at the policy level.  
Financial dependence on policy 
developments is closely linked to imposed 
values: the necessity for impact measurement 
and quality assurance according to official 
standards or requirements of grants, but not 
necessarily to accommodate the needs of 
society. 
Also at the policy level, similar issues were 
raised by the participants, who perceived the 
objective of employability and the practices of 
standardisation as imposed on adult learning 
and education; this can restrict the potential 
and the scope of ALE. Standardisation, and 
measurable outcomes, may hamper creativity 
and the joy of learning.  The discussion also 
focused on the meaning of skills as a concept 
and related terms: upskilling, and low-skilled. 
Participants questioned how skills are 
defined, valued, and taught. Lived values: In 
contrast with some of the imposed values, 
those that are lived in the sector relate to the 
social and community dimensions of ALE, 
namely socialisation, co-production, and a 
sense of wonder.  
The role of ALE in the integration, interaction, 
and empowerment of learners representing all 
backgrounds cannot go unnoticed.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 10 
 
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING IN PRACTICE 
 
Asking the right questions: Kazerne 
Dossin in Mechelen, Belgium 
Kazerne Dossin is a memorial, museum and 
research centre on Holocaust and human 
rights in Mechelen, Belgium. The museum 
educates visitors on the historical events that 
took place in Mechelen and also plays a role 
in assessing universal mechanisms linked to 
racism, discrimination, exclusion, and group 
violence still at play in society today. In this 
way, it makes a fundamental contribution to 
the educational and social project, in which 
citizenship, democratic resistance and the 
defence of individual basic freedoms are 
central. 
“In our museum, we try methodologies where 
we try to get in people who do not necessarily 
believe in a conversation; inviting is the most 
important starting point of a conversation” 
 Anne-Sophie Van Vyve, Director of Public 
Engagement & Education at Kazerne Dossin 
speaking at the EAEA Annual Conference 
2022 
In addition to running exhibitions, Kazerne 
Dossin also organises workshops and 
awareness-raising activities on hate speech 
and hate crimes, organised for example for 
the local police station.  
The public engagement and education team 
of Kazerne Dossin underlines the importance 
of asking the right questions to learners and 
visitors, which will trigger a reflection. For 
example, during a project with perpetrators of 
hate crimes, participants are invited for an 
activity at the museum, and then a longer 
discussion during which questions are asked 
without judgement. This challenges people to 
get out of their comfort zone and start a self-
reflection.  
Challenging ageism: the Ageing 
Laboratory of the Municipality of Ílhavo, 
Portugal 
The Laboratory of Ageing, coordinated by the 
Municipality of Ílhavo, aims to change the way 
older people are represented in society. For 
this to happen, it is necessary to debunk the 
stereotype that elderly people are in declining 
health and unable to face everyday 
challenges.  
Amongst proposed courses are IT classes, 
creative sewing sessions, embroidery, 
gardening, and horticulture; as well as other 
activities: visits to television shows, and 
participation in theatres, choirs, and short 
films, amongst others. By combining a diverse 
range of activities, the project addresses not 
only ageism but also problems such as 
loneliness and social exclusion of older 
people. 
The Ageing Laboratory is also a space where 
interviews and surveys are carried out and 
where different stakeholders can meet to 
share experiences and knowledge on ageing. 
The creation axis of the Laboratory hosts 
creative projects, developed by seniors and 
artists. It comprises a variety of arts, ranging 
from the creation of fabric items to drama and 
musical rehearsals. It is intended to foster 
intergenerational learning and a connection 
between classical knowledge and emerging 
sectors. 
Recognizing the transformative impact of the 
initiative, and especially the improvement of 
the physical and mental health of its senior 
participants, in May 2022 EAEA awarded the 
project with the Grundtvig Award on 
Transformative Learning and Values (see 
EAEA, 2022).
<<<PAGE=13>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 11 
 
Empowering women of all ages: NAHLA, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Center for Education and Research - NAHLA 
is a non-governmental, non-profit organisation 
founded in 2000 in Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Nahla implements projects and 
activities at the local level, in the field of adult 
education and social research, with a special 
focus on empowering women of all ages 
through education, networking, counselling 
and business support, faith and spirituality, 
health promotion and sports and recreation. 
Using the “transforming power of knowledge”, 
NAHLA aims to drive change and build a 
better future for women in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Empowerment is one of the 
main values underpinning the activities of 
NAHLA, alongside openness, cooperation, 
support, and inspiration, among others.  
In 2020/21, over 12 000 participants joined 
NAHLA’s activities in three cities in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. To better adapt to learners’ 
changing needs, NAHLA regularly introduces 
new courses or modes of their delivery, for 
example by engaging the Bosnian diaspora in 
online courses, or by proposing psychological 
assistance for learners confronted with mental 
health issues. New collaborations are set up 
to support the most vulnerable learners, such 
as single mothers. 
One key element of NAHLA’s work is the 
focus on the transformative power of learning 
in communication and reporting work. NAHLA 
(2021) regularly shares learner stories to 
demonstrate the impact that adult learning 
has had on their lives.  
“My message to all women who do not have 
the strength, willpower and who do not see 
the way or reason to open a new chapter in 
their self-improvement: Do not wait for 
motivation to find you, start learning today. 
Take small steps to achieve big goals! My 
example shows that it is possible to do that!”  
Danira Mustafović, a participant in a Data 
Science training and career counselling 
services at NAHLA
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Policy level 
Create an enabling environment for 
transformative learning: Promote strong 
structures for ALE at the national and regional 
levels, and provide better financing for ALE 
EAEA underlines the need for adequate 
support for ALE infrastructure and funding. 
ALE should be recognised in its diversity and 
funding instruments should support this 
diversity, while giving support to the building 
of networks and cooperation in the sector. 
Long-term and adequate funding for ALE is 
necessary to ensure high quality learning 
provision and to enable ALE organisations to 
test and implement transformative learning 
methods with their target groups and in their 
own areas of ALE. 
Promote civil dialogue and the inclusion of the 
learners’ voice in policy making 
EAEA encourages policy makers to work 
directly with civil society in ALE to ensure a 
community-based approach to the delivery of 
ALE programmes. Furthermore, we urge all 
policy makers to use the learners’ voice as a 
central element in all political decisions, and 
in particular to make the voices of people 
from marginalised and vulnerable
<<<PAGE=14>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 12 
 
backgrounds heard. This means using multi-
stakeholder approaches in political decision-
making processes. 
Promote policy coherence at all political levels 
Policy coherence in all areas of education and 
training is a key component to ensure lifelong 
learning for learners of all ages and all 
backgrounds. At the European and 
international levels, several policy initiatives, 
strategies, and frameworks give a direction to 
policymaking in ALE. Moreover, ALE also 
plays a key role in initiatives, strategies, and 
frameworks on themes such as digitalisation 
and sustainability. This reflects the situation of 
policymaking on ALE at the national and 
regional levels in many EU countries.  
The division among several departments 
requires good and close cooperation between 
the different departments and competences 
to promote policy coherence. A multi-
stakeholder approach in decision-making 
processes and/or the consultation of civil 
society in ALE and the learners’s voice can 
contribute to efficient initiatives, strategies 
and frameworks that make learning relevant 
and help to increase participation levels in 
ALE. Policy coherence is essential to ensure 
political support and implement policies 
effectively. 
Promote a holistic vision of adult learning in 
funding instruments, especially in the 
Erasmus+ programme and in the Individual 
Learning Accounts 
The new central calls in the Erasmus+ 
programme from 2021 onwards have a 
strong focus on work-based learning. From a 
survey of EAEA's members on Erasmus+ 
decentralised projects (i.e., projects approved 
by national agencies), it appears that few 
projects on life skills and values such as 
sustainability, active citizenship and 
democracy are approved and that the lists of 
approved projects in adult education show a 
preference for labour market-oriented 
projects. The focus of Individual Learning 
accounts as a means for adults to access 
learning is clearly labour market oriented. 
However, these neglect important parts of 
non-formal ALE that promote life skills and 
transversal skills that are essential for 
personal and community development. 
A broader and more holistic approach to ALE 
would be important to create more space for 
innovation and better respond to learners' 
needs. To promote greater social inclusion, 
sustainability, democracy and wellbeing, 
change-oriented ALE is needed that is 
transformative for learners and communities.  
Practice level 
Give learners a voice  
Moving away from an instrumentalist view of 
ALE and applying an emancipatory approach 
to ALE means empowering and supporting 
learners to raise their own voices in decision-
making processes. This can be approached 
from two angles: 
 the individual level: learners are 
empowered to determine and direct their 
own learning pathways. They are 
empowered to engage actively in society. 
This approach focuses on the change of 
individual behaviour, trickling down into 
wider social, political, and economic 
spheres. 
 the community and society level: learners 
are empowered to reflect on and question 
their (learning) environment, ask how their 
learning fits into overall societal 
developments and which changes they 
would like to see for the future of their 
communities and society at large. This, in 
turn, is translated into participation in 
decision-making processes and 
determining approaches to, methods and 
contents of learning. 
However, while these bottom-up approaches 
are crucial for transforming visions on
<<<PAGE=15>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 13 
 
education and learning itself, current systems 
of learning provision also require awareness-
raising from the top level down to the lower 
levels of decision-making.  
This means that, in order to create these 
enabling learning environments that empower 
learners, awareness-raising among 
policymakers and other decision-makers in 
learning systems is needed. While, in some 
sectors of education, participation of learners 
in decision-making processes is quite well-
established, in particular in the secondary 
school and higher education sectors where 
student councils exist that represent the voice 
of learners in the institutions’ decision-making 
bodies, this is a relatively new concept in ALE. 
Support from the European and national 
levels in establishing these structures is 
pivotal.  
On a more practical level, giving learners a 
voice can happen through a variety of 
instruments, for instance through national or 
regional learning festivals where learners and 
their journeys in education take centre stage. 
Videos or (other) forms of broadcasting are 
generally quite successful in reaching broader 
audiences, but also decision-makers.  
Learner fora are another way to empower 
learners: bringing learners together to discuss 
key issues and themes in ALE to develop 
policy-recommendations from a learner’s 
perspective. These learner fora can form at all 
levels, from the grass-roots level, i.e., the 
learning provider’s level, to the highest levels 
of policymaking. 
Reach out to new stakeholders 
EAEA recommends finding out in your own 
environment - i.e., geographically and within 
the field - which stakeholders there are and 
what objectives there could be for any 
cooperation. Is the vision for transformative 
learning shared? What concrete opportunities 
are there to work together? Could a project 
emerge from the cooperation, e.g., at the 
local level, or would a transnational project 
make sense, in which other partners are 
included? Based on these key data, a 
cooperation can be started.  
As simple as it sounds, it is sometimes difficult 
to put this into practice - also because of a 
lack of resources in ALE organisations. We, 
therefore, also demand from policymakers to 
promote an ‘enabling environment’ where 
cooperation in ALE can thrive and innovation 
is possible.  
Build networks and partnerships for 
transformative learning at the local and 
regional levels  
Mapping stakeholders and building new 
partnerships and cooperation with 
organisations that have similar goals, can 
transform learning approaches and 
organisations through peer learning and co-
creation.  
The (informal) networks for transformative 
learning that emerge from this can, in turn, 
help organisations to support each other and 
promote capacity building for joint advocacy 
work. Furthermore, these partnerships and 
networks can facilitate cooperation with 
research and other stakeholders. They can 
also promote critical reflection and rational 
discourse, which are at the core of 
transformative learning. Going through these 
processes together as a network or group 
can be beneficial for the development of new 
methodologies, projects etc. and promote 
innovation in the sector. 
Research 
Connect the dots on transformative learning 
In recent years and months, there have been 
a number of initiatives at European and 
international level to bring transformative 
learning and transformation of education itself 
into the spotlight. UNESCO in particular has 
been at the forefront of this with its process
<<<PAGE=16>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 14 
 
on transforming education which also 
included aspects of transformative learning.  
It would be interesting to examine these 
approaches from a scientific point of view, to 
compare them and to see what unifying 
elements they contain in order to connect the 
dots on transformative learning. For policy 
work, it would also be interesting to analyse 
the significance of these processes for 
political decision-making and which interests 
are behind transformative learning and 
education. 
Promote research into the impact of 
transformative learning 
Research could have a closer look at what 
transformative learning means for the learners 
and communities. The question of impact is 
key not only for financiers of transformative 
ALE, but first and foremost for the learners 
and the providers. What are the differences to 
other, ‘non-transformative’ approaches? 
Especially data on long-term effects of 
transformative learning could play a major 
role in shaping education policy and the 
promotion of transformative learning. 
Help develop methods for transformative 
learning 
Adult educators are very active and engaged 
in developing new methods for transformative 
learning. A scientific perspective could inform 
these development processes, but also 
analyse and develop general approaches 
from them as well as draw general 
conclusions about the role of transformative 
learning.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 15 
 
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING 
 
Culot, L. (2021). « Bir varmı bir yokmu  » « Il était une fois, il n’était pas une fois », dans le quartier 
de la Petite Anatolie. In: Journal de l’alpha 220 (1/2021), pp.31-46 
Desapio, J. (2017). Transformational Learning: A Literature Review of Recent Criticism. Journal of 
Transformative Learning, 4(2), 56-63. 
EAEA (2022). Grundtvig Award 2022: Transformative learning and values. https://eaea.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/10/Grundtvig_award_2022_web_publication-1.pdf  
Eschenbacher, S. / Fleming, T. (2021). Toward a critical pedagogy of crisis. In: European Journal 
for Research on the Education and Learning of Adults, Vol.12, No.3, 2021, pp. 295-309 
Hölscher, K. / Wittmayer, J. M. / Loorback, D. (2018). Transition versus transformation: What’s the 
difference? In: Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, Volume 27, June 2018, pp. 1-3 
Jarvis, P. (2012). Adult learning in the social context. Routledge.  
Joint Research Centre (2019). LifeComp https://joint-research-
centre.ec.europa.eu/lifecomp/lifecomp-conceptual-reference-model_en  
Kokkos, A. (Ed.). (2020). Expanding transformation theory: Affinities between Jack Mezirow and 
emancipatory educationalists. Routledge. 
Koulaouzides, G. (2021). The COVID-19 crisis as a collective biographical disjuncture: 
understanding the pandemic as a learning experience. Andragogical Studies – Journal for the Study 
of Adult Education and Learning. 1/2021, 09-20 
Kroth, M. & Cranton, P. (2014). Stories of transformative learning. Sense Publishers. 
LSE project (2018). Life Skills for Europe. Learning Framework. 
https://issuu.com/eaeapublications/docs/lse_learning_framework_final-to_pub  
MacLellan, M. / Taka, M. (2022). Transformational power of education in post-conflict societies: 
Cases of Rwanda and Northern Uganda. In: NORRAG Blog, 1 November 2022, online: 
https://www.norrag.org/transformational-power-of-education-in-post-conflict-societies-cases-of-
rwanda-and-northern-uganda/  
Manninen, J., Jetsu, A. & Sgier, I. (2020). FutureLab AE study. https://eaea.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/FutureLabAE_updatedversion2.pdf 
Mezirow, J. (1978). Education for Perspective Transformation: Women's Re-entry Programs in 
Community Colleges. Teachers College, Columbia University. https://silo.tips/download/education-
for-perspective-transformation-womens-re-entry-programs-in-community-c 
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. Jossey-Bass.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING AND VALUES                 16 
 
Mezirow, J. (1997). Transformative learning: Theory to practice. New directions for adult and 
continuing education, 1997(74), 5-12. 
Mezirow, J., & Taylor, E. W. (Eds.). (2009). Transformative learning in practice: Insights from 
community, workplace, and higher education. John Wiley & Sons. 
NAHLA Sarajevo (2021). Annual report 2020/21.  https://nahla.ba/wp-
content/uploads/2022/05/Annual_report_web2020-21.pdf  
SAFE Project (2022). Safe Spaces for Learning Guide. https://www.safespacesale.eu  
Wals, A. (2011). Learning our Way to Sustainability. Journal of Education for Sustainable 
Development, 5(2), 177-186.
<<<PAGE=19>>>

<<<PAGE=20>>>
QUESTIONS?
CONTACT US.
European Association for theEducation of Adults (EAEA)Rue de l’Industrie 10 1000 Brussels Belgium
eaea-info@eaea.org
@EAEA2020
@EAEA2020
European Association for the Education of Adults - EAEA