<<<PAGE=1>>>
Summary of DeliverEd
Findings in Pakistan 
March 2023
Pakistan
Photo credit: UNOPS: POWERING BETTER EDUCATION IN PAKISTAN
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Introduction to DeliverEd program
DeliverEd is a global initiative, launched in 2019 by the Education Commission, in 
partnership with the Blavatnik School of Government at the University of Oxford, and 
funded by the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Ofﬁce (FCDO), to 
investigate how governments can achieve their policy priorities through the use of 
delivery approaches. DeliverEd aims to deﬁne what different delivery approaches 
entail and build evidence on their efﬁcacy in improving reform implementation and 
education outcomes. The initiative conducted a global mapping of delivery 
approaches, developed a framework to study delivery approaches, and is 
researching the effect of delivery approaches on the implementation of key policy 
reforms across ﬁve different country case studies, including Pakistan, Ghana, 
Jordan, Sierra Leone, and Tanzania. This note summarizes the key ﬁndings from the 
delivery approach adopted in Punjab, Pakistan.
DeliverEd deﬁnition of delivery approaches
A delivery approach involves the establishment of a new or reformed unit or 
organizational structure to rapidly improve bureaucratic functioning and achieve key 
targets. It redesigns management practices at central and decentralized levels to 
improve policy implementation through ﬁve delivery functions: target setting and 
prioritization, monitoring and measurement, leveraging political sponsorship, 
accountability and incentives, and problem-solving and organizational learning.
Overview of the delivery approach in Punjab’s education sector 
In Punjab, the most populous province in Pakistan, a delivery approach was 
introduced in 2010 (and ran until 2018) to support the implementation of the Punjab 
Schools Reform Roadmap. The chief minister (CM) established a delivery unit at his 
ofﬁce (with national and international consultants), which identiﬁed priorities, 
developed indicators, and set targets to achieve the reform priorities. The delivery 
approach relied heavily on high-stakes accountability routines based on district and 
school-level performance indicators. District executive administrators  were held 
accountable for meeting school- and district-level targets. Quarterly progress review 
meetings (called stocktakes) were chaired by the CM to rank the districts against 
their targets, based on school data aggregated by markaz (the cluster of schools) 
under each district. District rankings were displayed as heat maps to ﬂag the districts 
1 “District executive administrators” refers to the district commissioners (DCs) that serve as the executive representatives of the bureaucracy at 
the district level. In Punjab, between 2012 and 2016, those in the position were referred to as district coordinating ofﬁcers (DCOs), and they 
enjoyed signiﬁcant executive powers at the district level. Following 2016, those in the position were referred to as district commissioners, and 
they had reduced executive powers.
2
<<<PAGE=3>>>
that were lagging on their targets as red and those that were on track as green. 
District executive administrators of the districts that were performing well were 
rewarded, and administrators of the districts that were performing poorly were 
named and shamed.
Research design
The DeliverEd research team analyzed the Punjab delivery approach with a 
qualitative and quantitative perspective. The qualitative study, led by the Institute of 
Development and Economic Alternatives (IDEAS), conducted over 70 interviews (of 
federal and provincial bureaucratic leaders, district staff, and education ofﬁcials) and 
conducted an extensive document review from 12 out of Punjab’s 36 districts to 
examine the implementation and lasting impact of the delivery approach. The 
qualitative component of the research traced the enactment of the reform process to 
understand the practices that were introduced and identify how they changed the 
managerial practices at the provincial and district level. The quantitative study, led by 
the World Bank Bureaucracy Lab, examined the impact of a reporting framework with 
data-intensive monitoring routines, using the administrative data generated by the 
education management information system in Punjab. The study analyzed data from 
the 10 years of implementation, using a weighted difference-in-difference 
methodology that measured the impact of this monitoring and accountability system 
on student attendance, teacher absenteeism, and learning outcomes, among other 
indicators.
Key ﬁndings
1. Adoption and objectives of the delivery approach/institutional and political 
features that shaped the delivery approach
The political context of electoral competition, and the need for a clear set of targets 
developed through political consensus, were important drivers of the delivery 
approach’s adoption in Punjab. Strong data capacity and donor involvement were 
important inputs into the delivery approach design and funding. The Punjab 
Education Roadmap reform required convening power and compliance across the 
delivery chain to succeed. The adoption of the delivery approach was comparatively 
easier, due to Punjab’s decade-long investments in teacher policies, data systems, 
and school infrastructure, which created an enabling environment. The provincial 
government, with donor support, identiﬁed key priorities, including setting targets for 
short-, medium-, and long-term reforms implementation. 
FCDO’s role in facilitating the Education Task Force (ETF), a high-level forum 
3
<<<PAGE=4>>>
established by the prime minister of Pakistan, and funding the education roadmap, 
led to a strong inﬂuence of the UK Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit model in the design 
of the Punjab delivery approach. The roadmap relied heavily on high-stakes 
accountability routines, based on district- and school-level data on speciﬁc 
performance indicators. Interviews with district executive administrators, however, 
revealed that it was difﬁcult to be responsible for targets when there were no tools to 
achieve them. Decentralization reforms affected the role and capacity of district 
executive administrators to deliver on key reforms. At the start of the reform in 2012, 
the district executive administrators had ﬁnancial, administrative, and executive 
authority over 11 services, but after 2016, their ﬁnancial authority was removed, and 
the majority of the administrative authority was moved to the district education 
authorities (DEAs). 
2. Changes in management routines and behaviors
The delivery approach in Punjab involved all departments at the district level; it was 
effective in setting targets across the delivery chain and harnessing routines for data 
collection and monitoring at the district level. High-stakes stocktake meetings and 
reputational incentives were used to foster competition among peers, based on 
school and district rankings. The delivery approach in Punjab introduced new 
routines and practices that focused on prioritization and target setting, measurement 
and monitoring, leveraging political sponsorship, accountability, and 
problem-solving.
• Prioritization and target setting: In the ﬁrst few years, the aim of the Punjab 
Education Roadmap approach was to increase school enrollment rates and improve 
school infrastructure. These aims later evolved to focus more on improving 
process-level indicators, such as teacher presence and student attendance. In 
parallel, reforms were introduced for enhancing teacher professional development, 
expanding supplies, reforming textbooks, investing in routine and robust student 
testing, and strengthening school-level leadership (Malik et al., 2023). Targets were 
set at the provincial level and communicated downstream to district authorities. The 
new routines and practices set targets for shorter periods of time and made district 
executive administrators responsible for achieving them.
• Measurement and monitoring  were based on school-level data collected by 
district monitoring ofﬁcers (DMOs) and monitoring and evaluation assistants (MEAs); 
the data was curated by the delivery team representatives of the Project 
Management Implementation Unit (PMIU) and Special Monitoring Unit (SMU). The 
markaz (cluster of schools) ﬂagging system was introduced by the delivery unit as a 
4
<<<PAGE=5>>>
data-driven practice to signal the districts in which the markaz had unsatisfactory 
performance on the education roadmap’s key performance indicators (KPIs). The 
delivery unit converted the data into heat maps to show how districts were 
progressing toward their targets (see Diagram 1).
• Leveraging political sponsorship: The chief minister, the highest political leader 
at the provincial level, took complete ownership of the reform agenda, and this was 
clearly communicated to the provincial- and district-level bureaucracies for serious 
implementation, including working closely with the education department at the 
district level to monitor and take corrective measures at the local level. The 
high-stakes quarterly stocktake meetings chaired by the chief minister with all 36 
district executive administrators were used to signal strong political commitment to 
improve district performance, based on school district rankings.
 
• Accountability routines were also introduced and leveraged to drive bureaucratic 
and school performance. The stocktake meetings served as the key accountability 
mechanism for the approach, whereby the district executive administrators were 
either rewarded for good performance or reprimanded publicly for the lack thereof. 
The district executive administrators reported a competitive spirit and a desire to 
show improvement in their districts. In addition to introducing informal reputational 
risks (naming and shaming) for underperforming districts, the delivery approach also 
introduced rewards to incentivize performance of the three top-performing districts 
by providing signed certiﬁcates and monetary rewards (bonuses) for their executive 
administrators, but not for their district education ofﬁcers. The education department 
staff reported a much more negative response toward rigid accountability 
mechanisms (and a sense of distance from reform objectives).
• Problem-solving  routines were more ad hoc. Even the monthly district review 
committees (DRCs) and pre-DRCs to review data and prepare for high-stake 
stocktake meetings served more as preparatory meetings rather than ground-up 
problem-solving and knowledge-sharing initiatives.
These routines appear to have been effective in introducing and harnessing new 
practices and routines, but their impact was perceived differently across 
administrative levels. In general, the delivery approach was effective in setting 
routines for target setting and prioritization, data collection and monitoring, and 
fostering a competitive spirit among district executives to try to achieve better 
outcomes for the district. For the period that the delivery approach was active, there 
5
<<<PAGE=6>>>
was more use of data and analysis at the provincial and district level. The district 
executive administrators were energized by the competition and promise of ﬁnancial 
rewards. On the other hand, district education ofﬁcials perceive that they were put in 
a “ﬁre-ﬁghting” mode, and they felt a great deal of stress and pressure from the 
frequent monitoring and review routines, which often affected their productivity and 
motivation levels, including by creating a culture of fear and pressure among junior 
bureaucrats.
3. Contribution to improved inputs, outputs and outcomes
As stated above, initially the Punjab Education Roadmap approach aimed to 
increase enrollment rates, improve teacher attendance, and improve school 
infrastructure. The qualitative and quantitative studies sought to understand how well 
the delivery approach achieved its intended goals and assess the approach’s impact 
on inputs, outputs, and outcomes. The mixed methods approach used by DeliverEd 
has helped to build a certain amount of evidence on the effects of the delivery 
approach in Punjab, but it is not possible to isolate the impact that the combined set 
of DA functions have had on learning outcomes. 
The qualitative study showed that the delivery approach was perceived to have 
some positive effects on managerial processes, while the approach was active. 
Some district executive administrators perceived that teacher attendance and 
infrastructure improved; however, they also reported that it was not possible to claim 
any impact on learning outcomes or more complex process-level outcomes of 
teaching and learning. In interviews, the district-level staff within the education 
department reported that they understood the importance of utilizing school-level 
data to make informed decisions and to support school leaders and teachers to 
improve school performance. The district executive administrators noted that the 
routine stocktake meetings and upstream reporting requirements enabled the district 
to align toward common priority targets. The accountability-associated routines also 
signaled the importance of education reform, focusing both resources and attention 
on key reform areas that received political support across different administrative 
levels in the education sector. 
The quantitative component assessed the markaz- and district-ﬂagging system, a 
subset of the data for the monitoring and accountability routines that were introduced 
within the delivery approach. The study found that ﬂagging low-performing schools 
had no effect on output-type or outcome-type metrics. These included district and 
school rankings, teacher and student attendance, functional facilities, and scores in 
6
<<<PAGE=7>>>
math, English, or Urdu. This ﬁnding suggests that the ﬂagging system was not able 
to help change the management practices and ultimately improve student 
performance, perhaps because the monitoring was capturing the high degree of 
variability within the system (short-term ﬂuctuations in the schools), rather than more 
structural issues that could better explain school performance.
Preliminary policy considerations 
Punjab introduced a top-down data-driven accountability reform initiative in 
education with the intent to improve education outcomes. The reform effort 
introduced a set of routines typically associated with delivery approaches, including 
target setting, collective monitoring and accountability through high-level meetings, 
and explicit and visible political ownership.
• Bureaucratic and management practices:  At the district level, bureaucratic and 
management practices changed in response to the reforms, including target setting, 
use of data for monitoring, and incentives linked with district performance. These 
practices did not endure once the reform effort concluded. More study of the 
attitudes, perceptions, behaviors, and practices of bureaucrats at the middle and 
ground level is needed to understand the long-standing structures that govern 
bureaucratic practice. 
• Sustainability: Punjab’s delivery approach was funded by donors, supported by 
external consultants, and strongly linked to one political leader: the chief minister of 
Punjab. For continuity of reforms and funding, sustainability should have been a key 
design consideration when the delivery approach was being initiated, as the donor 
funding ended, and the political leadership changed, due to elections, affecting the 
continuity of the roadmap. Having a sustainability strategy in the beginning of such 
an undertaking increases the likelihood that the approach will be sustained beyond 
the tenure of a single political leader. 
• Use of data: The roadmap reform effort formalized the practice of linking 
performance accountability to the well-established mechanism for data collection 
from schools and expanded the availability of data and aggregation at the district 
level. Despite there being a high-frequency monitoring system in place, and granular 
data, the absence of detailed analysis on the data led to the continuation and 
expansion of the program over a multiyear period. The quantitative analysis of the 
data showed that there was no improvement in the district ofﬁcer behaviors and in 
school or student performance due to the ﬂagging system. The monitoring system 
7
<<<PAGE=8>>>
did not improve the performance of the weakest districts, as deﬁned by the rankings. 
Instead, the relative rankings remained unchanged. An alternative reporting 
mechanism, based on the same data, may have better captured the relative 
progress. Data should be analyzed, reviewed, and interpreted with the right 
analytical team, on a regular basis, to identify whether the reforms are having an 
impact on education outcomes or not. This assessment should then inform policy 
formulation, implementation, and reshaping. Big data could also have been used to 
identify other priorities, such as more effective managers (head teachers) to improve 
learning outcomes and school performance.
Heat maps for one indicator along with district rankings, 2012–2018
Source: Chief minister’s stocktake meeting documents, PMIU. Artifact creation: authors
8
* Malik Rabea and Faisal Bari. Improving service delivery via top-down data-driven accountability:  Reform enactment of 
the Education Road Map in Pakistan. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. Forthcoming. 
* Mansoor Zahra, Dana Qarout, Kate Anderson, Celeste Carano, Liah YecaloTecle, Veronika Dvorakova and Martin J. 
Williams. 2021. “A Global Mapping of Delivery Approaches.” DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. Education Commission 
and Blavatnik School of Government. 
* Saad Gulzar, Juan Felipe Ladino, Muhammad Zia Mehmood and Daniel Rogger. Command and Can’t Control: An 
Evaluation of Centralized Accountability in the Public Sector. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. Forthcoming.  
* Williams Martin J., Clare Leaver, Karen Mundy, Zahra Mansoor, Dana Qarout, Minahil Asim, Sheena Bell, and Anna 
Bilous. 2021. “Delivery Approaches to Improving Policy Implementation: A Conceptual Framework.” DeliverEd Initiative 
Working Paper. Education Commission and Blavatnik School of Government.  
* Willams Martin J., Karen Mundy, Clare Leaver, Dana Qarout, Sheena Bell, Zahara Mansoor, et al., Global Mapping and 
Cross-case analysis from Ghana, Jordan, Pakistan, and Sierra Leone. DeliverEd Initiative Cross-Country Working 
Paper. Forthcoming.
References
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Policy Brief: 
Design Choices for Delivery 
Approaches in Education
 Policy Brief: 
Delivery Approaches in Crisis 
or Conﬂict Situations
Blog Series:
African Policymaker Forum 
and the High-Level Advisory 
Group
DeliverEd Products: Building knowledge for leaders on how to deliver education reforms 
Policy Brief: 
The Challenge of 
Delivering for Learning
Outline of delivery challenges in the 
education sector and the need for 
greater evidence on their impact
Delivery Approaches to 
Improve Policy 
Implementation
Conceptual framework for delivery 
approaches the DeliverEd research 
will use to guide in-country research 
across Tanzania, Ghana, Pakistan, 
and Jordan 
Interactive Database: 
A Global Mapping 
of Delivery Approaches 
An analysis to understand the 
diversity in delivery approach design 
worldwide 
For more information see https://educationcommission.org/delivered-initiative/
or contact deliver.ed@educationcommission.org
9