<<<PAGE=1>>>
Deliberate Disrupters
Can Delivery Approaches Deliver
Better Education Outcomes?
DeliverEd Final Report
June, 2023
Photocredit: UNICEF/UNI248828/Mawa
<<<PAGE=2>>>
The DeliverEd Initiative was launched in 2019 to strengthen the evidence base for the ways 
governments can achieve their policy priorities through delivery units and other delivery approaches. 
Globally, more than 80 countries have used such approaches to achieve better outcomes for policy 
reform and implementation. Forty-seven percent of the delivery approaches include education, either 
as a single-sector or as part of a multisector approach. However, there has been little empirical 
evidence, especially from developing countries, on the effectiveness of delivery approaches in 
delivering education outcomes or on the design choices, contextual features, and enabling factors 
that contribute to the performance of these delivery approaches.
DeliverEd helps to ﬁll this evidence gap and create a better understanding of the practices leaders can 
adopt to improve their policy delivery and reform efforts. DeliverEd has conducted research within and 
across countries on the effectiveness of delivery approaches in improving reform implementation, and 
this report builds on the key ﬁndings. DeliverEd has facilitated the sharing of knowledge and 
experience among countries—for example, through the Africa Policy Forum—to equip policymakers 
with a deeper understanding of delivery challenges and solutions to make informed decisions. 
DeliverEd also continues to increase awareness and the uptake of research to improve schooling and 
learning in low-income countries.
The Education Commission leads DeliverEd with Oxford University’s Blavatnik School of Government 
(BSG) and funding from the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Ofﬁce (FCDO). Other 
partners include the University of Toronto, the Institute for Educational Planning and Administration 
(IEPA, under the auspices of UNESCO), the University of Cape Coast in Ghana, the Institute of 
Development and Economic Alternatives (IDEAS) in Pakistan, the World Bank, and Georgetown 
University in the United States. For more information about DeliverEd, and to view the country studies 
and other related research and policy engagement materials, please visit 
www.educationcommission.org/delivered-initiative.
We are very grateful to the Blavatnik School of Government and to all of our research partners for their 
in-depth research, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. This DeliverEd Final Report is the 
Education Commission’s interpretation of the research. For the detailed research papers, please see 
the links on the next page and the bibliography for full references.
DeliverEd: Building knowledge on how to use
delivery approaches to advance education reforms
<<<PAGE=3>>>
DeliverEd Research Products
Anderson, K., Ibarra, A., & Javaid, N. (December 2022). The Education Commission.  A Case 
Study of the Sierra Leone Delivery Unit. DeliverEd Initiative Policy Note. 
Bell, S., Asim, M., Mundy, K., Pius Nuzdor, H., Boakye-Yiadom, M., & Mensah Adosi, C. (May 2023). 
How do regions, districts and schools respond to the introduction of a delivery approach: Evidence 
from Ghana. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. 
Bell, S., Leaver, C., Mansoor, Z, Mundy, K., Qarout, D., & Williams, M. (March 2023). The Role 
of Delivery Approaches in Education Systems Reform: Evidence from a Multi-Country Study . 
DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
Boakye-Yiadom, M., Leaver C., Mansoor, Z., & locco, MP. (March 2023). Management 
and performance in mid-level bureaucracies: Evidence from Ghanaian education districts. 
DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. 
Gulzar, S., Ladino, JF., Mehmood, MZ., & Rogger, D. (March 2023). Command and Can’t Control: 
An Evaluation of Centralized Accountability in the Public Sector. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. 
Malik, R. & Bari, F. (May 2023). Improving Service Delivery via Top-Down Data-Driven 
Accountability: Reform Enactment of the Education Road Map in Pakistan. DeliverEd Initiative 
Working Paper. 
Mansoor, Z., Qarout, D., Anderson, K., Carano, C., Yecalo-Tecle, L., Dvorakova, V., & Williams, M. 
(July 2021). A Global Mapping of Delivery Approaches. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
Qarout, D. (November 2022). The Accountability Paradox: Delivery Units in Jordan’s Education 
Sector 2010–2019. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. 
Williams, M., Leaver, C., Mundy, K., Mansoor, Z., Qarout, D., Asim, M., Bell, S., & Bilous, A. 
(April 2021). Delivery Approaches to Improving Policy Implementation: A Conceptual 
Framework. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
DeliverEd Policy Products
Anderson, K., & Bergmann, J. (2022). The Education Commission. Design Choices for Delivery 
Approaches in Education, DeliverEd Initiative Policy Brief.
Anderson, K., & Carano, C. (2021). The Education Commission. The Challenge of Delivering for 
Learning, DeliverEd Initiative Policy Brief.
Villaseñor, P. The Education Commission. (2021)  Delivery Approaches in Crisis or Conﬂict 
Situations, DeliverEd Initiative Policy Brief.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
We are pleased to present this ﬁnal report of DeliverEd authored by Abril Ibarra, Neelofar Javaid, and 
Bruce Ross-Larson on behalf of the Education Commission. Shekhar Shah was the Senior Advisor for 
the report and provided critical guidance during the conceptualization, writing, and review of the 
report. Their collective expertise and dedication have been integral to the creation of this work.
We would like to express our gratitude to the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Ofﬁce for 
their ﬁnancial and strategic support to the DeliverEd initiative and this report. We want to extend a 
special thank you to Rachel Hinton, Jo Cooke, and Salim Salamah.
A special acknowledgment to Amy Bellinger, Director of Programs at the Education Commission, for 
her guidance and strategic advice provided to the writing team. We express our appreciation to Amy 
for her invaluable contributions, including multiple comprehensive reviews of this report.
We extend our special thanks to the DeliverEd co-chairs, Baela Raza Jamil, Amel Karboul, and Albert 
Nsengiyumva, for their strategic input and guidance. Their expertise and vision have profoundly 
inﬂuenced the direction and enhanced the overall quality of this report.
We would also like to acknowledge and thank all members of the DeliverEd High-Level Advisory 
Group for their unwavering support and ongoing contributions throughout the project and beyond. 
Their valuable insights and input have played a crucial role in shaping the outcomes presented herein. 
We extend our appreciation to Dr. Liesbet Steer for her continued support and expertise, which have 
been instrumental in the successful completion of the DeliverEd project. Her insightful input and 
guidance throughout the DeliverEd project have played a crucial role in enhancing its outcomes.
We also extend our appreciation to the following individuals for their valuable advice and collaboration 
and helpful comments on this report’s drafts: Juan Barón, Sheena Bell, Clare Leaver, Zahra Mansoor, 
Karen Mundy, Dana Qarout, Rabea Malik, and Martin J. Williams.
Furthermore, we would like to sincerely thank all those who contributed to the DeliverEd research 
products and worked throughout COVID-19 to produce high-quality research that we could draw on: 
Minahil Asim, Sheena Bell, Faisal Bari, Michael Boakye-Yiadom, Veronika Dvořáková, Saad Gulzar, 
Rabea Malik, Clare Leaver, Juan Felipe Ladino, Zahra Mansoor, Christopher Mensah Adosi, Calum 
Miller, Karen Mundy, Hope Pius Nudzor, George Oduro, Ken Opalo, Dana Qarout, Daniel Rogger, 
Maria Pia Iocco, and Martin J. Williams.
In addition, we express our gratitude to Jacinth Planer for her meticulous copy editing, ensuring the 
accuracy and clarity of the content. We also thank Rizwan Abbas for his creative design work, which 
has enhanced the visual presentation and accessibility of the report, and to Madelyn Cunningham and 
Katie Rose Cuthbert for their project management and dedicated efforts in overseeing and 
coordinating the various aspects of the project.
We extend our deepest thanks to all individuals mentioned above, as well as to others who have 
contributed to this report in various ways. Their unwavering dedication and commitment have been 
pivotal in bringing this work to fruition.
Acknowledgements
1
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Contents
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
FOREWORD
KEY MESSAGES
INTRODUCTION
DELIVERY APPROACHES, AIMS, AND FUNCTIONS
ARE DELIVERY APPROACHES EFFECTIVE?
THE LAUNCHING, LEARNING, AND SUSTAINING AND SCALING FRAMEWORK 
LAUNCHING
LEARNING
SUSTAINING AND SCALING
HOW DO DELIVERY APPROACHES COMPLEMENT OTHER WAYS OF
PROMOTING EDUCATION REFORM?
ENDNOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1
3
4
6
7
11
13
15
20
26
30
32
33
36
2
<<<PAGE=6>>>
In a world undergoing rapid transformation, education stands as a cornerstone of progress, a catalyst for 
change that empowers individuals and societies alike. Yet the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated an 
already deep learning crisis and imposed new ﬁscal constraints on education systems. It is now 
increasingly imperative to critically examine our approaches to delivering education and classroom 
learning effectively. Governments around the world are striving to improve learning outcomes and are not 
short of good policies, but they often lack evidence-based strategies for effectively implementing reforms.
 
Many governments globally have adopted education delivery approaches or units to address their 
country’s learning crisis. DeliverEd has identiﬁed more than 150 delivery approaches in 80 countries, 
with the majority of these delivery approaches including education. However, little evidence has existed 
about their effectiveness, when and where they have proved useful, and what they have achieved. In 
response, DeliverEd initiated research in 2019, in collaboration with the Blavatnik School of 
Government (BSG) at Oxford University, centered around ﬁve delivery approaches in Ghana, Pakistan, 
Jordan, Sierra Leone and Tanzania to help build evidence on the effectiveness of these initiatives.
It is with great pleasure that we present DeliverEd’s ﬁnal report as the culmination of this research 
effort. Drawing upon the research conducted by DeliverEd's country teams and BSG, this report 
summarizes the effectiveness of delivery approaches and proposes a simple, three-part framework to 
help political leaders, policymakers, and practitioners plan, design, evaluate, and operate delivery 
approaches more effectively.
The report’s “launching-learning-sustaining and scaling” framework is developed around the notion of 
launching a delivery approach based on country context and with solid political support, a good design 
that focuses on student learning, data that helps evaluate effectiveness, and communication that 
helps build ongoing support. The framework emphasizes learning continuously from the operation of 
the delivery approach and adapting it based on data, evidence, and problem-solving at all levels, not 
just at the top. The framework also highlights the importance of sustaining and scaling up what is 
working to improve student learning and build political and popular support for education system 
reforms. This process of launching, learning, sustaining, and scaling a delivery approach should be 
iterative, with each element supporting the others in what should become a virtuous circle that 
improves classroom learning.
We believe that this report will serve as a valuable resource to guide the efforts of policymakers, 
donors, and practitioners in enhancing learning through the evidence-based implementation of 
reforms. The report reminds us that our ultimate focus should be on the learners and their progress, 
with every decision we take and every policy we implement guided by this goal.
We extend our heartfelt appreciation to the ﬁeld personnel, researchers, and experts whose 
dedication, analysis, and insights have made this report possible. It is our sincere hope that this 
DeliverEd ﬁnal report will serve as a catalyst for change, sparking meaningful discussions, further 
research, and government action on how best to implement education system reforms that produce 
student learning and foundational skills for all children.
Amel Karboul Albert NsengiyumvaBaela Jamil
DeliverEd Co-chairs
Foreword
3
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Delivery approaches, one type of large-scale management reform to improve policy implementation, 
have proliferated across more than 80 countries and remained popular among country leaders and 
donors, with almost half of the delivery approaches including the education sector.
1
 It is important to 
understand both their successes and failures and to consider how delivery approaches - as one of 
many policy implementation tools - can deliver better educational outcomes for a world aiming to 
address the global learning crisis.
Leveraging political and bureaucratic sponsorship to shift attention toward key national priorities 
and results.
Clarifying roles and responsibilities and improving coordination and alignment among national 
agencies and donors.
Achieving input and process targets at the central level including unclogging legal, structural, 
procurement, funding, and legislation bottlenecks.
Packaging and strengthening data and linking it to indicators and targets to make monitoring and 
reporting easier, particularly at the central level.
Introducing top-down accountability and incentives, both rewards and sanctions, which are usually 
high-stakes and linked to performance.
This evidence shows that Delivery approaches are more effective at:
This report builds on the DeliverEd research in Ghana, Pakistan, Jordan, Sierra Leone and 
Tanzania that sheds some light on the effectiveness of delivery approaches for improving policy 
implementation.
3
Key Messages
Establishing Priorities and Setting Targets
Creating Incentives and Accountability Mechanisms
Measuring and Monitoring Performance
DeliverEd identiﬁes ﬁve core functions that delivery approaches use to achieve their goals:
2
DeliverEd has conducted research on the effectiveness of delivery approaches in improving
reform implementation 
Leveraging and Signaling Political Sponsorship
Solving Problems
4
<<<PAGE=8>>>
This report puts forward a simple framework that policymakers, ofﬁcials, and donors can use to launch, 
learn and adapt, and sustain and scale up (LLSS) delivery approaches to improve student learning.
 
The framework is built around harnessing and adapting delivery approaches to launch reforms well 
with strong leadership and a clear focus on student learning, to learn and adapt delivery approaches 
based on data, evidence, and problem-solving, and as implementation proceeds, to sustain what is 
working through building capacity, embedding routines and creating a culture so that the reforms 
can be scaled up with growing political and popular support. Launching, learning, and sustaining 
and scaling are core elements of an iterative process with each element supporting the other. The 
messages from the LLSS framework may have relevance to other efforts to improve reform 
implementation and public sector management at multiple levels within the education system.
LAUNCHING
ON A SOLID
FOUNDATION
MID-TIER
MANAGERS/
SCHOOLS
 & LEARNING
OUTCOMESSUSTAINING
AND SCALING
WHAT WORKS
LEARNING WHAT
WORKS AND
WHAT DOESN’T
Prioritizing solutions and changing behaviors among downstream actors to bring about change in 
schools. Delivery approaches hardly ever build middle-tier capacity or address local constraints to 
ensure implementation at the school level. 
Ensuring strong linkages between intermediate (process) targets and the ultimate goals of 
improving learning outcomes.
Using data to drive analysis, problem-solving, organizational learning, and adaptation at all levels, 
particularly at the subnational, middle-tier, and school levels. Delivery approaches tend not to 
encourage bottom-up feedback loops.
Mainstreaming accountability and understanding and addressing its negative or unintended 
consequences.
Ensuring enduring changes in managerial knowledge, behavior, and norms after political changes 
or the end of donor support.
Delivery approaches are less effective at:
DeliverEd Policy Framework  
5
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Delivery approaches for education hold great political appeal. Assemble a capable team of local and 
international experts under the championing wing of a president, prime minister, or education 
minister. Give the delivery team adequate resources to fulﬁll its vision and mission for reform. 
Unleash the power of its position of inﬂuence to ask more of the bureaucracy and to shift the focus 
from inputs and processes to results. Presto, education ofﬁcials, frontline managers, and teachers 
start doing what they are supposed to do as they pursue established priorities and reach new targets. 
This is the expectation that has drawn policymakers across the world to delivery approaches.
 
Do delivery approaches live up to this expectation, and are they a useful approach  to improve 
learning outcomes? Consider the success of British Prime Minister Tony Blair’s delivery unit, set up 
with great effect early in his second term in 2001 to track and ramp up the implementation of reform 
priorities for education, health, and other public services.
4 
Blair’s government had boosted the 
budgets for public services in his ﬁrst term, but performance did not improve. The new delivery unit 
established in his second term quickly improved examination performance and reduced waiting 
times in clinics.
5
  
Similarly, Malaysia’s Performance Management and Delivery Unit (PEMANDU) was set up by the 
prime minister in 2009 to improve public services, and the subsequent Education Performance and 
Delivery Unit (PADU) was created to work with PEMANDU and push the Ministry of Education 
bureaucracy to improve learning outcomes.
6
 PADU supported the implementation of the Literacy and 
Numeracy Screening program, which contributed to improving the literacy and numeracy skills of 
young learners.  The units were well-staffed, well-ﬁnanced operations that had high-level support to 
jostle the bureaucracy and elevate reform efforts to new heights, thanks to some deliberate 
disruption. The delivery units ﬂourished in countries with substantial resources and experienced 
government ofﬁcials in senior leadership and on the frontline.
This report examines the education delivery approaches and units studied under the DeliverEd 
research initiative in Ghana, Pakistan, Jordan, Sierra Leone and Tanzania, the cross-country study 
summarizing the research, and several ﬁeld notes from other countries. There was great variety in 
the approaches, and most were launched with considerable publicity in the media and in 
government. Almost all improved attention to national priorities through communication and 
coordination among various departments. Many approaches improved the collection, analysis, and 
dissemination of data. Some tried to cascade instructions from the top down to district ofﬁcials, 
principals, and teachers, hoping to increase accountability through performance contracts. Some 
helped improve inputs and processes. However, the approaches mostly fell short in improving 
learning outcomes, with many not even measuring these outcomes. Even when some approaches 
appeared to be working, they remained vulnerable to being shut down when a new leader took over. 
Malaysia’s widely heralded PEMANDU was dismantled by a new prime minister who was appointed 
in 2018.
 
Delivery approaches keep getting adopted, however, and they have proliferated around the world and 
remained popular with both country leadership and donors. Delivery approaches are appealing to prime 
ministers and education ministers since they are a way to demonstrate that politicians are taking action 
to accelerate reform implementation and results. It is therefore important to understand their successes 
and failures, and to consider how delivery approaches—as one form of policy implementation—can 
deliver better educational outcomes for a world wanting to address the global learning crisis.
Introduction
6
<<<PAGE=10>>>
DeliverEd identiﬁes ﬁve core functions that delivery approaches use to achieve their goals. Many of 
the functions are already the responsibilities of education bureaucracies, but they are often fragmented 
in silos that do not work with one another:
These functions are not unique to delivery approaches; indeed, they describe the core of what most 
bureaucracies do daily. However, a delivery approach seeks to improve performance by combining 
functions in unique ways or carrying them out differently and more effectively. For example, most 
ministries have annual plans that deﬁne targets, but a delivery approach might help focus on key 
targets, leverage political sponsorship to increase impact, establish high-frequency measurement of 
Establishing
Priorities and
Setting Targets 
Measuring
and Monitoring
Performance
Creating
Incentives
and Accountability
Mechanisms
Solving
Problems
Leveraging
and Signaling
Political
Sponsorship
What is it? What does
it aim to do?
How does
it do that?
Why does
it do that?
A delivery 
approach is 
an institutional 
unit or 
structured 
process within 
a government 
bureaucracy
... that aims to 
rapidly 
improve 
bureaucratic 
functioning 
and policy 
delivery
... by 
combining a 
set of 
managerial 
functions in a 
novel way
... to shift 
attention from 
inputs and 
processes to 
outputs and 
outcomes
In the past 10 to 20 years, delivery units and other delivery approaches have been adopted worldwide 
to improve policy implementation or achieve high-level targets. Most delivery approaches introduce 
changes to catalyze and coordinate a set of management functions. They combine functions such as 
target-setting, monitoring, accountability, and problem-solving with the aim of rapidly improving 
bureaucratic performance and service delivery. They leverage political sponsorship to shift 
administrative focus to the achievement of key outputs and outcomes. They often create new 
organizational structures—delivery units—modeled at least in part on high-proﬁle examples, such as 
the UK Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit and Malaysia’s PEMANDU Delivery Unit. Put simply, delivery 
approaches are a combination of often centrally-driven management changes that governments 
adopt to improve policy implementation.
8
DeliverEd deﬁnes a delivery approach in the following way:   
Delivery Approaches, Aims, and Functions
7
<<<PAGE=11>>>
performance, and set up performance reviews chaired by ministers or higher-level ofﬁcials who hold 
functionaries below them accountable and give out rewards or penalties.
In some cases, a delivery approach may genuinely introduce new practices, such as high-stakes 
ambitious targets, new data collection, and more frequent stakeholder convenings. In other cases, a 
delivery approach may simply combine existing bureaucratic practices from throughout the 
bureaucracy into one unit, under the direct supervision of the minister.
The design of a delivery approach can be at or include different levels—national (president, prime 
minister, or other ministerial ofﬁce), subnational (states, provinces, districts, or cities) and schools - 
or it can take different forms depending on the context and the goals. The different forms can include:
• The existing bureaucracy: using existing structures or posts within the bureaucracy to execute 
the key functions of the delivery approach.
• A reorganized bureaucracy: reorganization or reshufﬂing of the bureaucracy within pre-existing 
structures.
• A new or parallel unit:  often staffed with consultants, speciﬁcally to achieve the goals of the 
delivery approach.
Delivery Approaches Around The World
DeliverEd’s 2021 global mapping exercise showed that 67 delivery units of the 142 units mapped 
included the education sector.  Of these, 19 were focused on education alone, and the rest were 
multisectoral.
10
  
Delivery approaches implemented in ﬁve countries were thoroughly researched as part of 
DeliverEd’s work, and these approaches are described below as in the cross-country analysis. Key 
country research ﬁndings are interwoven throughout the report.
11
Jordan
PakistanTanzaniaGhana
Sierra
Leone
Delivery Approaches
(Education-sector Global Overview)
Delivery Approaches
(Country)
Delivery Approaches
(Multi-sector Global Overview)
Source: A Global Mapping of Delivery Approaches | the Education Commission
8
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Ghana
Ghana’s National Education Reform Secretariat (NERS) established in 2019 in the Ministry of 
Education, with funding from the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Ofﬁce supports the 
implementation of Ghana’s 2018–2030 Education Strategic Plan and its three priorities for 
access, quality, and system management. Led by a retired senior education ofﬁcial and staffed 
with nationally recruited implementation specialists, the staff at the delivery unit reports directly to 
the minister. Initially it focused on national goals and targets related to the delivery and 
coordination of core functions across the agencies that administer Ghana’s education sector. 
Annual performance contracts were signed between the “big six” agency heads who owned the 
reforms and the education minister, and they were later expanded to all 17 education agency 
heads. In 2021, the new education minister shifted the focus of the reforms to the subnational 
level, to regions, districts, and schools. The priority now is coordinating the NERS with the Ghana 
Education Service (GES), the entity responsible for subnational education policy implementation.
Summary of delivery approaches used in the 
countries studied
Pakistan
In Pakistan’s Punjab province, an education roadmap and a delivery approach to support its 
implementation was introduced in 2012 and operated until 2018 under the leadership of the 
chief minister of Punjab, the highest political authority at the provincial level. In the beginning, 
the approach focused on school enrollment, teacher attendance, and school infrastructure, and 
later it included learning outcomes as a priority. The reforms implemented by the delivery 
approach were top-down and relied on high-stakes accountability that held district ofﬁcials 
responsible for meeting school and district targets, with data-intensive monitoring at the school 
level. The delivery unit converted the data into heatmaps to show how districts were progressing 
against their targets. Based on the data, a system was put in place to ﬂag underperforming 
clusters of schools, called markaz.
Jordan
Jordan had three delivery units operating in the education sector between 2010 and 2019. The 
Results and Effectiveness Unit was set up in 2016 to ensure accountability for results in 
implementing the 2016–2025 Human Resource Development Strategy. As part of the Economic 
Development Directorate in the Royal Hashemite Court, the unit monitored progress, resolved 
bottlenecks, and worked with teams in the Ministry of Education and other stakeholders. At the 
Ministry of Education, a project implementation unit established in 2003, the Development 
Coordination Unit, evolved into a de facto delivery unit in 2017, coordinating across sector 
donors, service providers, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) toward common, 
coherent, and standardized goals. It spearheaded the development of the ministry’s sector plan 
and was responsible for monitoring progress toward plan targets. The Prime Minister’s Delivery 
Unit (PMDU) was established in 2010 at the prime minister’s ofﬁce to ensure effective 
implementation of the government’s priorities, and it had a multisectoral focus, including 
education. The PMDU worked closely with the Cabinet and the PM to identify national priorities 
across sectors. Ministers were held accountable for results. The PMDU obtained data and 
information from the line ministries and published progress toward national targets on an online 
dashboard made available to the public.
9
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Tanzania
In Tanzania in 2013, the government launched the Big Results Now initiative—a delivery unit 
approach to reforms in education and ﬁve other sectors. The goal was to increase pass rates in 
both primary and secondary schools to 80 percent by 2016. To this end, the government 
identiﬁed interventions ranging from ranking schools on performance to training teachers on 
effective teaching, to directly transmitting capitation grants to principals, and developing school 
improvement toolkits for head teachers. The delivery unit primarily operated at the national level, 
with the regular district-level bureaucratic-administrative apparatus serving as its 
implementation arm.
Sierra Leone
In 2020, Sierra Leone’s Minister of Basic and Senior Secondary Education, set up a delivery unit 
to support implementation of the Free Quality School Education program. The unit was 
established as a parallel structure in the ministry and staffed with four full-time team members 
and experts from other organizations. Leveraging data systems and analytical support, it seeks 
to improve policy implementation by better coordinating efforts across ministerial departments 
and donors and building the capacity to understand reform progress and challenges needing 
immediate attention.
10
<<<PAGE=14>>>
DeliverEd research on delivery units in Ghana, Pakistan, Jordan, Sierra Leone and Tanzania 
analyzes the delivery approach structures and ambitions and sheds light on the effectiveness of 
delivery approaches for improving policy implementation.
The evidence shows that delivery approaches are more effective at:
• Leveraging political and bureaucratic sponsorship to shift attention toward key national 
priorities and results. Political support helps focus attention on national and sectoral priorities and 
signals a shift from inputs and processes to results.
• Clarifying roles and responsibilities and improving coordination and alignment among 
national agencies and donors. For example, Ghana’s NERS, working with 17 Ministry of 
Education agencies, increased the awareness of and sharpened the focus on the goals of the 
Education Sector Strategic Plan. It also improved coordination and helped clarify key roles, 
responsibilities, actions, and routines for accelerating implementation.
12
 
• Achieving input and process targets at the central level, including unclogging legal, 
structural, procurement, funding, and legislation bottlenecks. In Jordan, for example, the delivery 
units at the Royal Hashemite Court and the prime minister’s ofﬁce unblocked ﬁnancial and legal 
barriers. They also expedited procurement processes and the passing of legislation to implement 
the ﬁrst teacher education program and the National Center for Curriculum Development.
13
  
• Strengthening and aggregating data and linking it to indicators and targets to make the 
monitoring and measurement of progress easier. For example, in Pakistan’s Punjab province, 
the delivery approach used the strong data system that was in place (with data down to the school 
level) to create heatmaps that signaled whether districts were on- or off-track in meeting 
implementation targets. The data were presented at regular stocktake meetings to inform 
decision-making, which led to continuous use at the district level.
14
 
• Introducing top-down and usually high-stakes accountability and incentives (rewards and 
sanctions) linked to performance. For example, Punjab introduced accountability routines at the 
regional and district levels based on performance data. The naming and shaming of poor 
performers in the quarterly stocktake meetings with the chief minister was combined with having 
the top performers receive a monetary incentive.
Are Delivery Approaches Eﬀective?
“With the ﬁndings that the delivery 
approaches had limited inﬂuence on 
changing behavior at the school level, I 
would like us to pay attention to the linkage 
of the Delivery Approaches to the School 
leadership structures (both pedagogical and 
transformational) because this is where the 
real learning takes place and that is where 
the target for behavioral change should be.” 
Teopista Birungi Mayanja, Chairperson, 
Uganda National Teachers Union Board of 
Trustees, Commissioner, the Education 
Commission 11
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Delivery approaches are less effective at:
• Prioritizing solutions and changing behaviors to bring about improved learning in 
schools. Delivery approaches work usually from the center to the frontline and hardly ever build 
middle-tier capacity or address local constraints, including lack of resources and autonomy to 
ensure implementation down to the school level.
• Ensuring strong linkages between intermediate (process) targets and the ultimate goals of 
improving learning outcomes. All delivery approaches involve a complex pathway to change, 
with rigorous intermediate goals and targets selected based on a theory of change. However, not 
many delivery approaches focus on measuring and improving student learning outcomes from the 
outset.
• Using data to drive analysis, problem-solving, organizational learning, and adaptation at 
all levels, particularly at the subnational, mid-bureaucracy, and school levels. Delivery 
approaches may generate opportunities for organizational learning, often in an ad hoc or informal 
way. However, forums for problem solving and knowledge sharing are not always prioritized, 
especially for downstream actors in the education system. Delivery approaches also do not tend 
to encourage bottom-up feedback loops.
• Mainstreaming accountability and anticipating and addressing its negative or unintended 
consequences. Some delivery units face challenges in harmonizing accountability for results 
and streamlining implementation because they are unable to integrate the accountability 
requirements that bureaucrats already has, resulting in delays and inefﬁciencies in implementing 
tasks. 
• Ensuring that improvements in managerial knowledge, behavior, and norms endure after 
political changes or the end of donor support. Delivery approaches are usually housed in 
newly created units with non-civil service staff linked to a particular leader and the availability of 
external funding. These factors make the practices they introduce difﬁcult to sustain over time.
 
Given the mixed record of the effectiveness of delivery approaches, especially in improving learning 
outcomes, the purpose of this DeliverEd report is not to promote delivery approaches. Instead, given 
the worldwide interest in using delivery approaches to accelerate implementation, the purpose is to 
provide a framework to help policymakers consider how to harness the most useful aspects of 
delivery approaches and to make them as effective as possible when implementing reforms.
12
<<<PAGE=16>>>
LAUNCHING
ON A SOLID
FOUNDATION
MID-TIER
MANAGERS/
SCHOOLS
 & LEARNING
OUTCOMESSUSTAINING
AND SCALING
WHAT WORKS
LEARNING WHAT
WORKS AND
WHAT DOESN’T
Launching a delivery approach to improve the performance of a system requires considering the 
enablers that need to be in place given the contextual realities and designing the delivery approach 
to be open to adaptation as implementation proceeds. Key enablers include strong political and 
bureaucratic leaders, good information management and decentralized data systems or the capacity 
to develop them, and both top-down and bottom-up accountability structures that enable feedback 
loops in both directions. The design needs to include a strategic focus and targets for learning 
outcomes, based on evidence of what works, appropriate stafﬁng, adequate funding, and a 
well-thought-through communication strategy.
This report puts forward a framework to guide policymakers, bureaucrats, and donors in considering 
what is needed when implementing systemic reforms using a delivery approach. The framework is 
built around launching systemic reforms using a delivery approach well, learning and adapting the 
interventions and approach based on regular data as implementation proceeds, and sustaining what 
is working so that the approach can be scaled up with growing political and popular support. 
Launching-learning-sustaining and scaling are core elements of an iterative process, with each 
element supporting the others.
The Launching, Learning, and Sustaining
and Scaling Framework
13
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Learning quickly what is and is not working leads to adapting and reshaping the delivery approach 
and reform implementation strategies based on evidence. Learning involves monitoring the 
performance of departments, districts, and particularly schools, and analyzing high-frequency data in 
real time to inform decisions. Learning also involves collecting and analyzing data to identify and 
quickly rectify bottlenecks and local constraints through routine dialogues with schools, 
problem-solving forums at all levels, and stakeholder engagement. Targets and routines then need to 
be reviewed and revised based on the evidence to ensure a continuing focus on student learning.
Sustaining and scaling up what is working (and dropping what is not) involves building capacity, 
especially at the middle tier, so that the improved management functions, routines, attitudes, and 
behaviors are embedded at all levels. This requires building a culture of data and evidence-driven 
decision making, capacity building, knowledge exchange, peer support, and organizational 
problem-solving. Scaling up requires having the funding and resources to ensure adequate 
implementation of reforms at all levels, from the center to the frontline. Sharing evidence of improved 
learning outcomes through the implementation of a strong communications strategy can help 
maintain momentum. Durable political, bureaucratic, and popular support can then sustain the 
delivery approach so that it can survive changes in political regimes and the end of donor support.
14
<<<PAGE=18>>>
MATCH WITH
COUNTRY
REALITIES 
ENABLERS
LEVERAGE
POLITICAL
SUPPORT
STRENGTHEN
DATA
SYSTEMS
DESIGN
DEVELOP 
ROADMAPS TO 
MEET TARGETS
AGREE ON
STRATEGIC
FOCUS AND
CLEAR
PRIORITIES
BUILD IN
FEEDBACK,
LEARNING AND
ADAPTATION
COMMUNICATE
BROADLY THE
PURPOSE AND
VALUE ADD
OF THE
APPROACH
It is important to assess whether, in a particular context, a delivery approach is the best solution for 
accelerating reform implementation to improve student learning - and whether certain “enablers” are 
present for a delivery approach to succeed.
15 
Just as education policies and reforms can outrun the 
capabilities and inclinations of many country education systems, so too can the purposes of 
education reform implementation outrun the capabilities and inclinations of education bureaucracies. 
The UK Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit had a stable economy with stable governance and capable 
civil servants. Malaysia’s PEMANDU also had a stable economy, a longstanding democratic political 
system, and a reasonably well governed bureaucracy. It also had a public institutional ecosystem for 
performance management focused on results—an enabling environment to ﬂourish.
 
Delivery approaches could, for example, improve resource allocation. Several diagnostic tools have 
Assess realities of country context and implementation capacity
Delivery approaches spend a great deal of time, resources, and effort on launching. To launch a 
delivery approach well, an initial assessment needs to be based on the contextual realities to decide 
whether certain enablers are in place for it to succeed, and if they are, to take some key factors into 
account for the design of the delivery approach. 
KEY ENABLERS FOR A ROBUST LAUNCH
Launching
15
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Delivery approaches are often launched by a president, prime minister, or education minister, who 
seeks to deliver better outcomes by having the bureaucracy implement ministry plans, policies, and 
reforms. Delivery approaches offer a pathway for accelerating reform implementation, usually 
accompanied by external technical and ﬁnancial support. Just under half of the delivery approaches 
mapped were in a president’s or prime minister’s ofﬁce, just under a third were in a line ministry, and 
under a quarter were in a state, province, or district ofﬁce.
 
Delivery approaches can be appealing to leaders, because they signal to the public that the leaders 
are doing something to hold bureaucracies accountable for results. But leaders should also be willing 
to be held accountable for results themselves and show genuine interest in advancing learning 
outcomes by, for example, better understanding what is needed at the frontline to improve learning.
Political support helps shake the system and direct attention to key priorities. Speaking to the impact 
of political support, a deputy commissioner of Dera Ghazi Khan, Punjab said, “I think after 2009 there 
was a lot of focus by the government and there was funding too.” (Malik & Bari, 2023). Having strong 
political leaders spearheading reform implementation helps build momentum for reform, and it shifts 
attention and resources to performance and results. However, that support does not mean that all 
actors in the education system know about the delivery approach or welcome its activities, so clear 
and frequent communication mechanisms are needed. Because support can swiftly end with the 
arrival of new leaders, strong bureaucratic leadership is also needed.
Tanzania’s Big Results Now (BRN) program was launched early in President Jakaya Kikwete’s 
second term, with the support of the ministers for public services. President Kikwete, a leading 
champion of BRN, had all participating ministries reporting directly to him. In Punjab, Pakistan, the 
chief minister established the Education Roadmap and Delivery Approach, attended all 39 stocktake 
meetings to hold districts accountable, and took action to solve implementation bottlenecks in the 
quarterly high-stakes meetings over seven years. 
Establish strong political and bureaucratic support
Delivery approaches are usually executed by delivery units that are parallel to the bureaucracy and 
staffed by external consultants, and they are established under the executive leadership of, for 
example, a minister of education. Delivery units are usually small, with some exceptions (Malaysia’s 
PEMANDU had a staff of approximately 100 people.)
In addition to planning, implementation, and communication experts, delivery units should consider 
including data experts to assess what data exists and what is needed for data, monitoring, and 
evaluation systems and help raise the capacity of civil servants to collect, use, and analyze data. 
More importantly, delivery units for the education sector should also consider education experts (or 
been developed to assess and support the implementation of education reforms and policies, such 
as the Research on Improving Systems of Education (RISE) program, the World Bank Systems 
Approach for Better Education Results (SABER), the Global Partnership for Education Enabling 
Factors Screening Questionnaire and analysis, the Capacity Needs Assessment Framework, and 
the Global Policy Dashboard.
16 
Delivery approaches could identify the tools most relevant for each 
country’s context and use them to collect and analyze data to inform policy delivery. 
Consider appropriate staff 
16
<<<PAGE=20>>>
An important condition for a delivery approach is having a data system in place or the capacity to 
create one quickly. Monitoring and evaluation systems that regularly track relevant and reliable data, 
including student learning outcomes, can measure progress and help identify local implementation 
constraints. Some countries (Pakistan, for example) already have a system to collect data at the 
school level and a very strong data collection and monitoring capacity through networks of 
monitoring and evaluation assistants who visit schools to collect data. Many countries use delivery 
approaches to improve data systems.
In Ghana, the NERS is helping to develop the national integrated data management system to 
include learning, administrative, and inspection data. In Sierra Leone, one of the key goals of the 
delivery unit was to build data-gathering and monitoring systems so that the education bureaucrats 
could track key indicators related to performance and quickly identify implementation challenges. 
The unit worked with the minister on developing the systems and key aspects of data collection and 
digitization.
18 
Most education delivery approaches set ambitious national goals - improving education access and 
quality, and better managing the delivery chain. However, they usually take on too much, and their 
priorities are often mainly concentrated at the center. They may not consider local priorities and 
needs, or they may seem threatening, and thus they may not be embraced further down the delivery 
chain. It is therefore crucial to balance national and local priorities and needs.
 
Delivery approaches should focus on improving student learning. Even though delivery approaches 
aim to shift attention from inputs and processes to results, the priorities set are rarely focused on 
outcomes, especially learning outcomes. Perhaps it is too hard to link learning outcomes to structural 
reforms at the center, and reforms take time to produce desired results. For instance, in Punjab, “The 
targets probably needed to change after the ﬁrst few years, but this did not materialize. Monitoring 
systems were set up, army ofﬁcers were hired [for data collection] but following that quality was not 
focused on,” the deputy commissioner of Okara told our researchers (Malik & Bari, 2023).
Ideally, delivery approaches should measure student learning, set targets, understand what it takes 
to improve them, and focus on accelerating the implementation of those initiatives with support from 
the center and the middle tier.
In its ﬁrst years, Punjab’s delivery approach focused on three priorities: school enrollment, teacher 
attendance, and school infrastructure. The delivery approach also concentrated on 13 targets to be 
liaise with national agencies) who understand the teaching and learning process and the available 
tools to collect data on what is and is not working at the classroom and the school levels to improve 
learning.
17 
Whether these experts are available in-country or brought in from abroad, and whether 
they will accept civil servants’ contracts (including salaries) needs to be considered, as these 
matters have sustainability implications.
Harness and strengthen or set up data systems
Agree on a strategic focus and set clear priorities and targets
to improve student learning
KEY DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
17
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Delivery approaches promise to help downstream ofﬁcials and school leaders do their jobs better so 
that service delivery is improved. However, most delivery approaches focus primarily on setting 
centralized targets and cascading them down to decentralized managers through accountability 
routines. They pay less attention to organizational learning or forums for problem-solving among 
those responsible for delivery. Using Elmore’s (1979) terminology on education reform, Bell et al. 
(2023b) note that, “Delivery approaches tended to be designed more through ‘forward mapping’ 
(thinking about how to translate high-level policies into frontline changes) than through ‘backward 
mapping’ (thinking about how central actors can enable frontline workers to be more effective).”
To learn what works and how, it is important to introduce norms and mechanisms for organizational 
learning from the start. This could involve convening groups of stakeholders that do not usually 
interact along the delivery chain to identify and solve problems together—and supporting 
decentralized managers in using data to identify and solve performance problems. Ensuring that 
organizational learning is built into the design of delivery approaches—and that such learning is not 
crowded out by other components or demands of the approach—should ﬁgure prominently in the 
design or redesign of delivery approaches. Principals and teachers should be involved from the start, 
Delivery approaches help link data to targets while introducing top-down and usually high-stakes 
accountability linked to performance. They typically use roadmaps to lay out the activities to meet the 
targets, consider who needs to do what, and determine how best to manage the interdependencies. 
Delivery approaches should be designed with key stakeholders, with sufﬁcient granularity at all 
levels, including detailed implementation arrangements at the school level, but with enough ﬂexibility 
to adapt and evolve. “It is good to have a target, and even better to have worked out a trajectory on 
how you plan to improve performance over time to hit the target” (Gwyn Bevan, Emeritus Professor 
of Policy Analysis, London School of Economics & Political Science).
In Ghana, the delivery approach was initially designed to strengthen the work of national agencies 
under the Ministry of Education. Annual performance agreements with national agencies included 
output and outcome key performance indicators (KPIs) and quarterly targets, operationalized 
through detailed annual roadmaps. The national roadmaps helped clarify national agencies’ roles 
and responsibilities and improve coordination among them. The National Education Reform 
Secretariat provided capacity-building support to agencies to identify KPIs, set targets, and monitor 
their performance. Performance data were submitted in NERS-developed reporting templates and 
presented in quarterly “accounting to the minister” meetings. Indicators, targets, and roadmaps were 
well understood by national agencies. However, there was less detail on how to implement the 
delivery approach at the regional, district, and school levels.
21
achieved in a three-year period; these were focused on inputs or prerequisites for learning rather 
than learning outcomes (though this changed over time).
19 
Ghana’s NERS aimed to implement the 
12 reforms in the 2018 Education Strategic Plan. These 12 priorities formed the backbone of the 
minister’s reform agenda.
20 
Sierra Leone’s delivery unit was tasked with further prioritizing reform 
projects set in the Education Sector Plan and the Free Quality School Education program to make 
implementation more feasible. While the unit did work closely with the minister to establish a list of 
priorities, it struggled to make the list manageable for implementing bureaucrats. 
Develop detailed and ﬂexible roadmaps to meet targets
Build in feedback, organizational learning and adaptation mechanisms
18
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Communicate clearly about the purpose and value-add of the delivery
approach to all stakeholders
and their input should be sought on best practices, which will help to set and implement goals and 
priorities at the school level. 
Most delivery units have strong communication strategies, in particular at launching, but the 
emphasis is often on communicating from the center to the rest of the education delivery chain. 
Although communication is key to fostering ownership and mitigating resistance, few delivery 
approaches communicate the purpose and value-add of the delivery approach to all stakeholders and 
ensure that information ﬂows in both directions of the delivery chain. Frontline ofﬁcials and teachers 
often see the delivery approach staff as threats, especially initially, but sometimes these actors 
change their views as the usefulness of delivery approaches in coordinating and unblocking 
implementation challenges becomes evident.
 
In Sierra Leone, initially there were tensions between the delivery unit staff and the ministerial staff 
and civil service counterparts. However, the delivery unit’s communications staff demonstrated that 
the unit supported rather than replaced civil servants by sharing results and showing the value of the 
unit’s work over time. 
19
<<<PAGE=23>>>
REGULARLY
ANALYZE DATA
RAPIDLY
DIAGNOSE
IMPLEMENTATION
BOTTLENECKS
PROVIDE
CAPACITY
BUILDING AND
SUPPORT TO
TAKE ACTION
REVIEW AND
ADAPT
INDICATORS
AND TARGETS
IDENTIFY
OPPORTUNITIES
FOR
COLLABORATIVE
PROBLEM
SOLVING
REGULARLY
ASSESS AND
ADAPT
ACCOUNTABILITY
STRUCTURES
LEARNING WHAT
WORKS AND
WHAT DOESN’T
Delivery approaches disrupt education systems with new managerial routines and new or 
repackaged data. Those disruptions can be designed to induce organizational learning up and down 
the delivery chain. Ministers can learn from new quarterly, monthly, or even weekly brieﬁngs, data 
heatmaps, and dashboards. Senior education ofﬁcials and regional and district education ofﬁcers 
can learn from new data on performance. School principals can learn how implementing new 
approaches can improve their school’s performance.
22 
 This learning needs to be captured and used 
so that the reforms and the delivery approaches to accelerate their implementation are based on 
data and evidence. 
Learning 
“... We are preaching to [the GES] that 
they should use problem-solving 
approaches to understand the problem 
and ﬁnd solutions to it and should not 
hesitate to adapt to new ways of doing 
things... Because the delivery approach 
is a new concept to all of us, even 
though aspects of it can be found in 
what we were already doing... So, if you 
look at it and it’s not working, don’t 
hesitate. Don’t be shy to say ‘no, this is 
wrong and this one will be better’... So 
that we can all say even though we all 
inherited the delivery approach, but we 
altered it a little to ﬁt our situation”.
An interviewee at the Ministry of 
Education Ghana
20
<<<PAGE=24>>>
Analyze data regularly to understand what is working - and what is not - to
adapt policy interventions based on evidence
In the countries studied, the data spotlight issues, provoke discussions, and make abstract issues 
tangible. Data were useful for deep dives at the center but tended to ﬂow from the bottom up, often 
for top-down accountability routines. Access to data alone did not lead frontline actors to use the data 
for problem solving and decisions at the local level, where it would have been more useful. Gaps in 
staff capacity at decentralized levels sometimes inhibited the design and tracking of relevant 
indicators and targets to improve learning.
The Rwandan government set up the National Examination and School Inspection Authority in 2020 
to improve monitoring of the quality of education delivery through school inspections, national 
examinations, and learning assessments. Analyzing data from the Learning Assessment of Rwandan 
Schools, the authority provided critical insights about the Rwandan education system, allowing 
policymakers and administrators to make data-driven decisions about resource allocations as well as 
teaching and learning practices. System wide changes include:
• Revising the senior secondary curriculum and moving from a knowledge-based to a skills-based 
curriculum, making it more responsive to student needs and strengths.
• Increasing accountability among teachers and school administrators through the monitoring of 
student learning outcomes and use of data. 
• Increasing instructional time for Kinyarwanda, English, and mathematics and introducing double 
shifts in primary schools.
• Improving assessment practices in schools through better alignment with learning objectives, the 
development of more reliable and valid assessments, and more timely feedback for students. 
• Improving teacher development and support by providing free teacher guides and learning 
materials, establishing teacher resource centers, implementing effective continuous professional 
development, and training more than 2,800 primary and secondary school teachers.
• Strengthening the capacity of education authorities to collect and analyze data on student 
learning outcomes, leading to more effective monitoring and evaluation of education policies and 
programs, and greater capacity to respond to future challenges.
High frequency data are often collected but not always analyzed and leveraged to inform 
improvements in monitoring and evaluation systems or the education system as a whole. In some 
cases, this is due to limited skills in the bureaucracy. In other cases, the deadlines assigned to targets 
are too tight to accommodate the time and human capital required for data analysis and use.
The quantitative study of Punjab's delivery approach found that the markaz (school cluster) ﬂagging 
system had no effect on output or outcome metrics, which included district and school rankings, 
teacher and student attendance, functional facilities, and scores for mathematics, English, or Urdu. 
There also was no effect on school rankings. The delivery approach used a wealth of data, but it could 
not improve student performance. Possibly the monitoring was capturing the high variability in the 
system caused by short-term ﬂuctuations in school performance, rather than more structural issues 
that could better explain school performance. For example, the same study found that head teachers 
were a strong determinant of student learning and that teacher attendance improved school 
infrastructure. It also found that head teachers had different strengths and weaknesses that 
explained why school performance was better in some areas than others.
23 
If this information had 
been available when the approach was active, the approach could have been adapted to focus on 
promising initiatives to improve student learning. 
21
<<<PAGE=25>>>
Collecting regular and reliable data on student learning outcomes is a persistent challenge for many 
countries, with some not collecting such data or doing so only for a limited number of subjects. Some 
delivery approaches implement holistic education reforms when student learning data are not yet 
available, and others aim to implement learning assessments. Student assessments that comprise 
both formative and summative evaluations are essential for reﬁning goals, assessing learning 
outcomes, and adapting teaching and learning strategies. Providing capacity-building and support to 
the mid-tier and frontline staff to act on these assessments is important.
 
The aims of the Punjab Education Roadmap evolved from higher school enrollment rates, better 
teacher attendance, and improved school infrastructure to focus on developing assessment systems 
and investing in routine and robust student testing. The new focus also included enhancing teacher 
professional development, expanding supplies, and reforming textbooks.
24
High-stakes accountability is commonly used by delivery approaches to improve performance. It may 
attract attention and generate activity to improve operational inputs in education systems (e.g., 
delivering textbooks or building schools), but it seems less effective for driving behavioral change at 
the frontline.
25 
Delivery approaches should therefore regularly assess accountability structures and 
routines to understand their intended and unintended consequences and adapt them accordingly. It is 
also important to continually ensure a balance of accountability and organizational learning, problem 
solving opportunities, and support for stakeholders throughout the delivery chain.
 
In Punjab, the delivery approach made district coordinating ofﬁcers (DCOs), accountable for the 
achievement of education targets. Changes to local government laws halfway through the period of 
the delivery approach altered service delivery responsibilities at the district level. DCOs no longer had 
executive authority on key functions, for example ﬁnancing. However, the delivery approach was not 
adapted to respond to this change. There may also have been a misalignment in rewards and 
Measure, review, and revise targets and indicators to focus on
student learning
Regularly reassess accountability structures
Rapidly diagnose bottlenecks throughout the delivery chain
Thanks to high-level sponsorship, delivery approaches have degrees of freedom that line agencies 
and departments do not have. However, delivery approaches deal with complex systems. Much of 
the focus on delivery approaches seems to be more about pushing bureaucratic levers to improve 
inputs and processes. Few delivery approaches appear to have focused on classrooms to address 
teacher skills, pedagogical practices, or evidence-based interventions proven to increase access and 
improve learning.
The Ministry of Basic and Senior Secondary Education (MBSSE) Delivery Unit in Sierra Leone 
conducted an exercise to understand the bottlenecks for accessibility to exams and placement 
results for secondary school students. In collaboration with EdTech Hub, the ministry then helped 
digitize and send exam results and school placements through text messaging to reduce costs and 
time and improve accessibility, particularly for students in rural areas. In Punjab, heatmaps helped 
visually display the performance gaps between districts in southern Punjab and other areas, and this 
helped justify the directing of more resources to consistently underperforming districts.
22
<<<PAGE=26>>>
sanctions even before the changes, as DCOs—but not executive district ofﬁcers (EDOs), district 
education ofﬁcers (DEOs), deputy district education ofﬁcers (DDEOs), or school-level leaders—were 
rewarded for good school performance. DCOs were responsible for education and many other 
sectors and acted mainly as coordination ofﬁcers between the Chief Minister’s Ofﬁce and the district 
education departments (including the EDOs) which were much closer to the schools. “I think bonuses 
were only given to DCs or EDOs but everyone should have gotten them because this was through 
collective efforts targets were achieved so if everyone who were involved got them then it would have 
encouraged them. So, I found this least effective, giving the bonus to just the upper management,” a 
DEO in Rawalpindi, noted (Malik & Bari, 2023).
Even though the accountability routines, such as quarterly review meetings, and the upstream 
reporting requirements enabled the district to focus on common priority targets, these routines also 
had mixed effects on bureaucrats. DCOs were reportedly energized by the competition among 
districts and the promise of ﬁnancial rewards. However, more junior administrative education staff at 
the subdistrict level reported feeling a great deal of stress and pressure from these frequent 
monitoring and review routines, which often cultivated a culture of fear and affected their productivity 
and motivation. There also was no accountability from the bottom of the system to the top, such as 
school leaders holding districts to account and so on up the system. "The quarterly rankings and the 
performance accountability caused a lot of concern" (DCO Rawalpindi, Punjab in Malik & Bari, 2023). 
"… Because of these meetings there was fear and there was this tension that had an effect on our 
health and our personal life as well. And targets that were given sometimes were such that they were 
unachievable" (Malik & Bari 2023). 
Similarly, greater use of accountability routines at the district level in Ghana was found to be 
correlated with lower satisfaction among district ofﬁce staff, as well as higher teacher absenteeism, 
and less teacher-student time-on-task (Boakye-Yiadom et al., 2023). 
Delivery approaches sometimes generate opportunities for organizational learning, often as an 
unintended beneﬁt rather than by design. Effects seem stronger when delivery approaches create 
both formal and informal channels and opportunities for organizational learning that are integrated 
into the mainstream civil service. As delivery approaches serve as focal points with a mandate for 
reform, the actors in delivery approaches learn over time about challenges in their policy areas, about 
their roles, and about broader systemic strengths and weaknesses. However, creating formal spaces 
for stakeholders to meet, share knowledge and experiences, and analyze data together to solve 
implementation problems was not always explicitly articulated or prioritized. Few opportunities for 
shared learning were created downstream in the education system, and few resources were devoted 
to such opportunities.
In Ghana, in 2022, there was a shift in the delivery approach and the work of the NERS from its initial 
focus on high-stakes accountability to improving coordination and problem-solving across agencies. 
With support from the NERS, a national technical working group of agency specialists was 
established to work through the nitty-gritty details of implementation. Several data-driven, deep-dive 
presentations on cross-cutting issues (such as pupil absenteeism) were held each year by the NERS 
for national-level reform owners. Improved interagency coordination was attributed to these 
problem-solving procedures, including deep dives and technical working group meetings. 
Importantly, the agencies came to view the NERS less as a policeman and more as a vehicle for 
Identify organizational learning opportunities and forums for collaborative
problem-solving at all levels
23
<<<PAGE=27>>>
support and capacity building at the national level, particularly by the newer, smaller, more 
specialized education agencies.
26 
 
  
At the subnational level, the delivery approach helped link district targets to existing procedures that 
required local stakeholders—including parents, representatives from the community, teachers, 
school leaders, and district ofﬁcers—to meet regularly to analyze data and ﬁnd solutions to improve 
learning. However, little progress has been made toward these targets due to local implementation 
constraints, such as the lack of time, fuel, or funding to conduct these meetings. For instance, an 
interviewee in Region 2 mentioned, “… the resources here are a big challenge…, is a serious 
challenge because, we are in the half year and as we speak now, we do not have even one cedis in 
our accounts… monitoring is zero over 100 because you see, we sit in the ofﬁce here and some of 
the things that we do here, you must go to the ﬁeld to see things for yourself. It is not about what they 
are reporting to you through the digital system”.
27 
 
Changing the organizational culture and norms to concentrate on prioritization, results, performance, 
and the use of data is not easy and requires a great deal of capacity building, support, and 
problem-solving spaces for managers at all levels, including those at the frontline. To implement 
management routines and other initiatives, support and capacity building have to be provided to the 
middle tier, where supervisors and pedagogical coaches can build trust with teachers and school 
leaders to develop a culture of school improvement and provide support and collaboration 
opportunities. These roles in an education system—and their importance in working with schools—is 
fundamental in creating and maintaining links among policy, implementation, and practice.
28 
For 
centralized management reforms, various avenues should be explored to enhance the capacity of 
decentralized managers and other staff members.
29 
 
In Ghana, at the subnational level, annual targets were set by the GES, and quarterly targets were set 
by regional, district, and school heads. However, little or no training was provided to subnational 
actors on how to set targets, resulting in inaccuracies in the calculations of indicators and targets. 
Furthermore, subnational actors did not receive ﬁnancial resources in a timely manner, which limited 
their ability to meet the targets.
30
 
Brazil’s Lemann Leadership Center for Equity in Education started the Leadership Training Program 
in 2022 to strengthen the commitment and capacity of municipal secretaries of education, middle-tier 
managers, and school principals to improve learning with equity. From the school to the municipality, 
the program intends to transform education leaders’ beliefs, attitudes, visions, and management 
practices to improve education in their schools. The program focuses on pedagogical leadership, 
cultivates high expectations for students’ learning and development, and helps leaders collect and 
make better use of data to support decision making.
The program offers a new “hybrid” curriculum with a hands-on monitoring and mentoring methodology, 
collaboration and exchange among leaders, and a roadmap of implementation activities. The link to 
delivery is that program’s Systemic Transformation Laboratory works with municipalities and leaders 
to improve leadership practices and policy outcomes through delivery functions, including 
identiﬁcation of priorities, data analysis and construction of indicators, problem-solving and knowledge 
sharing mechanisms, and strategies for political advocacy. The lab helps municipalities and school 
monitors use tools and techniques that are informed by implementation science and leadership 
research to understand what works and does not work in their contexts.
Provide capacity building and support to take action
24
<<<PAGE=28>>>
Municipalities are paired with a program focal point and a junior researcher to support the construction 
of a common and collaborative agenda focusing on data collection and analysis and co-creating 
solutions to challenges related to educational inequality, always based on evidence. Three thousand 
leaders, including municipal secretaries, school monitors, supervisors, and school directors from 66 
Brazilian municipalities have been trained since 2022. Surveys of participants after their ﬁrst year in 
the program found that 91 percent reported progress in their personal and professional development 
and 85 percent reported changes in their practices.
The research study in Tanzania found suggestive evidence that perceptions of staff regarding the use 
of delivery functions in Tanzania's education system varied. In particular, school staff (headteachers) 
perceived that much less attention was given to problem-solving routines at the school level relative 
to the national level. These ﬁndings suggest that at the frontline of the Big Results Now approach, 
problem-solving was at the lowest and opportunities not always available.
Retrospective Evaluations of BRN Implementation
Priorities and Targets
6
5
4
3
2
National District School
Accountability
6
5
4
3
2
National District School
Problem Solving
6
5
4
3
2
National District School
Monitoring and Data
6
5
4
3
2
National District School
25
Source: Opalo, K. Using Delivery Units to Improve Public Services: The Case of Education Reforms in 
Tanzania. (June 2023) DeliverEd Working Paper.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
Delivery approaches generally spend less time on sustaining and scaling up management practices 
that improve learning and ensure enduring changes and long-lasting results. The effective lifespan of 
delivery approaches is often tied to political leaders or administrations and the availability of external 
funding. This can create a mismatch between the resulting short-term nature of delivery approaches 
and the long-term goal of improving learning outcomes. While delivery approaches may receive 
strong support from central political leadership, there is limited evidence of their ownership by middle 
tiers and school heads, impairing widespread adoption and transfers of delivery approach practices 
across the system. 
“Political support for this kind of initiative 
should also be at the sub-national level, 
especially in countries with decentralized 
systems, where there usually is more 
resistance for implementation. On the other 
hand, in countries where there are existing 
units of information–labs, evaluation units, 
statistics units–the implementation is better, 
although there may be some duplications.”
Martin Benavides, International Institute for 
Educational Planning
MAINSTREAM 
ACCOUNTABILITY TO 
FOSTER AND SUSTAIN 
IMPROVEMENTS IN 
LEARNING
ENSURE
ADEQUATE
FUNDING
SCALE UP WHAT’S 
WORKING WITH 
RESOURCES AND 
SUPPORT
DEVELOP STRONG 
BUREAUCRATIC 
LEADERSHIP AND 
SUPPORT TO SURVIVE 
POLITICAL CHANGE 
AND THE END OF 
DONOR SUPPORT  
CREATE A CULTURE 
OF PRIORITIZATION, 
PERFORMANCE, AND 
USE OF DATA FOR 
STUDENT LEARNING 
COMMUNICATE 
RESULTS TO SECURE 
POLITICAL, 
BUREAUCRATIC AND 
POPULAR SUPPORT
SUSTAINING
AND SCALING
WHAT WORKS
Sustaining and Scaling 
26
<<<PAGE=30>>>
In addition to the already complicated accountability schemes-involving multiple executive authorities, 
civil service formal performance assessments, and donor reporting requirements-delivery approaches 
usually create parallel lines of accountability and incentives. Multiple accountabilities and a lack of 
autonomy can hamper downstream actors’ abilities to respond to and sustain the routines introduced 
by a delivery approach.
32 
 
Policymakers may want to pay attention to how centralized delivery approaches can engage with 
stakeholders at all levels, including parents and communities. Boosting demand for better learning 
outcomes by helping school leaders and teachers interact more with parents and community leaders, 
to increase understanding and expectations about what schools should deliver, could help to sustain 
what works at schools.
33
 
Bottom-up accountability can empower frontline providers (who know better and can respond faster to 
classroom needs) and help streamline multiple top-down accountabilities that can hamper the ability 
of subnational stakeholders to focus on student learning and increase the administrative and reporting 
Publicizing early results could generate political, popular, and parental support for sustaining these 
and other more complex systemic reforms. In this process the middle tier can ensure that 
communication ﬂows both ways and that frontline providers get the support and resources they need 
to implement the reforms to improve learning.
In Jordan, the continuity of evidence-based programs like the Reading and Mathematics Program and 
the School and Directorate Development Program, which demonstrated positive impacts on learning 
outcomes, can be attributed to a coalition of stakeholders, including donors and the Delivery 
Coordination Unit within the Ministry of Education (MOE). Despite frequent changes in ministry 
leadership, these projects received sustained support due to strong evidence base and aligned and 
streamlined efforts across stakeholders to improve student learning and school leadership.
31
Delivery approaches should focus not only on establishing new managerial routines but also on 
embedding the changes in attitudes and behaviors from staff involved in delivery approaches 
throughout the delivery chain. However, they do not seem to be designed to leverage the capacity and 
responsibility of downstream and frontline leaders to improve service delivery. Most approaches work 
more to translate high-level policies into changes along the delivery chain than to have central actors 
supporting the middle tier, school principals, and teachers to deliver learning.
More attention also needs to be paid to transferring skills and behaviors among staff horizontally - 
across the many agencies and departments responsible for education - and vertically, from the center 
to the classroom and from the classroom to the center. If changes in routines, knowledge, and behaviors 
that focus on student learning do not reach districts and schools, student learning is unlikely to improve.
Create a culture of prioritization, performance, and use of data for
student learning
Communicate results to secure political, bureaucratic, and popular support
Mainstream accountability to foster and sustain improvements in learning
27
<<<PAGE=31>>>
In addition to trying new combinations of managerial routines, the focus of delivery approaches should 
also be widened to identify and implement successful teaching and learning practices. Delivery 
approaches could start by prioritizing proven cost-effective interventions to promote learning rather 
than implementing broad wholesale reforms that aim to improve everything. That could involve testing 
some of the “great buys” and “promising buys” that the Global Education Evidence Advisory Panel 
(GEEAP) has identiﬁed.
35 
It could also involve scaling up other interventions that have been proven to 
yield rapid improvements in learning.
Delivery approaches could also help identify novel routines and practices that are working in 
classrooms and schools in well-performing districts and pilot those routines and practices as testing 
grounds in classrooms in other districts to see whether those practices take hold. If these practices do 
take hold, they can be scaled up across the education delivery system, and the improvements can be 
publicized to secure and sustain political, bureaucratic, and popular support.
Teaching at the right level in the world’s largest country: from experimenting, trial and error
and learning to scalable solutions. In many developing countries, teachers teach a demanding 
curriculum regardless of the level of preparation of the children. As a result, children who get lost in early 
grades never catch up. In response, Pratham, an Indian NGO, designed a deceptively simple 
approach, which eventually came to be called teaching at the right level (TaRL). The basic idea is to 
group children, for some period of the day or part of the school year, not according to their age, but 
according to what they know—for example, by splitting the class, organizing supplemental sessions, or 
reorganizing children by level—and match the teaching to the level of the students. Pratham’s 
experiments showed that learning improved substantially. Pratham took versions of the small-scale 
experiments, started in 2001 in Mumbai’s slums, eventually to reach 33 million children by 2009 in the 
“Read India” program, using this method of remedial instruction. The program showed the promise of 
TaRL.
 
Pratham then turned to scaling up the program, starting with a few large states in India. It took ﬁve 
randomly controlled trials and several years for the concept to become a scalable policy. By 2017, a 
school teacher-led model covered some 5 million children in 13 Indian states, and an in-school, 
volunteer-led model had reached more than 200,000 children in Uttar Pradesh state. The baseline and 
endline results for language competency by treatment status in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh states 
show what is possible. The percentage of students unable to recognize letters fell from 27 to 8 percent 
in Haryana and from 39 to 8 percent in Uttar Pradesh. The percentage of students who were able to 
read a paragraph or story rose from 30 to 53 percent in Haryana and from 15 to 49 percent in Uttar 
Pradesh.
As Banerjee et al. (2017) note, “The journey from smaller-scale internal validity to larger-scale external 
validity is a process that involves trying to identify the underlying mechanisms, reﬁning the intervention 
model based on the understanding of these mechanisms and other practical considerations, and often 
Scale up what works with resources and support
burden, leaving them with less time and fewer resources for local problem solving. Communicating 
results can also create more demand-side accountability that can help delivery approaches sustain 
and scale up the reforms leading to positive learning outcomes. Making information widely available 
can also help parents and communities hold schools accountable.
34
 
28
<<<PAGE=32>>>
Housing delivery approaches within newly created units staffed by personnel who are not under civil 
service contracts has hindered the broader adoption of practices and undermined sustainability. 
Education bureaucracies often perceive the delivery approach teams as threats, creating some 
resentment and tension among delivery approach staff and civil servants, because delivery approach 
staff usually are not part of the civil service, they may get higher salaries, and sometimes they are 
recruited internationally. This perception of delivery units as threats can be gradually modiﬁed by 
anticipating the pushback from bureaucrats at all levels and by improving coordination and unblocking 
implementation challenges.
36
  
In Tanzania, after President Jakaya Kikwete left the government and President John Pombe Magufuli 
took ofﬁce with his own priorities (focusing on infrastructure), eight of the nine interventions initiated 
under the Big Results Now (BRN) program survived; ﬁve are ongoing. Although the delivery unit was 
established at the national level, the BRN relied on regular subnational administrative bureaucratic 
structures, so a change in the top-level political leadership did not completely alter the speciﬁc 
features of BRN.
The high proﬁle and expertise of staff at delivery units brings fresh perspectives and new skills. 
However, delivery approach staff tend to leave when the units dissolve, as they usually are not willing 
to be made permanent with signiﬁcantly reduced salaries. An effort to develop strong bureaucratic 
leadership and integrate the practices introduced by delivery approaches and their staff early in the 
process into all levels of the bureaucracy can help sustain changes over time.
37
Many delivery approaches are supported by donor funding within a conﬁned period (usually three to 
ﬁve years). When the external funding ends, most delivery units cease to exist, and the practices that 
they introduced fade over time. It is therefore important to make transitional arrangements from those 
delivery units that are funded externally or housed outside the civil service structure well in advance, 
and ideally from the outset. Transition arrangements do not necessarily mean that the delivery units 
need to exist forever, but these arrangements should ensure that the routines introduced translate 
into long-term behavioral changes in the bureaucracy-for example, by funding some of the 
suggestions for sustainability made here.
performing multiple iterations of experimentation”. This quote nicely sums up the importance of the link 
between learning and scaling up that should also motivate delivery approaches.
Develop strong bureaucratic leadership and support to survive political
change and the end of donor support 
Ensure adequate funding
29
<<<PAGE=33>>>
In this ﬁrst phase of its work, DeliverEd researchers focused on delivery approaches and their impact 
as seen through the country and cross-country studies. However, the researchers were also 
conscious of the larger question, beyond the scope of this work, of whether a delivery approach was 
the right instrument for what governments wanted to achieve in student learning under their political, 
bureaucratic, classroom, and social conditions. A delivery approach provides a way for governments 
to organize the implementation of education system reforms. The choice of such an approach must 
clearly rest on assessing ground realities and the priority reforms being considered.
Two recent large-scale knowledge initiatives have also sought to understand which  systemic 
education reforms have the best prospects for improving student learning in low- and middle-income 
countries. The Research on Improving Systems of Education (RISE) program has been exploring the 
fundamental system changes needed to ensure foundational skills for every child based on research 
in seven countries and on the political economy of reform. The Global Education Evidence Advisory 
Panel (GEEAP) assesses and summarizes the best, most up-to-date evidence from over 550 
evaluations on the cost-effectiveness at scale of different interventions, sorting the “great buys” for 
improving learning from the “bad buys” and identifying the interventions in between.
 
All three initiatives seek to guide governments and other stakeholders on what works to promote 
learning. While DeliverEd focused on the impact of the organizing institutional framework of a delivery 
approach or unit as seen in so many countries, the other initiatives have focused more on providing 
a stepwise analysis and action framework for identifying and committing to the most promising 
coherent reforms aligned to learning (RISE), or a cost-effectiveness framework for setting reform 
priorities (GEEAP). The three research initiatives complement each other, with the 
launching-learning-sustaining-scaling framework of this report converging with several key themes of 
RISE and GEEAP, even as they offer different and useful perspectives on education systems reform 
to address the global learning crisis.
 
RISE contrasts the learning crisis with the tremendous worldwide success with raising enrollment 
rates and expanding schooling, suggesting ﬁve actions that can provide a pathway out of the crisis 
and toward providing foundational skills for all children:
• Commit to universal, early foundational learning.
• Measure learning regularly, reliably, and relevantly.
• Align systems around the learning commitments.
• Support teaching.
• Adapt what you adopt as you implement.
The RISE emphasis on committing to learning and then working from that commitment to the priority 
actions a government should undertake resonates with the DeliverEd ﬁnding that delivery 
approaches often focus on process and input improvements that may be easy to measure, to hold 
functionaries accountable and yield short-term political gains, but that may not substantially improve 
learning. The RISE emphasis on measuring, aligning, and adapting is also consistent with the 
learning and sustaining focus of this report. The RISE recommendation on supporting teachers and 
teaching sits well with the DeliverEd ﬁnding that many delivery approaches are top-down without 
How Do Delivery Approaches Complement
Other Ways Of Promoting Education Reform?
30
<<<PAGE=34>>>
adequate attention to what happens in the classroom and how those dynamics can be changed.
GEEAP ranks a range of interventions on their cost-effectiveness to promote learning. The “great 
buys,” that it lists include:
• Providing information on the beneﬁts, costs, and quality of education.
• Supporting teachers with structured pedagogy.
• Targeting instruction by learning level, not by grade.
 
These recommendations speak to what should be considered as some of the core initial priorities in 
launching a delivery approach. These priorities can yield early results that can then be scaled up to 
generate popular and political support for sustaining these and more complex systemic reforms. In 
listing these priorities, GEEAP also encourages policymakers to review their speciﬁc context, their 
political economy, and implementation details, all important considerations for the launching and the 
scaling and sustaining parts of the LLSS framework.
 
In the same vein as these initiatives, the 2018 World Development Report, Learning to Realize 
Education’s Promise, implores educators to act on evidence to make schools work for all learners and 
to align actors to make the whole system work for learning. For a politician, policymaker, education 
functionary, or a donor, these complementary studies offer a rich menu of pathways to education 
systems reform.
Delivery units and approaches are one way of crystalizing a focus on improving the capacity of 
educational bureaucracies/ministries to actually implement and delivery reforms. Though 
complementary, they tackle a different type of problem than GEEAP and RISE, but one that deserves 
a great deal of attention. What we have learned from the DeliverEd research so far is that delivery 
requires careful consideration of capacity and engagement at all levels of the system. Stronger data 
and accountability are important, but they need to be embedded in a focus on capacity, engagement, 
and problem solving to meet implementation challenges among frontline and middle tier leaders. This 
is an area that calls for much more empirical research on improving public sector capacity for 
implementing reform and delivering education.
In summary: For governments and ministries thinking of using a delivery approach, the DeliverEd 
research emphasizes the importance of assessing and addressing contextual realities, ensuring that 
key enablers and design factors are considered, such as priorities that can yield early student 
learning, institutional learning opportunities, and evidence for sustaining and scaling from the very 
start. If implemented, the delivery approach should learn from and adapt to the data and evidence and 
build in problem-solving mechanisms as well as capacity building for the middle tier to help with 
scaling the interventions that are working. The management practices, routines, and cultural shifts 
should be embedded in the institutional structures so that the early wins can generate political and 
public support to sustain reforms through political cycles.
DeliverEd thus emphasizes the creation of a virtuous circle of launching reforms and delivery 
approaches effectively, capturing learning and adapting, and sustaining successful interventions, all 
building public and political support for scaling up and accelerating this process until a country can 
overcome its learning crisis and every child can leave school with strong foundational skills and 
beyond that help them realize their potential.
31
<<<PAGE=35>>>
1 Mansoor et al., 2021
2 Williams et al., 2021
3 Bell et al., 2023b
4 Bevan & Wilson, 2013
5 Ibid
6 World Bank, 2017
7 World Bank, 2018. The report underlines that in the absence of impact evaluations, it is unclear whether LINUS was the sole intervention that   
   resulted in improved literacy and/or numeracy skills of young learners.
8 Williams et al., 2021 and Bell et al., 2023b
9 Mansoor  et al., 2021
10 According to the global mapping exercise, 61 percent of cross-sectoral approaches and 39 percent of single-sector approaches focus on 
education.
11 Bell et al., 2023b
12 Bell et al., 2023b
13 Qarout, 2022
14 Gulzar et al., (2023) ﬁnd that the Punjab monitoring and information system did not have an impact on output or outcomes. However, this 
does not seem to be due to the way that data was strengthened or packaged but rather to the fact that the system was capturing the high 
degree of variability within the system (short-term ﬂuctuations in the schools), rather than more structural issues that could better explain 
school performance. 
15 DeliverEd research focuses only on delivery approaches, highlighting their potential advantages and disadvantages, and suggesting ways to 
enhance their effectiveness. DeliverEd does not compare delivery approaches to alternative practices for improving management and 
education service delivery.
16 The Building Evidence in Education (BE2) group has conducted a mapping and overview of this and other diagnostic tools.
17 This could include classroom observation tools and management tools, such as the World Management Survey (WMS), etc.
18 Bell et al., 2023b
19 Malik & Bari, 2023
20 Bell et al., 2023a
21 Ibid
22 Williams et al., 2021 and Bell et al., 2023b
23 Gulzar et al., 2023
24 Javed, 2018 in Malik & Bari, 2023
25 Bell et al., 2023b 
26 Bell et al., 2023a
27 Ibid
28 Childress et al., 2020
29 Adelman & Lemos, 2021
30 Bell et al., 2023a
31 Qarout, 2022
32 Bell et al. 2023b
33 Barrera-Osorio et al., 2009. Research shows that bottom-up accountability, as a reform approach, has demonstrated mixed effects on 
students learning, particularly in Africa. 
34 Decentralization, school-based management, and other forms of bottom-up reform approaches to improve implementation have, however, 
demonstrated weaknesses in lower- and middle-income countries and proven more effective in advanced education systems. Barber et al., 
2010
35 GEEAP, 2023
36 Bell et al., 2023b
37 Ibid.
Endnotes
32
<<<PAGE=36>>>
Adelman, M., & Lemos, R. (2021). Managing For Learning: Measuring and Strengthening Education 
Management in Latin America and the Caribbean. The World Bank.
Anderson, K., & Bergmann, J. (2022). The Education Commission. Design Choices for Delivery 
Approaches in Education, DeliverEd Initiative Policy Brief. 
Anderson, K., & Carano, C. (2021). The Education Commission. The Challenge of Delivering for 
Learning DeliverEd Initiative Policy Brief. 
Anderson, K., Ibarra, A., & Javaid, N. (December 2022). The Education Commission.  A Case Study 
of the Sierra Leone Delivery Unit. DeliverEd Initiative Policy Note.  
Banerjee, A., Banerji, R., Berry, J., Duﬂo, E., Kannan, H., Mukherji, S., Shotland, M., & Walton, M. 
(2017). From Proof of Concept to Scalable Policies: Challenges and Solutions, with an Application. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 22931. 
https://www.nber.org/system/ﬁles/working_papers/w22931/w22931.pdf 
Barber, M., Chijioke, C., & Mourshed, M. (2010). How the World’s Most Improved School Systems 
Keep Getting Better. McKinsey & Company. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/education/our-insights/how-the-worlds-most-improved-school-s
ystems-keep-getting-better 
Barber, M., Mofﬁt, A., & Kihn, P. (2011). Deliverology 101: A Field Guide for Educational Leaders. 
Corwin Press. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781452219660
Barcellos, T., Cunningham, M., Ibarra, A., Lee, C. (unpublished). Lemann Leadership Center for 
Equity in Education Field Note. The Education Commission. DeliverEd Initiative.
Barrera-Osorio, F., Fasih, T., Patrinos, H. A., & Santibáñez, L. (2009). Decentralized 
Decision-making in Schools: The Theory and Evidence on School-based Management. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/5f764662-7f64-5f61-ad97-3bd1691f6bcf
Bell, S., Leaver, C., Mansoor, Z., Mundy, K., Qarout, D., & Williams, M. J. (2023b). The Role of 
Delivery Approaches in Education Systems Reform: Evidence from a Multi-Country Study. DeliverEd 
Initiative Working Paper.
Bell, S., Asim, M. Mundy, K., Pius Nudzor, H., Boakye-Yiadom, M., Mensah Adosi, C. (2023a). How 
Do Regions, Districts and Schools Respond to the Introduction of a Delivery Approach: Evidence 
from Ghana. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper. 
Bevan, G., & Wilson, D. (2013). Does “Naming and Shaming” Work for Schools and Hospitals? 
Lessons from Natural Experiments Following Devolution in England and Wales. Public Money & 
Management 33(4), 245–252. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09540962.2013.799801 
Boakye-Yiadom, M., Leaver, C., Mansoor, Z., & Locco, M. P. (2023). Management and Performance in 
Mid-level Bureaucracies: Evidence from Ghanaian Education Districts. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
Bibliography
33
<<<PAGE=37>>>
Childress, D., Chimier, C., Jones, C., Page, E., & Tournier, B. (2020). Change agents: Emerging 
evidence on instructional leadership at the middle tier. Education Development Trust, United Nations 
Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Institute for Educational 
Planning(IIEP), & the Education Commission. 
https://educationcommission.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Change-agents-Emerging-evidence-o
n-instructional-leadership-at-the-middle-tier.pdf
Crouch, L. (2020). Systems Implications for Core Instructional Support Lessons from Sobral (Brazil), 
Puebla (Mexico), and Kenya. RISE Insight Series 2020/020. 
https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-RI_2020/020, 
https://riseprogramme.org/publications/systems-implications-core-instructional-support-lessons-sobr
al-brazil-puebla-mexico 
Cruz, A., & Loureiro, L. (2020). Achieving World-Class Education in Adverse Socioeconomic 
Conditions: The Case of Sobral in Brazil. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/c7c6c980-0772-53c6-98dd-98384dc44fc0 
Elmore, R. F. (1979). “Backward Mapping: Implementation Research and Policy Decisions.” Political 
Science Quarterly 94(4): 601–616.
Elongue, C.C. (unpublished). Rwanda Field note. The Education Commission. DeliverEd Initiative.
Elongue, C.C. (unpublished). Gambia Field note. The Education Commission. DeliverEd Initiative.
 
Evans, D., & Loureiro, A. (2020). From Bad to Best: How One State and One Municipality in Brazil 
Are Eradicating Illiteracy and Innumeracy. World Bank. 
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/5403715935989
19465/from-bad-to-best-how-one-state-and-one-municipality-in-brazil-are-eradicating-illiteracy-and-i
nnumeracy 
GEEAP (Global Education Evidence Advisory Panel). (2023, May)
Cost-Effective Approaches to Improve Global Learning: What does recent evidence tell us are 
“Smart Buys” for improving learning in low- and middle-income countries? Recommendations of the 
Global Education Evidence Advisory Panel. 
https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/231d98251cf326922518be0cbe306fdc-0200022023/related/G
EEAP-Report-Smart-Buys-2023-ﬁnal.pdf 
Gulzar, S., Ladino, J. F., Mehmood, M. Z., & Rogger, D. (2023). Command and Can’t Control: An 
Evaluation of Centralized Accountability in the Public Sector. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
Hanushek, E. A., Link, S., & Woessmann, L. (2013). Does school autonomy make sense 
everywhere? Panel estimates from PISA. Journal of Development Economics (104), 212–232. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304387812000661 
Javed, U. (2018, July 12). Implementing complex reforms: The Roadmap approach in Pakistan. 
Pakistan’s Growth Story. 
Leithwood, K., Louis, K., Anderson, S., & Wahlstrom, K. (2004). How Leadership Inﬂuences Student 
34
<<<PAGE=38>>>
Learning: Review of Research. Wallace Foundation. 
https://www.wallacefoundation.org/knowledge-center/documents/how-leadership-inﬂuences-student-
learning.pdf 
Loureiro, A., Cruz, L., Lautharte, I., & Evans, D. (2020). The State of Ceará in Brazil is a Role Model 
for Reducing Learning Poverty. World Bank. 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/brazil/publication/state-ceara-brazil-role-model-reducing-learn
ing-poverty 
Malik, R., & Bari, F. (2023). Improving Service Delivery via Top-down Data-driven Accountability: 
Reform Enactment of the Education Road Map in Pakistan. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
Mansoor, Z., Qarout, D., Anderson, K., Carano, C., Yecalo-Tecle, L., Dvorakova, V., & Williams, M. 
J. (2021). A Global Mapping of Delivery Approaches. DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2016). Improving School 
Leadership and Evaluation in Mexico: A State-level Perspective from Puebla. 
https://www.oecd.org/education/school/Improving-School-Leadership-and-Evaluation-in-Mexico-A-St
ate-level-Perspective-from-Puebla.pdf 
Qarout, D. (2023.) The Accountability Paradox. Delivery Units in Jordan’s Education Sector: 
2010–2019. Education Commission and Blavatnik School of Government DeliverEd Initiative 
Working Paper.
Ross-Larson, B., et al. (2023). Why Students Aren’t Learning What They Need for a Productive Life. 
RISE Political Economy Paper PE13. https://doi.org/10.35489/BSG-RISE-2023/PE13
Williams, M., Leaver, C., Mundy, K., Mansoor, Z., Qarout, D., Asim, M., Bell, S., & Bilous, A. (April 
2021). Delivery Approaches to Improving Policy Implementation: A Conceptual Framework. 
DeliverEd Initiative Working Paper.  
  
World Bank. (2017). Driving Performance from the Center: Malaysia’s Experience with PEMANDU. 
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/3180414925135
03891/driving-performance-from-the-center-malaysia-s-experience-with-pemandu 
World Bank. (2018). World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education’s Promise. 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2018 
35
<<<PAGE=39>>>
List of Acronyms
BRN
BSG
DCO
DDEO
DEO
EDO
FCDO
GEEAP
GES
IDEAS
IEPA
KPI
LINUS
LLSS
MBSSE
NERS
PADU
PEMANDU
PMDU
RISE
SABER
TaRL
UNESCO
Big Results Now (Tanzania)
Blavatnik School of Government
District Coordinating Ofﬁcer (Pakistan)
Deputy District Education Ofﬁcer (Pakistan)
District Education Ofﬁcer (Pakistan)
Executive District Ofﬁcer (Pakistan)
Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Ofﬁce (UK) 
Global Education Evidence Advisory Panel
Ghana Education Service
Institute of Development and Economic Alternatives (Pakistan)
Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (Ghana)
Key Performance Indicator
Literacy and Numeracy Screening (Malaysia)
Launch, Learn And Adapt, and Sustain and Scale Up
Ministry of Basic and Senior Secondary Education (Sierra Leone)
National Education Reform Secretariat (Ghana)
Education Performance and Delivery Unit (Malaysia)
Performance Management and Delivery Unit (Malaysia)
Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit (Jordan)
Research on Improving Systems of Education
Systems Approach for Better Education Results
Teaching at the Right Level
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
36