<<<PAGE=1>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
137 
The Effect of Training on Employee Performance  
Dr . Amir Elnaga 1*  Amen Imran 2 
1.  Vice  Dean of College of Business Administration, A ssistant Professor, Dar Al Uloom University, Riyadh, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
2.  Ms. Amen Imran, Lecturer, Institute of Management Studies, University of Peshawar, Pakistan. 
* E-mail of the corresponding author: amirzaki78@hotmail.com 
Abstract 
Employee is a blood stream of any business. The acc omplishment or disaster of the firm depends on its employee 
performance. Hence, top management realized the imp ortance of investing in training and development fo r the sake 
of improving employee performance.  This conceptual  paper aimed at   studying the effect of training o n 
employee performance and to provide suggestion as t o how firm can improve its employee performance thr ough 
effective training programs. The research approach adopted for the study conforms to qualitative resea rch, as it 
reviews the literature and multiple case studies on  the importance of training in enhancing the perfor mance of the 
workforce. Further the paper goes on to analyse  an d understand the theoretical framework and models r elated to 
employee development through training and developme nt programs, and its effect on employee performance  and on 
the basis of the review of the current evidence of such a relationship, offers suggestions for the top  management in 
form of a checklist, appropriate for all businesses , to assess the employee performance and to find ou t the true 
cause(s) of the performance problem so the problem could be solved in time through desired training program. 
The study in hand faces the limitations as there ar e no adequate indications to correlate directly the  relationship 
between training and employee performance. Hence, t here is a need for conducting an empirical research  in future to 
test the proposition discussed in the study.  
The study in hand provides brief overview of the li terature about training effectiveness and how it co ntributes in 
enhancing the employee performance and ultimately c oncludes along with recommendation to give directio ns for 
future research by applying different level of anal ysis on exploring the impact of training practices on employee 
performance.  
Keywords: Training , Employee performance. 
 
1.  Introduction 
Improved capabilities, knowledge and skills of the talented workforce proved to be a mojor source of c ompetitive 
advantage in a global market (McKinsey, 2006). To d evelop the desired knowledge, skills and bilities o f the 
employees, to perform well on the job, requires eff ective training programs that may also effect emplo yee motivation 
and commitment (Meyer and Allen, 1991). In order to  prepare their workers to do their job as desired, organizations 
provides training as to optimize their employee’s p otential. Most of the firms, by applying long term planning, invest 
in the building new skills by their workforce, enab ling them to cope with the uncertain conditions tha t they may face 
in future, thus, improving the employee performance  through superior level of motivation and commitmen t. When 
employees recognizes their organization interest in  them through offering training programs, they in t urn apply their 
best efforts to achieve organizational goals, and show high performance on job.  
Employees are the most valuable asset of every comp any as they can make or break a company’s reputatio n and can 
adversely effect profitability. Employees often are  responsible for the great bulk of necessary work t o be done  as 
well as customer satisfaction and the quality of pr oducts and events. Without proper training, employe es both new 
and current do not receive the information and deve lop the skill sets necessary for accomplishing thei r tasks at their 
maximum potential. Employees who undergo proper training tend to keep their jobs longer than those who do not. 
Training is a necessity in the workplace. Without i t, employees don't have a firm grasp on their respo nsibilities or 
duties .Employee training  refers to programs that provide workers with information, new skills, or pr ofessional 
development opportunities 
CORE Metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
Provided by International Institute for Science, Technology and Education (IISTE): E-Journals
<<<PAGE=2>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
138 
The companies aimed at gaining the competitive adva ntage realized the importance of training in improv ing the 
employees performance. Past researches provides the  evidence regarding the positive affect of training  programs on 
both employee and organizational performance. On on e hand previous work in the field proved  that effe ctive 
training programs leads to superior return on inves tment while the other researches mentioned the posi tive role of 
training in attaining the  supreme levels of employ ee retention (Colarelli & Montei, 1996; Becker, 1993). 
Due to fast pace global and technological developme nt the firms are now facing new changes as well as challenges. 
Technological advancements have moulded the need of  capabilities and competencies required to perform a 
particular tasks. Thus, to cope with these challeng es, more improved and effective training programs a re required by 
all corporates.  Effective training programs helps in constructing a more conducive learning environme nt for the 
workforce and train them to cope with the upcoming challenges more easily and in time (Wei-Tai, 2006).  
According to Farooq. M, & Aslam. M. K (2011), manag ers are trying their level best to develop the empl oyee’s 
capabilities, ultimately creating good working envi ronment within the organization. For the sake of ca pacity building 
managers are involved in developing the effective t raining programs for their employees to equip them with the 
desired knowledge, skills and abilities to achieve organizational goals. This struggle by the top mana gement not only 
improves the employee performance but also creates positive image of the firm worldwide, (Jia-Fang, 20 10). 
Effective training programs helps employees to get acquaintance with the desired new technological adv ancement, 
also gaining full command on the competencies and s kills required to perform at s particular job and t o void on the 
job errors and mistakes (Robert, 2006).  
Amongst the important function of human resource ma nagement, one of the crucial function is employee 
development through proper training and development  programs. Employee  development  refers to the  ca pacity 
and capability building on an employee, and thus as  of whole organization, to meet the standard perfor mance level 
(Elena P. 2000).  More the developed employees, mor e they are satisfied with their job, hence increasi ng the firm 
productivity and profitability. (Champathes, 2006). 
In spite of the large number of researches on the r elationship between training and employee performan ce, there 
appears to be a gap, concerning the study of effect  of training on employee performance. The purpose o f this study is 
to close this gap by deeply investigating this phen omenon through the relevant literature, shedding mo re light into 
the relationship of  training effectiveness, and su perior employee performance and providing suggestio ns to the 
firms as how they can make best use of training programs to make their employees perform well on job. 
 
2.  Research  problem 
This study begins from the realization of the need to effectively administer the effect of training on  employee 
performance. Training is a systematic process to en hance employee’s skill, knowledge and competency, n ecessary to 
perform effectively on job. Overall, training impac ts organizational competitiveness, revenue and perf ormance. 
Unfortunately, the majority of governmental, private organization and international organizations are not recognizing 
the importance of training to increase their employ ee's productivity and when the economy slows or whe n profits 
decline, many organizations first seek cuts in thei r training budgets. This will leads to high job tur nover then increase 
the cost to hire new employees which low down the organizational profitability. 
Past researches proved a positive link between trai ning and employee performance, as training brings b enefits for the 
employee along with for the firm by positively impa cting employee performance through the enhancement of 
employee’s competencies and behaviour. Firms that f ocuses on shareholders and customer satisfaction re alized the 
importance of investing in training, and thus recog nizes the worth of employee development (Evans and Lindsay, 
1999). 
Keeping above discussion in mind, the significant function of this study is to answer the following research question: 
Research Question: How training effect the employees’ performance.  
Moreover, to find the answer to the above mentioned research question, the study highlights the critical review on the 
topic under consideration to better understand the phenomenon as to how effective training leads to su perior 
employee performance and higher organizational retu rns and provide a checklist for improving employee 
performance through designing effective training programs.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
139 
3.  Research objectives  
Through the relevant review of different studies, r eports, periodicals and books, on the topic under c onsideration, 
following objectives could be drawn:  
• To investigate the meaning and importance of training. 
• To identify the significance of employee performance. 
• To explore the relationship between Training and employees performance. 
• To develop guideline for assessing the employee performance 
 
4.  Review of Literature 
In the fast pace changing world of business and  en vironmental uncertainty, organizations realize its limitation of 
dealing with new challenges (Tai, 2006). However te  further states that the firms should invest in tra ining programs 
to make their employees competent enough to face un certainties and take effective decision in time, in  order to 
remain competitive in the market. Effective trainin g is beneficial for the firm in variety of ways, su ch as, it plays a 
vital role in building and maintaining capabilities , both on individual and organisational level, and thus participates 
in the process of organisational change (Valleet al ., 2000). Moreover, it enhances the retention capac ity of talented 
workforce, hence decreasing the unintentional job r otation of the workers (Jones and Wright, 1992; Sha w et al., 
1998). Furthermore, it indicates the firm’s long-te rm commitment towrds its workers and increases the employee’s 
motivational level (Pfeffer, 1994). All these contr ibutions lead to a achieving competitive advantage (Youndtet al., 
1996) and to an enhancement in employee performance  and organisational productivity (Bartel, 1994; Kno ke and 
Kalleberg, 1994; Huselid, 1995; Delery and Doty, 1996). 
4.1 Training 
Effective training and development programs aimed a t improving the employees’ performance. Training re fers to 
bridging the gap between the current performance an d the standard desired performance. Training could be given 
through different methods such as on the coaching a nd mentoring, peers cooperation and participation b y the 
subordinates. This team work enable employees to ac tively participate on the job and produces better p erformance, 
hence improving organizational performance.  
Training programs not only develops employees but a lso help an organization to make best use of their humane 
resources in favour of gaining competitive advantag e. Therefore, it seems mandatory by the firm to pla n for such a 
training programs for its employees to enhance thei r abilities and competencies that are needed at the  workplace,  
(Jie  and  Roger,  2005). 
Training not only develops the capabilities of the employee but sharpen their thinking ability and cre ativity in order 
to take better decision in time and in  more produc tive manner (David, 2006). Moreover it also enable employees to 
deal with the customer in an effective manner and r espond to their complaints in timely manner (Hollen beck,  
Derue and Guzzo, 2004). 
Training develops  self efficacy and results in sup erior performance on job (Svenja, 2007), by replaci ng the 
traditional weak practices by efficient and effecti ve work related practices (Kathiravan, Devadason  a nd Zakkeer, 
2006).   
Training refers to a planned intervention aimed at enhancing the elements of individual job performanc e” (Chiaburu 
and Tekleab, 2005). It is all about improving the s kills that seems to be  necessary for the  achievem ent of 
organizational  goals. Training programs, may also help the workforce to decrease their anxiety or fru stration, 
originated by the work on job (Chenet al., 2004). T hose workers who feel themselves to be unble to per form  a task 
with the desired level of performance often decide to leave the firm (Chen et al., 2004), otherwise th eir stay at frim 
will not dd to productivity (Kanelopoulos and Akriv os, 2006). The greater the gap between the skills n ecessary and 
those possessed by the workforce, the higher the jo b dissatisfaction of the workers.  Rowden (2002), s uggest that 
training may also be an efficient tool for improvin g ones job satisfaction, as employee better perform ance leads to 
appreciation by the top management, hence employee feel more adjusted with his job. According to Rowde n and 
Conine (2005), trained employees are more able to s atisfy the customers and (Tsai et al., 2007), employees who learn 
as a result of training program shows a greater level of job satisfaction along with superior performance.  
4.2 The Importance of Training
<<<PAGE=4>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
140 
Training is important and an imperative tool for th e organization to revamp the performance of all the  personnel for 
organizational  growth and success. It is beneficia l to both employers and employees of an organizatio n. An 
employee will become more efficient and productive if he is trained well. Firms can develop and enhanc e the quality 
of the current employees by providing comprehensive  training and development. Training is essential no t only to 
increase productivity but also to motivate and insp ire workers by letting them know how important thei r jobs are and 
giving them all the information they need to perfor m those jobs (Anonymous, 1998). The general benefit s received 
from employee training are: increased job satisfact ion and morale , increased motivation , increased e fficiencies in 
processes, resulting in financial gain, increased c apacity to adopt new technologies and methods, incr eased 
innovation in strategies and products and  reduced employee turnover. 
 
4.3 Employee performance 
According to Hawthorne studies, and many other rese arch work on productivity of worker highlighted the  fact that 
employees who are satisfied with their job will hav e higher job performance, and thus supreme job rete ntion, than 
those who are not happy with their jobs (Landy, 198 5). Moreover, it is stated that employees are more likely to 
turnover if they are not satisfied and hence demoti vated to show good performance.  Employee performan ce is 
higher in happy and satisfied workers and the manag ement find it easy to motivate high performers to a ttain firm 
targets. (Kinicki and Kreitner, 2007). The employee  could be only satisfied when they feel themselves competent to 
perform their jobs, which is achieved through better training programs.  
Recognizing the role of training practices, enable the top executives to create better working environ ment that 
ultimately improves the motivational level as well as the performance of the workforce.  
According to Leonard-Barton, (1992), an organisatio n that gives worth to knowledge as a source of gain ing 
competitive edge than competitors, should build up system that ensure constant learning, and on the ef fective way of 
doing so is training. Pfeffer (1994) highlights tha t well-trained workforce is more capable of achievi ng performance 
targets and gaining competitive advantage in the ma rket. Training is determined as the process of enab ling employee 
to complete the task with greater efficiency, thus considered to be vital element of managing the huma n resource 
performance strategically (Lawler, 1993; Delaney and Huselid, 1996).  
The importance of training on the employee performa nce, through ccelerating the learning process, is m entioned  in 
many researches (e.g. McGill and Slocum, 1993; Ulri chet al., 1993; Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995; DiBella et al., 
1996). Employee performance, achieved through train ing,  refers to immediate improvements in the knowl edge, 
skills and abilities to carry out job related work,  and hence achieve more employee commitment towards  the 
organizational goals (Huselid, 1995; Ichniowski et al., 1997). Kamoche and Mueller (1998) mentioned th at training 
should leads to the culture of enhancing learning, to raise employee performance and ultimately higher  return on 
investment (in training) for the firm.  
 “ A term typical to the Human Resource field, empl oyee performance is everything about the performanc e of 
employees in a firm or a company or an organization . It involves all aspects which directly or indirec tly affect and 
relate to the work of the employees” ( employee performance, website ). 
Employee's performance important for the company to  make every effort to help low performers. Performa nce is 
classified into five elements : Planning, monitorin g, developing, rating and rewarding. In the plannin g 
stage ,Planning means setting goals, developing str ategies, and outlining tasks and schedules to accomplish the goals. 
Monitoring is the phase in which the goals are look ed at to see how well one is doing to meet them .Mo nitoring 
means continously measuring performance and providi ng ongoing feedback to employees and work groups on  their 
progress toward reaching their goals. Ongoing monit oring provides the opportunity to check how well em ployees are 
meeting predetermined standards and to make changes  to unrealistic or problematic standards . During t he 
developing stage an employee is supposed to improve  any poor performance that has been seen during the  time 
frame one has been working at the company. During p lanning and monitoring of work, deficiencies in per formance 
become evident and can be addressed.  
The rating is to summarise the employee performance . This can be beneficial for looking at and compari ng 
performance over time or among various employees. O rganizations need to know who their best performers  are at 
the end of the cycle is rewarding stage. This stage  is designed to reward and recognise outstanding be havior such as
<<<PAGE=5>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
141 
that which is better than expected. 
4.4 The relationship between Training and employees performance 
Most of the previous studies provides the evidence that there is a strong positive relationship betwee n human 
resource management practices and organizational pe rformance. (Purcell et al., 2003). According to Gue st (1997) 
mentioned in his study that training and developmen t programs , as one of the vital human resource man agement 
practice, positively affects the quality of the wor kers knowledge, skills and capability and thus resu lts in higher 
employee performance on job. This relation ultimately contributes to supreme organizational performance. The result 
of Farooq. M, & Aslam. M. K (2011) study depicts th e positive correlation between training and employe e 
performance as r=.233. Thus, we can predict from th is finding that it is not possible for the firm to gain higher 
returns without best utilization of its human resou rce, and it can only happen when firm is able to me et its employees 
job related needs in timely fashion.  Training is t he only ways of identifying the deprived need of em ployees and 
then building their required competence level so that they may perform well to achieve organizational goals.  
Moreover, the result of the study of Sultana. A, et .al. (2012), conducted in telecom sector of Pakista n, states the  R² 
as .501 which means that 50.1% of variation in empl oyee performance is brought by training programs. F urther,  
the T-value was 8.58 that explains training is good predictor of employee performance. 
As depicted by the work of Harrison (2000), learnin g through training influence the organizational per formance by 
greater employee performance, and is said to be a k ey factor in the achievement of corporate goals. Ho wever, 
implementing training programs as a solution to cov ering performance issues such as filling the gap be tween the 
standard and the actual performance is an effective way of improving employee performance (Swart et al., 2005). 
According to Swart et al., (2005), bridging the per formance gap refers to implementing a relevant trai ning 
intervention for the sake of developing particular skills and abilities of the workers and enhancing e mployee 
performance. He further elaborate the concept by st ating that training facilitate organization to reco gnize that its 
workers are not performing well and a thus their kn owledge, skills and attitudes needs to be moulded a ccording to 
the firm needs. There might be various reasons for poor performance of the employees such as workers m ay not feel 
motivated anymore to use their competencies, or may  be not confident enough on their capabilities, or they may be 
facing work- life conflict. All the above aspects m ust be  considered  by the firm while selecting mos t appropriate 
training intervention, that helps organization to s olve all problems and enhance employee motivational  level to 
participate and meet firm expectations by showing d esired performance. As mentioned by Swart et al.(20 05) this 
employee superior performance  occur only because o f good quality training program that leads to emplo yee 
motivation and their needs fulfilment.  
According to Wright and Geroy (2001), employee comp etencies changes through effective training program s. It not 
only improves the overall performance of the employ ees to effectively perform the current job but also  enhance the 
knowledge, skills an attitude of the workers necess ary for the future job, thus contributing to superi or organizational 
performance. Through training the employee competen cies are developed and enable them to implement the  job 
related work efficiently, and achieve firm objectives in a competitive manner.  
However, employee performance is also effected by s ome environmental factors such as corporate culture , 
organizational structure, job design, performance a ppraisal systems, power and politics prevailing in the firm and the 
group dynamics. If the above mentioned problems exi st in the firm, employee performance decreases not due to lack 
of relevant knowledge, skills and attitude, but bec ause of above mentioned hurdles. To make training effective and to 
ensure positive effect of training on employee perf ormance these elements should be taken into conside ration Wright 
and Geroy (2001). Besides, Eisenbergeret al.(1986) stated that workers feel more committed to the firm , when they 
feel organizational commitment towards them and thus show higher performance. 
Bartel (1994), reports that there is a positive cor relation between effective training program and emp loyee 
productivity, however to make it possible, (Swart e t al., 2005), it is the responsibility of the manag ers to identify the 
factors that hinders training program effectiveness  and should take necessary measures to neutralize t heir effect on 
employee  performance. In addition, Ahmad and Bakar  (2003), concluded that high level of employee comm itment 
is achieved if training achieve learning outcomes a nd improves the performance, both on individual and  
organizational level. These findings are also consistent with the results of Kim (2006) research work. 
Generally, it can be debated that the effect of tra ining program on employee outcomes such as motivati on, job
<<<PAGE=6>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
142 
satisfaction and organizational commitment, did not  received much attention so far. Rare work was done  to test 
whether firms can affect their workers attitude, th rough proper training interventions. According to L ang (1992) 
training should be planned in such a way that it re sults in organizational commitment. On the other ha nd Gaertner 
and Nollen (1989) proposed that employees’ commitme nt is a result of some human resource practices, th at is, 
succession planning and promotions, career developm ent and training opportunities. All these practices , when 
achieved results in greater employee performance.  Moreover, Meyer and Smith (2000), investigate the l ink 
between Human Resource Management practices and org anizational commitment, so as to discover the cause s of 
effective employee performance.  
Although the above literature provides the evidence s regarding the benefits of training and its positi ve influence on 
employee performance, Cheramieet al. (2007), argued  that, management, mostly feel hesitant while inves ting in its 
human resource due to various reasons. Sometime, in  spite of receiving effective and timely training p rograms, 
employee are intended to cash it for the sake of th eir own market value and employment opportunity , o r willing to 
change job just because of higher salaries, and thu s, firm investment in training results as a cost ra ther than profit. It 
is also observed that due to the resistance of the organization towards offering training, propels ind ividuals to invest 
themselves for their career development and greater performance (Baruch, 2006).  
As mentioned by Arnoff (1971), training sessions ac celerate the initiative ability and creativity of t he workforce and 
facilitate to avoid human resource obsolescence, th at may occur because of demographic factors such as  age, attitude 
or the inability to cope with the technological cha nges. Obisi (2001), reported that training is a sys tematic process of 
enhancing the knowledge, skills and attitude, hence  leads to satisfactory performance by the employees  at job. He 
further mentioned that the need and objectives of t he training program should be identified before off ering it to the 
employees.   
Scott, Clothier and Spriegel (1977) argued that tra ining is the crux of better organizational manageme nt, as it makes 
employees more efficient and effective. They furthe r elaborated that training practice is have a stron g bond with all 
other human resource practices as (Mamoria, 1995), it enables employees to develop themselves within t he firm and 
raise their market value in the market. Moreover, t raining supports to shape employees’ job related be havior and 
facilitate them to participate for the success of t he organization and ultimately firm gets higher ret urn due to superior 
performance of its employees. Mamoria (1995), furth er mentioned that a well trained worker is able to make a best 
use of organizational resources along with minimum level of wastages. As stated by Ohabunwa (1999), wh en 
employees are well trained organization can delegat e responsibility and authority to them with full co nfidence of 
ensuring organizational success. 
5.  Theatrical framework 
Being the intellectual property of the firm, employ ees proves to be a good source of gaining competiti ve advantage 
(Houger,  2006), and training is the only way of de veloping organizational intellectual property throu gh building 
employees competencies.  
Hence on the basis of the above review of literature, following proposition could be drawn:  
Proposition:    Those employees who receive periodical effective  training sessions are more able to perform well 
on the job by increasing the quality of work, hence achieving organizational goals and gaining competitive advantage. 
(Wei-Tai, 2004). Delineated in Figure 1.  
6.  Research Methodology 
This is an exploratory research based solely on ins ights drawn from the analysis of the existing liter ature of different 
studies, reports, periodicals and books related to the topic of study in order to investigate the rela tionships between 
training and employee performance. This research wo rk will serves as a means to help acquire useful in formation or 
knowledge about the subject area. By drawing on the  existing literature, not only topic under consider ation is 
theorize, but also formulates and discusses the pro position that will help illuminate and discuss some  ways for the 
firms to understand the effect of training on emplo yees performance. As posited by Gummesson (2002, p.  283), one 
burdensome task with all research is not to collect  or rather generate more data, but to interpret and  combine what is 
already there and make some sense out of it. We sub mit to this assertion and try to make the most out of the insights 
we can get from the existing literature to address the phenomenon under study.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
143 
7.  Researchers  views and Suggestions 
Based on the collection and analysis of results of studies, reports, periodicals and books related to the topic of study 
the researchers found that managers does not recogn ize about the   importance of training  and its eff ect on employee 
performance or they  believe that training increase s the  company cost .In an effort to correct the pr oblem, 
management will decide that what these poor perform ers need is training. But unless poor performance i s caused by 
a real lack of knowledge or skill, training will ha ve little or no effect on the problem. So, how do y ou know when 
training is the remedy?. The researchers devised   guidelines  suitable for all companies  to assess t he employee 
performance .These guidelines   are designed to det ermine the true cause(s) of the performance problem  , and, in 
turn, how best to correct it. 
 
7.1  Guidelines for Employee Professional Evaluation & Development 
• Ability: 
 Evaluate the employee’s physical ability and heath  issues, if there are any, to decide to what extent  cane he 
perform the job, in addition, evaluate the employee ’s present and past psychological state to decide i f he or she 
has the mental ability to actually start or even co ntinue the tasks. For example: Kaiser Permanente ha s been 
ranked 3rd in 2012 in recruiting disabled employees ’, who constitute 5% or the workforce there, and as signed 
them tasks that could actually fit their capabilities . (Diversity Inc. 2011). 
 
• Standards: 
 Evaluate how the employees perceive their jobs in term of understanding their tasks and duties, smoot h 
cooperation with their supervisors, and awareness o f time limits. Also, evaluate how goals and procedu res are 
presented to employees in terms of clearance, and a vailability (soft or hard copies). For example, Hal liburton’s 
“zero” rule, which seeks to zero health incidents, is set, clearly, to both employees and visitors, ev en on their 
website to ensure safety in its facilities. (Halliburton) 
• Knowledge and Skills: 
 Evaluate if the employees’ background knowledge an d adeptness are compatible with tasks and duties. I f they 
are not, check if there is any training to narrow t he knowledge and skill gaps. And if there are no tr ainings, 
decide whether it is absolutely necessary for the e mployee to complete the tasks. For example, most IB M 
employees need to have an electronic or computer sk ills background, but if some lack some of this know ledge; 
IBM will provide extensive trainings to close the gap. (Training Industry, 2012). 
• Measurement: 
Evaluate your employee evaluation if it is based on  measuring the employees’ performance in terms of t ask 
performance or if it biased to the employee. For ex ample, the Accreditation Board of Engineering and 
Technology sends its evaluators overseas to evaluat e college professors in terms of accreditation stan dards, 
while maintaining a completely un-biased status. (ABET). 
• Feedback: 
 Check if the employee receives regular feedback on  his or her work and performance or not. And if fee dback is 
received, check if it is related to compensation, a nd if the employee chooses his evaluator. For examp le, Adobe 
has decided to relate performance feedback to annual salary increase. (ET, and Sengupta, 2012) 
• Environment: 
 Check if the employee is surrounded by the necessa ry tools needed for task completion and if enough t ime is 
given for task completion, or if the working enviro nment is comforting for task completion. For exampl e 
McDonald’s provides all the necessary tools require d for trainings, and accommodations to its working 
environment. (McDonald’s) 
• Motivation: 
 Check if there is any sort or incentive for good p erformance or punishment for bad performance. Addit ionally, 
for effective employees, check for any guard for th ose employees if they are punished with extra tasks  to do just 
because of their good performance. For example JFC staffing company motivates its employees through th e
<<<PAGE=8>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
144 
“employee of the month competitions”. (JFC staffing company). 
8.  CONCLUSION 
The main objective of every training session is to add value to the performance of the employees, henc e all type of 
businesses design training and development programs  of their employees as a continuous activity. Purpo se of 
training is what employees would attain after exper iencing the training program. Some  of the organiza tions  plan 
and implement the training program for their employ ees without identifying the purpose and objectives and without 
knowing  what the knowledge, skills and abilities e mployees would learn at the end of the training pro gram and 
whether they will be able to attain performance tar gets on job. Therefore, firm must design the traini ng program with 
clear goals and objectives while keeping in mind the particular needs of both individual and the firm. 
This study in hand chiefly focuses on the role of t raining in enhancing the performance of the employe es. Training 
plays vital role in the building of competencies of  new as well as current employees to perform their job in an 
effective way.  It also prepares employees to hold future position in an organization with full capabi lities and helps 
to overcome the deficiencies in any job related are a. Training is considered as that sort of investmen t by the firm that 
not only bring high return on investment but also supports to achieve competitive advantage.  
Employees referred as the rare, non-imitable and va luable resource of the firm and the success or fail ure of any 
business mainly relies on its employees performance . Thus, organizations realizing the fact are willin g to invest in 
training programs for the development of their empl oyees. Effective training is considered to be a key  factor for 
improved performance; as it can enhance the level o f employee and firm competency. It supports to fill  the gap 
between what performance if required and what perfo rmance is happening, i.e. gap between desired perfo rmance and 
actual employee performance. Training need referred  to any deficit in performance, which can be reliev ed by 
appropriate training. There are different methods o f overcoming deficiencies in employee performance o n job, and 
training is one of them. Particularly training deve lops skills, competency, and ability and ultimately  improves 
employee performance and organizational productivity.  
Training programs is the stimulant that workers req uire to improve their performance and capabilities,  which 
consequently increase organizational productivity. Therefore, training should be designed on the basis  of firm 
specific needs and objectives. Effective training i s the thoughtful intervention designed at attaining  the learning 
necessary for upgraded employee performance. 
The research affirmed the proposition that training has a positive impact on employee performance. 
 
 
References 
1.  ABET. Accreditation commission and constitution, http://www.abet.org/governance/ 
. 
2.  Afshan Sultana, Sobia Irum, Kamran Ahmed, Nasir Meh mood (2012), impact of training on employee 
performance: a study of telecommunication sector in  Pakistan, interdisciplinary journal of contemporar y 
research in business, vol 4, No 6. 
3.  Ahmad, Z.K. and Bakar, R.A. (2003), “The associatio n between training and organisational commitment 
among the white-collar workers in Malaysia”, Intern ational Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 7  
No. 3, pp. 166-85. 
4.  Anonymous. (1998, Sept/Oct). What nonprofits need to know about technology. Nonprofit World, 16, 38. 
5.  Arnoff, J. (1971) Achievement Motivations Training and Executives advancement, Journal of  Applied 
Science New York Vol. 7(1). 
6.  Bartel, A.P. (1994), “Productivity gains for the im plementation of employee training programs”, Indust rial 
Relations, Vol. 33 No. 4, pp. 411-28. 
7.  Bartel, A.P. (1994), “Productivity gains from the i mplementation of employee training programs”,Indust rial 
Relations, Vol. 33, pp. 411-25. 
8.  Baruch, Y. (2006), “Career development in organizat ions and beyond: balancing traditional and 
contemporary viewpoints”, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 16, pp. 125-38.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
145 
9.  Becker, G. S. 1993. Human capital: A theoretical an d empirical analysis with special reference to 
education(3 rd  ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
10.  Brinkerhoff, R. O., (2006). Increasing Impacts of T raining Investments: An Evaluation Strategy for 
Building Organizational Learning Capability, Indust rial and Commercial Banking. Emerald Group of 
Publishers, 38(6), pp. 302-307. 
11.  Cheramie, R.A., Sturman, M.C. and Walsh, K. (2007),  “Executive career management: switching 
organizations and the boundary less career”, Journal of Vocational Behavior. 
12.  Colarelli, S. M., & Montei, M. S. 1996. Some contex tual influences on training utilization. The Journa l of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 32(3): 306-322. 
13.  Delaney, J.T. and Huselid, M.A. (1996), “The impact  of human resource management practices  
operceptions of organizational performance”,Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 949-69 
14.  Delery, J.E. and Doty, D.H. (1996), “Modes of theor izing in strategic human resource management: tests  of 
universalistic, contingency and configurational per formance predictions”,Academy of Management Journal , 
Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 802-35 
15.  DiBella, A.J., Nevis, E.C. and Gould, J.M. (1996), “Understanding organizational learning 
capability”,Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 361-79. 
16.  Diversity Inc. , 
http://www.diversityinc.com/diversity-management/the-diversityinc-top-10-companies-for-people-with-disa 
bilities-2/ 
17.  Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchinson, S. and  Sowa, D. (1986), “Perceived organisational support ”, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 71, pp. 500-7. 
18.  Evans, J. R. and Lindsay W. M., (1999), “The Manage ment and Control of Quality”, 4th edition, 
South-Westernllege College Publishing, Cincinnati Ohio, USA. 
19.  Gaertner, K.N. and Nollen, S.D. (1989), “Career exp eriences, perceptions of employment practices and 
psychological commitment to the organisation”, Human Relations, Vol. 42, pp. 975-91. 
20.  Guest, D. (1997), “Human resource management and pe rformance: a review and research agenda”, 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp. 263-76. 
21.  Gummesson, E. (2002), Total Relationship Marketing:  Marketing Management, Relationship Strategy and 
CRM Approaches for the Network Economy, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford. 
22.  Halliburton, The Zero Rule,  
http://www.halliburton.com/AboutUs/default.aspx?navid=971&pageid=230 
23.  Harrison, R. (2000),Employee Development, Beekman Publishing, Silver Lakes, Pretoria. 
24.  http://www.buzzle.com/articles/employee-performance/ 
 
25.  Huselid, M.A. (1995), “The impact of human resource  management practices on turnover, productivity and  
corporate financial performance”,Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 635-72. 
26.  Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K. and Prennushi, G. (1997), “The effects of human resource management practices  
on productivity: a study of steel finishing lines”,American Economic Review, Vol. 87 No. 3, pp. 291-313 
27.  JFC Staffing Companies, http://www.jfcstaffing.com/about-us.cfm 
28.  Jones, G.R. and Wright, P.M. (1992), “An economic a pproach to conceptualizing the utility of human 
resource management practices”, in Rowland, K. and Ferris, G. (Eds),Research in Personnel and HRM, Vol. 
10 
29.  Kamoche, K. and Mueller, F. (1998), “Human resource  management and the appropiation-learning 
perspective”,Human Relations, Vol. 51 No. 8, pp. 1033-60. 
30.  Kim, S. (2006), “Public service motivation and orga nizational citizenship behavior in Korea”, Internat ional 
Journal of Manpower, Vol. 26 No. 8, pp. 722-40.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
146 
31.  Kinicki, A. and Kreitner, R. (2007),Organizational Behavior, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 
32.  Knoke, D. and Kalleberg, A.L. (1994), “Job training  in US organizations”,American Sociological Review,  
Vol. 59, pp. 537-46. 
33.  Landy, F. W. (1985).The psychology of work behavior(3rd ed.). Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press. 
34.  Lang, D.L. (1992), “Organisational culture and comm itment”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, Vol.  
3 No. 2, pp. 191-6. 
35.  Lawler, E.E. III (1993), “Creating the high-involve ment organization”, in Galbraith, J.R. and Lawler, E.E. 
III (Eds),Organizing for the Future: The New Logic for Managing Complex Organizations, Jossey-Bass, 
San Francisco, CA. 
36.  Leonard-Barton, D. (1992), “The factory as a learning laboratory”,Sloan Management Review, pp. 23-38. 
37.  Lu, J.F., Tjosvold, D., and Kan Shi. (2010). Team T raining in China: Testing and Applying the Theory o f 
Cooperation and Competition, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(1), pp. 101-134. 
38.  Mamoria, C.B (1995), Personnel Management, Himalaya Publishing House New Delhi. 
39.  McDonald’s, http://www.aboutmcdonalds.com/mcd/corporate_careers.html 
40.  McGill, M.E. and Slocum, J.W. (1993), “Unlearning the organization”,Organizational Dynamics, pp. 67-79. 
41.  McKinsey Quarterly (2006), “An executive take on the top business trends”, a McKinsey Global Survey. 
42.  Meyer, P.J. and Smith, A.C. (2000), “HRM practices and organisational commitment: test of a mediation 
model”, Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, Vol. 17 No. 4, pp. 319-31. 
43.  Mullins, J.L., 2003. Management of organizational B ehavior, 7th edition, Prentice Hall, New Jersey 
http://img1.ukdissertation.com/materials/samples/dissertation.pdf  
44.  Mumford, A. (1988).  Developing Top Managers.  Alde rshot: Gower.Quoting ,Ashish Kumar,Evaluating 
the Training and Development programmes in the Corp orate Sector , Lotus Institute of Management  
Bareilly (U.P.), INDIA. 
45.  Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995),The Knowledge-cr eating Company, Oxford University Press, New 
York, NY. 
46.  Obisi Chris (2001), Employee development, Issues an d dimensions, Unical Journal of public Administrato r 
Sept Vol. 1. 
47.  Ohabunwa Sam (1999) Nigeria Business Environment in  the New Millennium-  paper presented for 
HRDB UNILAG on Renovating our corporate management practices for the New Millemium, Wednesday 
19 th  May. 
48.  Pfeffer, J. (1994),Competitive Advantage through People, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA 
49.  Purcell, J., Kinnie, N., Hutchinson, S., Rayton, B.  and Swart, J. (2003),Understanding the People and 
Performance Link: Unlocking the Black-Box. Research Report, CIPD, London. 
50.  Sengupta, Devina, and ET Bureau. "Adobe Systems set  to scrap annual appraisals, to rely on regular 
feedback to reward staff." Economic Times . (2012): n. page. Web. 2 Jan. 2013. 
<http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2012-03-27/news/31245058_1_adobe-systems-appraisal-fee 
dback>. 
51.  Shaw, J.D., Delery, J.E., Jenkins, G.D. and Gupta, N. (1998), “An organization-level analysis of volun tary 
and involuntary turnover”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 41 No. 5,pp. 511-25. 
52.  Swart, J., Mann, C., Brown, S. and Price, A. (2005) ,Human Resource Development: Strategy and Tactics, 
Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann Publications, Oxford. 
53.  Scott. Clotheir and Spriegel (1977) Personnel Management: Principles, practices and point of View.  
54.  Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi, Sixth Edition. Steinmetz, Lawrence (1969) 
55.  Tai, W. T., (2006). Effects of Training Framing, Ge neral Self-efficacy and Training Motivation on 
Trainees’ Training Effectiveness, Emerald Group Publishers, 35(1), pp. 51-65.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
European Journal of Business and Management                                        www.iiste.org  
ISSN 2222-1905 (Paper) ISSN 2222-2839 (Online) 
Vol.5, No.4, 2013 
 
147 
56.  Training Industry, Top 20  Training Outsourcing Com panies, 2012, 
http://www.trainingindustry.com/training-outsourcing/top-companies-listings/2012/2012-top-20-training-ou 
tsourcing-companies.aspx 
57.  Ulrich, D., Jick, T. and Von Glinow, M.A. (1993), “ High-impact learning: building and diffusing learni ng 
capability”, Organizational Dynamics, pp. 52-66 
58.  Valle, R., Martı´n, F., Romero, P.M. and Dolan, S. (2000), “Business strategy, work processes and huma n 
resource training: are they congruent?”,Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 21, pp. 283-97 
59.  Wexley, K.N., and Baldwin, T.T. (1986), ‘Management  development,’ Journal of Management, 12, 277-294. 
Quoting ,Ashish Kumar,Evaluating the Training and D evelopment programmes in the Corporate Sector , 
Lotus Institute of Management  Bareilly (U.P.), IND IA. 
60.  Wright, P. and Geroy, D.G. (2001), “Changing the mi ndset: the training myth and the need for word-clas s 
performance”, International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 586-600. 
61.  Youndt, M.A., Snell, S.A., Dean, J.W. and Lepak, D. P. (1996), “Human resource management, 
manufacturing strategy and firm performance”,Academ y of Management Journal, Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 
836-66. 
 
 
Figure 1: Theoratical Model Representing Relationship Between Independent And Dependent Variable 
 
 Independent Variable                                                         
Dependent Variable 
 
 
Effective Training Programs Employee Performance