<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 11 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Yvonne Erasmus1 
Sunet Jordaan1 
Ruth Stewart1 
Affiliation:
1Africa Centre for Evidence, 
Faculty of Humanities, 
University of Johannesburg, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Yvonne Erasmus,
yerasmus@uj.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 24 Feb. 2020
Accepted: 25 June 2020
Published: 23 Oct. 2020
How to cite this article:
Erasmus, Y ., Jordaan, S. & 
Stewart, R., 2020, ‘Scoping 
the impact evaluation 
capacity in sub-Saharan 
Africa’, African Evaluation 
Journal 8(1), a473. https://
doi.org/10.4102/aej.v8i1.473
Copyright:
© 2020. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License. Introduction
As the demand for impact evaluation evidence increases across Africa, so do calls for greater 
capacity to undertake these technically complex evaluations. However, the discourse surrounding 
local African capacity in this field is mired in post-colonial deficit models of the Global South and 
appears to omit any consideration of ‘Made in Africa’ approaches (see Crawley 2017; Goldman, 
Byamugisha & Gounou et al. 2018). There is a widespread assumption that a lack of human and 
institutional capacity exists in sub-Saharan Africa to conduct impact evaluations (Althsuler & 
Staats 2019; Van den Berg, Naidoo & Tamondong 2017) and a suggestion that because much of the 
financial support, and therefore evaluation capacity, to conduct impact evaluations comes from 
the Global North,1 local capacity is not being developed (Goldman et al. 2018; Manning, Goldman 
& Licona 2020; World Bank 2009). Furthermore, frameworks for assessing monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) capacity have largely been driven by Northern approaches and have not 
always been adapted sufficiently for Southern application (Blaser-Mapitsa & Khumalo 2018).
We know that there is a rise in the number of, and importance of, impact evaluations in the region 
(Altshuler & Staats 2019; Goldman et al. 2018). We also know that when research is conducted by 
‘outsiders’, it risks being irrelevant, missing the nuances of the local context and marginalising 
both the local research community and those whom we hope will make use of that research in 
decision-making (Kalinga 2019). The literature acknowledges an increased demand for, and use of, 
impact evaluation results in sub-Saharan Africa, including by governments (Goldman et al. 2018; 
1.Defined here by the Royal Geographical Society ( https://www.rgs.org/CMSPages/GetFile.aspx?nodeguid=9c1ce781-9117-4741-af0a-
a6a8b75f32b4&lang=en-GB).
Background: There has long been an assumption that Africa has low levels of impact evaluation 
capacity and that when impact evaluations are conducted in the region, they need to be led 
and conducted by researchers from the North. The Africa Centre for Evidence at the University 
of Johannesburg conducted a scoping study on impact evaluation capacity in sub-Saharan 
Africa to test this assumption.
Methodology: We used a multicomponent design, which included a systematic author search, 
desk review, online survey (with 353 respondents) and key informant discussions.
Results: Contrary to previous assumptions, we found a large number of researchers with 
impact evaluation capacity across sub-Saharan Africa. We identified 490 impact evaluation 
publications, to which 1520 unique African researchers from 34 countries had contributed. 
South Africa had the most impact evaluation researchers who had published, followed by 
Kenya and Uganda, illustrating a concentration of capacity in Southern and Eastern Africa. 
Authors largely resided within schools of public health and health science faculties at 
universities. The study showed that modules and elements of impact evaluation training had 
been offered in 32 countries, indicating more training opportunities than anticipated, although 
formal, accredited training in impact evaluation was mostly presented outside Africa.
Conclusion: Contrary to previous assumptions, widespread capacity to conduct impact 
evaluations exists in sub-Saharan Africa, reducing the need for researcher capacity from the 
Global North to deliver impact evaluations in the region. However, our evidence suggests that 
capacity gaps exist in non-health sectors, creating an opportunity for further capacity support 
in these areas.
Keywords: Impact evaluation capacity; Sub-Saharan Africa; Evidence-informed decision 
making; Impact evaluation training; Impact evaluation publication; Survey; Research methods.
Scoping the impact evaluation capacity in 
sub-Saharan Africa
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Note: Special Collection: SAMEA 7th Biennial Conference 2019.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). Altshuler and Staats (2019) 
as well as Gol dman et al. (2018) explain the importance of 
impact evaluations and specifically the use of the results of 
these studies for the sub-Saharan Africa policy context. 
These can assist with evidence-informed policy-making 
and other policy decisions. They also highlight that 
governments are reluctant to make policy decisions based 
on evaluations and research done by researchers from 
outside sub-Saharan Africa. This stresses the importance of 
understanding local impact evaluation capacity. 
Contrary to the assumption about the absence of 
capacity (Altshuler & Staats 2019), the literature also 
highlights high-profile examples of impact evaluations 
conducted in the region. Examples include the Mwanza 
study in Tanzania that tested the link between improving 
treatment of sexually transmitted infections and reductions 
in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) incidence 
(Grosskurth et al. 1995) and the REVAMP HIV resistance 
clinical trial (Siedner et al. 2017). In addition, the Abdul 
Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) has conducted 
over 300 randomised evaluations across Africa, resulting in 
substantial developmental and policy impact. This includes 
their randomised control trials and impact evaluations on 
the Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL) in India, which led 
to scaling this work to various schools in Africa (J-PAL 2017). 
Based on our previous work on mapping evidence capacities 
in Africa (Stewart, Erasmus & the UJ-BCURE team 2017a; 
Stewart, Nduku & Langer 2017b), we suspected that many of 
the assumptions surrounding the discourse of impact 
evaluation capacity were unfounded. This includes the 
assumption of a deficit in impact evaluation capacity in sub-
Saharan Africa (Altshuler & Staats 2019). Like many others in 
the Global South, we were keen to challenge the deficit models 
that continue to assume we are merely the beneficiaries of 
investments and that these investments will develop our 
capacity (Stewart et al. 2019). However, we wanted to ensure 
that our assertions were based on more than assumptions. 
We therefore set out to research the scope and depth of 
capacity to produce impact evaluations in sub-Saharan Africa.
In this particular study, we defined impact evaluation as 
(Altshuler & Staats 2019):
A type of evaluation design that assesses the changes that can be 
attributed to a particular intervention. It is based on models of 
cause and effect and requires a credible counterfactual 
(sometimes referred to as a control group or comparison group) 
to control for factors other than the intervention that might 
account for the observed change. (p. 1)
This article reports the findings of our stock taking of 
impact evaluation capacity in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Specifically, our research project focused on answering 
four questions: (1) Who in sub-Saharan Africa has 
published impact evaluations? (2) In addition to those 
who have published, who else might have capacity to 
conduct impact evaluations? (3) Where do African 
researchers receive training on impact evaluations? 
(4) What do these findings tell us about where there 
appears to be the most evidence of impact evaluation 
capacity? 
Research methods and design
The project was sup ported by an advisory group who gave 
input into the scope and methodology of the project, as well 
as specific elements of the study, as requested.
In line with the objectives of the study, namely to scope the 
field, we drew on a variety of methods to assess the impact 
evaluation capacity from different angles. For example, we 
drew on key informant interviews, a desktop review, an 
online survey and an academic search to identify authors 
who have published impact evaluations. Each method in 
turn informed and complemented the next; for example the 
author search of who had published impact evaluations and 
the desktop search on who had provided impact evaluation 
training in part contributed to the distribution list for the 
online survey. The following subsection discusses each of 
these methods in turn. 
Data collection methods
Data collection took place between July 2018 and May 2019.
Semi-structured key stakeholder discussions
A sampling frame was drawn up in preparation for this stage. 
We aimed to have discussions with individuals at 
organisations conducting impact evaluations both inside and 
outside of Africa, as well as different types of institutions 
(e.g. universities, research institutes and networks). We used 
a combination of purposive sampling (where we identified 
key stakeholders in the field beforehand) and a snowballing 
approach (where we followed leads suggested by those 
contacted) (Chambliss & Schutt 2006). In 2018, we conducted 
12 semi-structured discussions over email or Skype with 14 
key stakeholders about the current state of impact evaluation 
in Africa to (1) understand where current capacity to produce 
impact evaluations in Africa sits, what the gaps in capacity 
are and what the challenges are in filling those gaps and (2) 
identify individuals and organisations to include in other 
research activities that formed part of this project. 
Desk research on available impact evaluation training 
courses
At the end of 2018 and early in 2019, we conducted desk 
research to collect data on training courses, conferences and 
workshops relevant to the field of impact evaluation. This 
included online training, formal qualifications, short courses, 
workshops and conferences. The purpose was to identify 
what training courses and providers are available in addition 
to where those surveyed had received training. This could 
help to match the demand for capacity building with the 
supply of courses and material that is already available. The 
team also captured what additional support is given to 
trainees, such as mentorship and coaching, where this 
information was available. However, a limitation of a desk 
review is that it did not capture training opportunities that
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
were in the process of being developed and that institutional 
websites were not always up to date.
Online survey
Early in 2019, we conducted an online survey to capture 
information about existing African impact evaluations, 
training and capacity. We drew on various networks in the 
distribution of the survey, such as the Africa Evidence 
Network (AEN), Partnership for Economic Policy (PEP) 
Africa mailing list, International Development Research 
Centre (IDRC) think tank list, Network of Impact Evaluation 
Researchers in Africa (NIERA)/Center for Effective Global 
Action (CEGA), East Africa Social Science Translation 
(EASST) network, PEP Policy Impact Evaluation Research 
Initiative (PIERI) Africa researchers, International Initiative 
for Impact Evaluation (3ie) researchers who opted in to 
participate, NIERA/CEGA alumni and the South African 
Monitoring and Evaluation Association (SAMEA) Listserv. 
In addition, we also drew on other stages of the research 
process, such as the author search and training desk review 
discussed below, to identify additional individuals and 
organisations to distribute the survey to. 
Follow-up interviews
Six follow-up interviews were conducted after completion of 
the online survey. These were with a subsample of survey 
participants and other organisations identified by the funder 
as priority from different stages of the research process. 
During this process, we aimed to better understand (1) what 
helped build existing impact evaluation capacity and 
(2) what opportunities exist to strengthen capacity. All but 
one of these interviews were with individuals at senior 
management level at university departments, research 
institutes or think tanks in East Africa, including in Uganda, 
Ethiopia and Kenya. An equivalent interview was 
conducted with a research institute in Benin, West Africa. 
All interviews were conducted in English. 
Impact evaluation author search
We aimed to identify authors of published impact evaluations 
who were African citizens and currently residing in Africa. 
This served as an additional channel through which to 
identify existing capacity that might not be picked up in 
other phases of the project. In order to identify authors, at 
the end of 2019 we searched the 3ie Impact Evaluation 
Repository that consists of published development impact 
evaluations that were identified through systematic search 
and screening processes of 35 databases, search engines and 
websites.2 The filter for publications from sub-Saharan 
Africa was used. We excluded articles if there were no 
African authors with African affiliations. In order to identify 
relevant authors, we used the following process and 
selection criteria, although we also acknowledge some 
subjectivity in these determinations. We first excluded 
authors based on institutional affiliation if the institution 
listed was not based in Africa. International organisations 
2.Available at https://developmentevidence.3ieimpact.org/.
with offices in Africa were included if the author was 
affiliated to the local office. We then conducted additional 
searching (e.g. Google and LinkedIn profiles) to obtain more 
information on the authors. Authors were included if they 
were citizens of an African country and had a local affiliation. 
We excluded non-African authors who had dual affiliations, 
one of which was to an African institution, and African 
authors who only listed affiliations with institutions not 
based in Africa. 
Data analysis 
In accordance with the study objectives, namely to ‘scope the 
field’, our analysis methods were largely descriptive in 
nature. For example, we used thematic analysis for all our 
qualitative interview data – our initial semi-structured 
interviews as well as follow-up interviews from the survey 
(Ritchie, Spencer & O’Connor 2003) – looking for common 
themes in response to our semi-structured interview schedule. 
For the academic author search, we extracted the following 
data from each study into an Excel spreadsheet: author name, 
contact details (email), institution, country, title of the article, 
publication date, resource type and sector. Through insights 
from our key informant interviews, we decided to extract 
information regarding author placement post hoc (i.e. was 
the researcher first author or non-first author). Many authors’ 
institutions and contact details were not present in the article 
publication, requiring extensive desktop searching to identify 
institution affiliations. We used descriptive statistics to 
present our quantitative findings on the authors of impact 
evaluations. 
Similarly, the survey, conducted through a Google Form, was 
exported into an Excel spreadsheet where data such as 
country and impact evaluation experience could be easily 
filtered and represented as descriptive statistics. Similarly, 
the desktop research on training resources was analysed 
based on specific parameters set such as region, length of 
course and whether the course was accredited or not. These 
data were collated in an Excel spreadsheet and are publically 
available on the Africa Centre for Evidence website. 
Ethical considerations
The study was awarded ethical clearance by the University of 
Johannesburg’s Faculty of Humanities Research Ethics 
Committee (clearance number REC-01-014-2019).
Results
The results of our study are presented to answer four 
questions: (1) Who in sub-Saharan Africa has published 
impact evaluations? (2) In addition to those who have 
published, who else might have the capacity to conduct 
impact evaluations? (3) Where do African researchers receive 
training on impact evaluations? (4) What do these findings 
tell us about where there appears to be the most evidence of 
impact evaluation capacity?
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Capacity to author impact evaluations
The interviewees were of the view that practitioners of 
impact evaluations in Africa are not always incentivised to 
publish their results as academic papers. This view was 
expressed at different points in the research process, such as 
the initial key informant interviews and follow-up interviews 
from the survey. The reasons given by the interviewees 
included that practitioners are not necessarily based at 
universities and therefore are not required to publish 
academically for their career progression. However, the 
interviewees told us that the writing of academic papers is 
emerging as a funding requirement, which is resulting in an 
increased number of publications. 
Our search of the 3ie Impact Evaluation Repository yielded a 
total of 1718 impact evaluations published on sub-Saharan 
Africa between 1990 and 2015. From the total, 1228 articles 
(71%) did not have any African authors with African 
affiliations. However, the remaining 490 impact evaluations 
yielded 1520 unique African researchers with African 
affiliations. Only 210 (14 %) of these 1520 were first authors. 
From the 490 publications in question, for 68 articles (14%) all 
the authors were African and had African affiliations, 
indicating nascent local capacity. 
Of the 490 publications identified, 449 (91 %) were journal 
articles, whilst the remainder included project reports and 
published working papers. 
The following descriptions are based on the 490 articles and 
1520 researchers identified.
Geographic distribution
The 1520 authors found were based in 34 different countries, 
as set out in Table 1. 
Interestingly, when the countries with the largest number 
of impact evaluation authors are cross-referenced with the 
World Bank Country classification by income level, all but 
South Africa are low-income or lower-middle-income 
countries, suggesting that the capacity to publish impact 
evaluations does not necessarily correlate with the income 
status of a country, as evidenced in Table 1. 
Based on data from the 3ie Impact Evaluation Repository, 
South Africa has the most impact evaluation researchers 
(n = 307), followed by Kenya ( n = 210), Uganda ( n = 161), 
Tanzania (n = 111) and Zambia (n = 104). 
As mentioned earlier, only 210 (13 %) of the 1520 African 
authors with African affiliations identified were first authors. 
This illustrates the existence of capacity to lead in the design 
and implementation of impact evaluations and writing up the 
findings for academic publication. When the geographic 
distribution of capacity was compared to the first authors on 
publications, we found that East Africa (n = 89) had more first 
authors on publications than Southern Africa (n = 72), although 
the latter region had more authors on publications overall. 
And whilst South Africa had the most impact evaluation 
authors of all countries in sub-Saharan Africa (n = 307), it also 
had the most first authors on publications ( n = 54). Whereas 
Uganda had the third most authors overall (n = 161), it had the 
second highest number of first authors (n = 31). 3
A number of researchers from West Africa were also first 
authors on publications (Ghana, n = 16; Nigeria, n = 14; 
Burkina Faso, n = 6; the Gambia, n = 4; Côte d’Ivoire, n = 1; 
Guinea-Bissau, n = 1; Mali, n = 1; Senegal, n = 1). 
A breakdown of African regions in Table 2 shows that 75% of 
the authors are based in Southern Africa ( n = 591) and East 
Africa (n = 555). 
Capacity by institution
Our search for African authors with African affiliations 
yielded various African organisations that appear to have 
the greatest impact evaluation capacity. Table 3 shows the 
list of organisations that came up the most in our database 
search, sorted by the number of author affiliations. 
3.See https://data.worldbank.org/country.
TABLE 1: Distribution of authors by country, including World Bank 2019 country 
classification by income level.
Country World Bank country 
classification by income 
level3
Number of 
Authors
Number of 
First Authors
% share of 
1st authors
South Africa Upper-middle income 307 54 17,6%
Kenya Lower-middle income 210 24 11,4%
Uganda Low income 161 31 19,3%
Tanzania Low income 111 17 15,3%
Zambia Lower-middle income 104 3 2,9%
Ghana Lower-middle income 93 16 17,2%
Zimbabwe Lower-middle income 86 8 9,3%
Burkina Faso Low income 73 6 8,2%
Nigeria Lower-middle income 62 14 22,6%
Ethiopia Low income 50 14 28,0%
Malawi Low income 49 5 10,2%
Mali Low income 25 1 4,0%
Senegal Lower-middle income 22 1 4,5%
DRC Low income 20 1 5,0%
Rwanda Low income 19 3 15,8%
Gambia Low income 16 4 25,0%
Côte d’Ivoire Lower-middle income 13 1 7,7%
Cameroon Lower-middle income 12 3 25,0%
Mozambique Low income 12 2 16,7%
Bostwana Upper-middle income 11 - -
Namibia Upper-middle income 11 - -
Benin Low income 11 - -
Togo Low income 8 - -
Madagascar Low income 7 - -
Sudan Lower-middle income 5 1 20,0%
Guinea-Bissau Low income 4 1 25,0%
Sierra Leone Low income 4 - -
Niger Low income 4 - -
Burundi Low income 3 - -
Lesotho Lower-middle income 2 - -
Eswatini Lower-middle income 2 - -
Eritrea Low income 1 - -
Gabon Upper-middle income 1 - -
Liberia Low income 1 - -
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Our results indicate a large amount of research capacity 
resides within schools of public health and health science 
faculties at university institutions. Many of the university 
research programmes were also linked with international 
institutions, for example, the London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) and Johns Hopkins 
University.
In particula r, Makerere University in Uganda had the 
greatest number of researchers ( n = 66) at an institution. 
Specifically, the research units that conducted the impact 
evaluations were the School of Public Health ( n = 17), the 
School of Medicine ( n = 8) and the Infectious Diseases 
Institute ( n = 5). Similarly, the University of Zimbabwe 
(n = 53) also had various units with research capacity in the 
College of Health Sciences ( n = 13), Department of 
Community Medicine ( n = 16) and Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology ( n = 4). 
Additionally, the results show that 4 of the top 10 institutions 
with the greatest number of researchers were from 
South Africa. The following units in the University of 
Witwatersrand produce impact evaluations: the Faculty of 
Health Sciences ( n = 19), the Department of Science and 
Technology ( n = 8) and the School of Public Health ( n = 7). 
Moreover, we found that the University of Cape Town’s 
School of Public Health/Family Medicine and the School of 
Child and Adolescent Health each had seven impact 
evaluation researchers. 
Capacity by sector
Drawing on the sector classifications in the 3ie Impact 
Evaluation Repository, the health, nutrition and population 
sector dominated with 377 articles, making up 77 % of the 
total studies identified. The 23 % remaining articles are 
shared amongst 10 other sectors. Agriculture and rural 
development came second with 49 impact evaluations. The 
education sector is third highest on publication numbers, 
recording 37 studies. 
Our search of the 3ie Impact Evaluation Repository showed 
that there is substantial impact evaluation production 
capacity across the African continent – with a large 
concentration in the East Africa region (n = 555). Interestingly, 
Southern Africa’s capacity is concentrated within five 
countries, whilst West Africa’s production capacity is 
spread across 14 countries. This finding represents a 
robust  research capacity within South Africa ( n = 307) and 
the potential to grow researcher capability in West 
Africa where there is evidence of existing publication 
capacity. 
Although South Africa had the overall largest number of 
impact evaluation researchers in a country, Makerere 
University in Uganda had the largest number of 
researchers at a single organisation ( n = 66), denoting 
strong institutional capacity. Moreover, Zimbabwe had 
the sixth largest number of researchers country-wide, but 
the University of Zimbabwe had the third largest 
number of researchers. This finding indicates another 
pocket of capacity: that generally research infrastructure 
TABLE 3: Breakdown of key impact evaluation organisations.
Institutions Country Number of 
authors
Makerere University Uganda 66
South African Medical Research Council South Africa 58
University of Zimbabwe Zimbabwe 53
University of the Witwatersrand South Africa 52
University of Cape Town South Africa 46
Kenya Medical Research Institute Kenya 44
Ifakara Health Institute Tanzania 30
University of Nairobi Kenya 29
Centre National de Recherche et de Formation 
sur le Paludisme
Burkina Faso 22
Human Sciences Research Council South Africa 22
University of Bamako Mali 20
National Institute for Medical Research Tanzania 20
University of Malawi Malawi 18
Centre Muraz Burkina Faso 16
Muhimili University Tanzania 16
Uganda Virus Research Institute Uganda 15
University of Zambia Zambia 15
University of Ghana Ghana 13
Centre for the AIDS Program of Research in 
South Africa 
South Africa 13
Centre for Infectious Disease Research Zambia 13
Medical Research Council – LSHTM Gambia 12
University Teaching Hospital Zambia 12
Biomedical Research and Training Institute Zimbabwe 11
Jimma University Ethiopia 10
Moi University Kenya 10
Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration Uganda 10
Manhiça Health Research Center Mozambique 9
School of Public Health, University of Kinshasa DRC 8
Bandim Health Project, INDEPTH Network Guinea-Bissau 8
Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Faculté de 
Médecine
Senegal 8
Unité de Formation et de Recherche Biosciences, 
Université Félix Houphouët-Boigny
Côte d’Ivoire 7
Haramaya University Ethiopia 6
Programme National de Lutte contre le VIH/Sida Togo 5
Note: Authors were based at the institution at the time of publication, but might have moved 
since.
AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome; LSHTM, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine; DRC, Democratic Republic of Congo; INDEPTH, International Network for the 
Demographic Evaluation of Populations and their Health; VIH, virus de l’immunodéficience 
humaine [human immunodeficiency virus]. 
TABLE 2: Distribution of authors by region.
Region Number of  
countries
Number of  
authors
Share of first 
authors (%)
Southern Africa 10 591 12.18
East Africa 7 555 16.04
West Africa 14 337 13.06
Central Africa 3 37 13.51
Total 34 1520 N/A
Note: The following countries are included in the regional groupings. Southern Africa: South 
Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Mozambique, Botswana, Namibia, Madagascar, Lesotho 
and Swaziland; East Africa: Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Burundi and Eritrea; 
West Africa: Ghana, Gabon, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Gambia, Mali, Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire, 
Benin, Guinea-Bissau, Togo, Siera Leone, Niger and Liberia. Central Africa : Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Cameroon.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
is clustered in universities, in particular in faculties of 
health, and  within those, in schools of public health. 
Furthermore, over 75 % of all impact evaluations found 
were in the health, nutrition and population sector. 
This finding demonstrates a disproportionate amount of 
inquiry in this field. As evident from Figure 1, many 
sectors are underdeveloped in generating impact 
evaluations, as a number of sectors had three or fewer 
publications. However, this could also be linked to the 
amount of funding that different sectors have received to 
conduct impact evaluations, which is not something that 
this study was able to investigate. 
We conducted a supplementary academic search from 
2016 onwards to supplement the findings from the 3ie 
Impact Evaluation Repository. This search confirmed an 
upward trend in African authors with African affiliations 
being authors on impact evaluation publications. The 3ie 
search yielded 490 publications with 1520 unique authors 
between 1990 and 2015, with a steady increase per year 
from 2011 onwards, leading to n = 69 in 2014 and n = 72 in 
2015. Our supplementary search confirmed that this 
steady increase continued after 2015. 
Beyond analysing publications – Who else might 
have the capacity to conduct impact 
evaluations?
In a ddition to those who have published impact 
evaluations, we sought to explore who else might have the 
capacity to conduct impact evaluations. For this, we 
drew in particular on our online survey. We received 
353 responses to the survey; 63 % of respondents were 
male and 37 % female. A total of 93.5 % of respondents are 
currently based in Africa, and 92.9% are citizens of an African 
country. More than half (55 %) are based in the academic 
sector, 24 % work for government and 32 % work for think 
tanks and non-governmental organisations (NGOs). Of the 
respondents based in Africa, 36% were from Western Africa, 
33% from Eastern Africa, 23 % from Southern African and 
7% from Central Africa. A total of 77.3 % of respondents 
have been involved in conducting impact evaluations, 
providing a substantial basis for us to draw from. 
Respondents to our survey were asked to name African 
organisations that they think have capacity to conduct 
impact evaluations. A large number of organisations were 
mentioned by survey respondents, and although there was 
some overlap and triangulation with other stages in our 
research, it has not been possible to verify all responses to 
ensure that they are accurate. Table 4 summarises the responses 
by country. The researchers only included organisations that 
were mentioned by at least two respondents. 
A total of 77.3% of respondents to the survey reported having 
themselves been involved in conducting impact evaluations. 
Of these respondents, 11 % reported that they had been 
involved in more than 10 impact evaluations, had citizenship 
in an African country and worked in that country. These 
institutional affiliations are included in Table 5.
The survey results suggest that select government departments 
also have experience in conducting impact evaluations. Of the 
survey respondents, 24% were from government departments, 
377
49
37
8
8
3
3
1
1
2
1
05 0 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Health nutri/g415on and popula/g415on
Agriculture and rural development
Educa/g415on
Mul/g415sector
Finance
Social protec/g415on
Water and sanita/g415on
Economic policy
Energy
ICT
Public sector management
Number of publica/g415ons 
ICT, information and communications technology.
FIGURE 1: Distribution of publications by sector.
TABLE 4: Distribution of African organisations with impact evaluation capacity based on survey responses. 
Region Country Sample organisations
Eastern Africa Ethiopia Ethiopian Development Research Institute (EDRI)
Kenya Genesis Analytics, African Institute for Development Policy (AFIDEP), Network of Impact Evaluation Researchers in Africa (NIERA), Tegemeo 
Institute, African Population and Health Research Center (APHRC), Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, African Economic Research 
Consortium (AERC), Royal Nexus Group
Tanzania Ifakara Health Institute (IHI), Economic and Social Research Foundation (ESRF)
Uganda Various centres and departments at Makerere University, Uganda Management Institute (UMI), Economic Policy Research Centre (EPRC)
Western Africa Benin African School of Economics (IREEP)
Côte d’Ivoire Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Statistique et d’Econonomie Appliquée (ENSEA), Cellule d’ Analyse de Politiques Economiques du Cires 
(CAPEC), African Development Bank
Ghana Various departments and centres at the University of Ghana, including the Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research (ISSER), 
Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA)
Nigeria Various departments at the University of Nigeria, Nigerian Institute for Social and Economic Research (NISER), AFRIDEV Initiative for 
Evidence-Based Development and Empowerment 
Senegal Centre Africain d’Etudes Supérieures en Gestion (CESAG), Centre de Recherche Econolique et Social (CRES), African Growth and 
Development Policy (AGRODEP), CLEAR-FA
Cameroon Centre de Recherches en Economie et Gestion (CEREG), Université de Yaounde II
Southern Africa Malawi Various departments at the University of Malawi
South Africa Genesis Analytics, Benita Williams and Associates, Khulisa, JET Education Services, Southern Hemisphere, Otherwise Research and 
Evaluation, Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA), HEARD
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
and 13.5 % of survey respondents who conducted 
impact evaluati ons were from government departments. 
Respondents from the following countries’ governments 
reported having experience in impact evaluations: Benin, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Ghana, Madagascar, Nigeria, Somalia, South 
Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda and Zimbabwe. 
Various international organisations have worked with 
African impact evaluation practitioners based in Africa. This 
included organisations such as 3ie, Innovations for 
Poverty Action (IPA), IPE, J-PAL, RTI International, Oxford 
Policy Management, ITAD, FHI 360, Population Services 
International, PEP, the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), Department of International 
Development, Centre for Effective Action (Berkeley), One 
Acre Fund, International Food Policy Research Institute, the 
World Bank group, various American and European 
universities, Clinton Health Access Initiative, IDinsight, 
Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research 
(CGIAR) centres and the Overseas Development Institute.
Who provides training on impact evaluations? 
Our survey yielded a number of important findings about 
where African researchers receive training, the organisations 
providing impact evaluation training and the nature of the 
training. Of the 353 respondents who completed the survey, 
67.6% ( n = 238) indicated that they had received impact 
evaluation training in the last 10 years. The majority of this 
training was short attendance courses 4 (57.3%). Almost 40 % 
of respondents indicated that they had received impact 
evaluation training at universities outside Africa, at 
European universities in the Netherlands, Germany, France, 
the United States, Canada and others. Survey respondents 
from Eastern Africa received most of their impact 
evaluation training from institutions outside Africa, and 
some from institutions within East Africa. Only one 
respondent received training in West Africa, and two in 
Southern Africa. In Central Africa, an equal number of 
respondents received training outside Africa, and within 
Central Africa. Two respondents received training from 
4.Used to describe courses that are not followed by an assessment, but where 
participants receive a certificate of attendance. 
institutions in Eastern Africa, and three from institutions in 
West Afric a. Within Western Africa, the trends are the 
same as in East Africa. The majority of respondents 
reported that they had received training from institutions 
outside Africa, limited from within West Africa, six 
respondents from Southern African institutions and four 
from East Africa. Lastly, in Southern Africa, the respondents 
reported equal training from institutions outside Africa 
and within Southern Africa, and only three respondents 
received training from institutions in East Africa. 
Only 33% (n = 109) of survey respondents reported that their 
own organisations had provided impact evaluation training 
during the past 10 years. The majority of this was in the form 
of short courses. Only 18.6 % ( n = 62) of respondents were 
aware of additional support provided to practitioners of 
impact evaluations. These support mechanisms were limited 
to mentorship programmes (mostly provided by PEP, 3ie 
and CEGA), some financial support for conferences and 
workshops (such as that provided by 3ie) and network 
support (e.g. the Africa Evidence Network).
Our survey was supplemented by a desk review of impact 
evaluation training resources and yielded similar results for 
East, West and Southern Africa. Most accredited courses 
(linked to a formal diploma or degree programme) focussed 
on M&E in general, and not impact evaluation or impact 
evaluation methodology specifically. Most courses were 
found to have at least one module on impact evaluation. 
In East and West Africa, there is anecdotal evidence of 
master’s programmes on impact evaluation that are 
being developed at Sokoine University of Agriculture in 
Tanzania and Gaston Berger University–Saint Louis in 
Senegal. The M&E courses are mostly based in departments 
of public administration, development studies, agriculture, 
and health. Workshops and non-accredited short courses 
are presented by academic institutions, international 
organisations and various NGOs. Courses ranged from 2 to 
10 days and are conducted at national or regional levels. A 
sizeable number of workshops and short courses focus 
specifically on the value and use of impact evaluation as well 
as on training in impact evaluation methodology. Few of 
these training opportunities are externally funded. Funders of 
these short courses include the Hewlett Foundation and the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Some conferences feature 
impact evaluation training components. However, the focus 
is either on M&E more broadly or on link impact analysis to 
evidence use. M&E training courses that are donor funded are 
geographically focussed in Western Africa, showing that 
capacity building in impact evaluation is centred in West 
Africa. The desk review identified several training and 
capacity-building opportunities in West Africa that were only 
available in French. This includes the CLEAR–CESAG (Centre 
for Learning on Evaluation and Results - Centre Africain 
d’Etudes Supérieures en Gestion) courses such as Le 
Séminaire en Evaluation d’Impact en Afrique Francophone. 
Overall, in two-thirds of African countries, we found evidence 
that impact evaluation training had taken place in some form 
or another, indicating more training opportunities than 
TABLE 5: Institutional affiliations of survey respondents who had conducted 
10 or more impact evaluations. 
Country of work Organisational affiliation 
Bénin Centre d’Expertise en Evaluation du Développement (CEED)
Burundi English for All Center (EAC)
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo 
Centre de Connaissance en Santé 
Kenya Root Capital, Innovations for Poverty Action 
Malawi University of Malawi – Chancellor College
Republic of Cameroon Cameroon Consumer Service Organization (CamCoSO)
Nigeria Cross River State Bureau of Statistics, College of Medicine, 
University of Nigeria, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife
Sénégal CRES, Centre Panafricain de Recherche pour le 
Développement Economique et Social (CARDES)
South Africa World Vision International, University of Johannesburg, 
Praekelt.Org 
Tanzania Tanzania National Parks, State University of Zanzibar
Uganda Office of the President-Cabinet Secretariat, Office of the 
Prime Minister
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
anticipated. The majority of impact evaluation training is 
presented by university departments, centres or institutions 
based at universities. Other major providers of impact 
evaluation training include AERC (African Economic 
Research Consortium), the EASST network, the Partnership 
for African Social and Governance Research (PASGR), ESRF 
(Economic and Social Research Foundation), and CLEAR and 
CESAG. A large number of international organisations 
provide impact evaluation training in African countries, 
such as IPA, J-PAL Africa, 3ie, Measure Evaluation (in 
association with GEM-Net Health [Global Evaluation and 
Monitoring Network for Health]) and PEP in conjunction 
with the University of Laval, amongst others. These findings 
are supported by the work of Manning et al. (2020). 
When reflecting on the impact evaluation training offered, 
the interviewees were of the view that the level at which 
training is pitched is often a challenge. People are keen to 
learn but have varied degrees of knowledge and experience 
in M&E, which makes it difficult to determine the level at 
which training opportunities should be offered. Training 
opportunities should therefore be well targeted and 
differentiated and efforts should be made to enable people to 
attend, as training is often in a capital city, which makes 
transport and accommodation prohibiting factors. 
A total of 13% of survey respondents expressed the need for 
training opportunities, capacity building and mentorship 
opportunities to increase their impact evaluation capacity.
Understanding capacity across different African 
regions
Looking across all of our data, the following discussion 
summarises where we found evidence of the greatest impact 
evaluation capacity per region, as visually represented in the 
map in Figure 2.
Eastern Africa 
The greatest capacity in the Eastern African region appears 
in four coun tries: Uganda, Ethiopia, Tanzania and Kenya. 
Institutions from these four countries featured prominently 
in the findings from the author search, as discussed in the 
previous section. These four countries also have the most 
confirmed impact evaluation training opportunities in 
Eastern Africa. For Ethiopia, four institutions appear to 
have the most evidence of impact evaluation production 
capacity: Jimma University, Haramaya University, Mekelle 
University and the Addis Continental Institute of Public 
Health. In addition, there are examples where all authors on 
publications from these institutions are local to these 
areas, potentially indicating nascent local capacity. 
The Ethiopian Evaluation Association, the Ethiopian 
Economics Association, the Ethiopian Economic Policy 
Research Institute and EDRI (Ethiopian Development 
Research Institute) were also mentioned as organisations that 
have the capacity to conduct impact evaluations, although 
they did not feature prominently in the author searches. 
These institutions are think tanks that have been funded 
under the IDRC TTI (Think Tank Initiative). 
For Kenya, five institutions appear to have the most 
impact evaluation publications: Kenya Medical Research 
Institute, University of Nairobi, Moi University, APHRC 
(African Population and Health Research Center)
and Kenyatta University. Other institutions that were 
mentioned as having the capacity to conduct impact 
evaluations but that did not feature prominently in the 
author searches included the AERC and the Kenya 
Institute of Public Research.
Makerere University in Uganda topped the overall 
publication search for institutions through which authors 
have published impact evaluations. Other institutions in 
Uganda through which impact evaluations have been 
published include the Uganda Virus Research Institute and 
the Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration. Various 
centres and departments at Makerere University were also top 
of mind when respondents commented on what organisations 
in Uganda had the capacity to conduct impact evaluations. 
Western Africa
Compared to other regions, there was less evidence of 
impact evaluation capacity in Western Africa, although 
the capacity is growing. Evidence on countries with 
the greatest impact evaluation capacity in Western Africa 
related to five countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte 
d’Ivoire, Nigeria and Senegal. 
Central Africa 
The most evidence of impact evaluation capacity in Central 
Africa was found in Cameroon. We found evidence that 
individuals from Cameroon had participated in accredited 
impact evaluation training presented by AERC. In addition, 
PASGR had presented a short course that individuals from 
FIGURE 2: Overall evidence of greatest capacity by region.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Page 9 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Cameroon participated in. Despite Cameroon not featuring 
prominently in the search for authors, a number of local 
institutional affiliations were noted across five different 
impact evaluations: University of Yaoundé I, University of 
Dschang, Yaoundé Central Hospital and University Center 
Hospital. Other institutions in Cameroon that were 
mentioned as having impact evaluation capacity included 
CEREG (Centre de Recherches en Economie et Gestion) at 
University of Yaounde II and CamCoSO (Cameroon 
Consumer Service Organization).
Southern Africa 
In Southern Africa, South Africa showed the strongest 
capacity to conduct impact evaluations. Looking across all 
of the data collected, there was strong evidence of a number 
of organisations in South Africa having the capacity to 
conduct impact evaluations; named organisations were 
Genesis Analytics, Benita Williams and Associates, Khulisa, 
JET Education Services, Southern Hemisphere, 
Otherwise Research and Evaluation, CLEAR-AA, HEARD, 
Praekelt.org, University of Johannesburg, University of 
Stellenbosch (AERC network), the African Microeconomic 
Research Unit at the University of the Witwatersrand, 
HSRC (Human Sciences Research Council) (Research Use 
and Impact Assessment Unit), University of Cape Town’s 
Southern Africa Labour and Development Research Unit. 
In terms of author affiliations on published impact 
evaluations, various organisations stood out as having had 
a substantial number of authors, including the South 
African Medical Research Council, University of the 
Witwatersrand, University of Cape Town, Humans 
Sciences Research Council and CAPRISA (Centre for the 
AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa). In addition, 
we have found evidence of accredited training provided 
by the Wits School of Governance, University of Cape 
Town and University of Stellenbosch, whilst short courses 
have been presented by the Gordon Institute of Business 
Science, CLEAR-AA, CESAR-Africa (Centre for Statistical 
Analysis and Research - Africa), IQ Business, Africa 
Management Services Company and PASGR.
Discussion
Summary of the results 
We used a multipronged research approach including key 
informant interviews, an online survey and follow-up 
interviews, desktop research on training resources and an 
academic search on authors who had published impact 
evaluations. Using a diverse strategy enabled us to 
capture information on impact evaluation capacity that 
one single method would not have allowed. Our findings 
confirmed that many of the impact evaluations published on 
sub-Saharan Africa have been conducted by researchers 
from the Global North – of the 1718 impact evaluations 
published between 1990 and 2015, 1128 articles (71 %) did 
not have any African authors with African affiliations. 
However, we also found more evidence of capacity by local 
researchers to publish and conduct impact evaluations 
than has been widely assumed to exist. In terms of impact 
evaluation publications, we identified 490 publications to 
which 1520 unique African researchers with African 
affiliations across 34 different countries had contributed 
between 1990 and 2015. For 14 % of these 490 publications, 
all of the authors were African, indicating nascent local 
capacity. Looking across all of the data collected, there is 
evidence of strong capacity in Southern and Eastern 
Africa and in schools of public health and faculties of 
health at universities, showing disproportionate capacity in 
this sector and less so in non-health sectors. Despite the 
geographic concentration of capacity in Southern and 
Eastern Africa identified across our different datasets, we 
did find 337 authors across 14 countries in Western 
Africa who had published impact evaluations, indicating 
growing capacity in this subregion. Of the 48 African 
countries investigated, we found evidence that impact 
evaluation training has been offered in 32 of these countries, 
indicating more impact evaluation training opportunities 
than anticipated. However, respondents to the survey 
indicated that formal, accredited training in impact 
evaluations is mostly presented at universities outside 
Africa, particularly European universities.
Limitations of the study
Our study is subject to a number of limitations. Our focus 
was exclusively on those who have the capacity to 
produce and publish impact evaluations, as well as where 
training had been conducted. We were not in a position to 
directly investigate who provides funding for impact 
evaluations, which would be a further important piece in 
understanding the political economy of impact 
evaluations on the continent. In addition, although 
interviewees spoke of the link between the demand for 
and supply of impact evaluations, and the challenges of 
both, we did not set out to directly study the demand side, 
but focused on supply. As we were particularly 
interested in understanding local capacity, we had to make 
some judgements about who was considered to be local. 
Although we used predefined criteria that we attempted to 
apply systematically, we have to acknowledge some level 
of subjectivity in these decisions. As our focus was on sub-
Saharan Africa, we are unable to comment on impact 
evaluation capacity in North Africa, and therefore on 
the continent as a whole. Finally, although we triangulated 
our findings through various methods and sampling 
strategies as outlined in our methodology section, we still 
might not have captured all impact evaluation capacity in 
sub-Saharan Africa. However, even with the methods that 
we used to take stock of the impact evaluation capacity in 
sub-Saharan Africa, there is evidence of increasing capacity 
across countries and regions.
Practical implications and recommendations 
The impact evaluation capacity we identified across sub-
Saharan Africa has come about because of decades of 
investment in training and capacity support (Altshuler & 
Staats 2019). Across the breadth of experience that exists, 
there appears to be disproportionate capacity in specific
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Page 10 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
sectors such as health and nutrition. This should perhaps 
not be surprising considering the history of impact 
evaluation methods, with the concept of a control and 
experimental group first introduced in the field of health 
dating back to 1747, with other fields to follow later (J-PAL 
n.d.). This history has led to considerable investment in 
health care research on the continent by international 
agencies, including USAID, the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation and others (Tarsilla 2014). 
In addition, disparities exist in impact evaluation capacity 
across countries. Although the reasons for this could be 
multifaceted, countries such as South Africa, Uganda and 
Benin have had specific interventions that assisted with the 
development of government-wide evaluation systems 
(Goldman et al. 2018). Within the government context, 
many countries experience funding limitations that inhibit 
how they are able to support both the development of 
evaluation capacity, as well the use of evaluations. This 
explains to some extent the disparities in government 
impact evaluation capacity in Africa.
African authors, because of their awareness of local context 
and proximity to decision-makers, are best positioned both to 
shape policy-relevant research questions and to support 
research uptake (Altshuler & Staats 2019). Funders who rely 
on European or North American researchers to conduct 
impact evaluations would do well to consider as alternative 
the existing pool of more local capacity (Altshuler & Staats 
2019). Similarly, those funding development projects that do 
include impact evaluations could, indeed should, look at the 
large pool of local expertise to meet this need. Ample scope 
exists to continue to build impact evaluation capacity across 
sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in sectors other than health, 
and to draw on the substantial capacity that already exists, 
particularly in the health sector. 
The existing capacity has in part been built through 
collaboration across continents and the mutual learning 
from these relationships, which provides an argument for 
them to continue. Both African and non-African researchers 
reported benefits of cross-continental collaboration. For 
African scholars, some of the reported benefits included 
that co-authoring with well-known scholars from other 
continents helped them build credibility and created 
opportunities for future work. Non-African researchers in 
turn reported that their African co-authors provided 
technical capacity, context to better situate the work and 
relationships to help drive policy impact. However, greater 
reflection on, and methods for, such partnerships are 
needed: both African and non-African scholars said that 
clear communication and an equitable distribution of 
responsibilities are essential (Altshuler & Staats 2019). There 
is much to learn here from the ‘Made in Africa’ movement 
within M&E more broadly, in which useful frameworks 
(Blaser Mapitsa & Khumalo 2018; Crawley 2017) and 
curricula (Wotela 2017) have been developed. These shifts 
also need to be positioned within broader movements of 
decoloniality, which are increasingly prominent across the 
continent (Mbembe 2015).
Although not explored in great detail in our study, the 
interviewees expressed the need for, and the potential 
importance of, being able to connect with other impact 
evaluation practitioners. The importance of communities of 
practice such as NIERA and AEN in connecting researchers 
and users of evidence should therefore be highlighted. 
Finally, the study highlighted the role that language 
plays, particularly English and French, as an important 
consideration in understanding existing impact evaluation 
capacity and how capacity development could be further 
supported. Francophone universities and think tanks 
might be at a disadvantage in getting their work published 
in international publications when writing in English, 
whilst a similar challenge applies in identifying funders 
who are willing and able to accept applications in French. 
This gap is something for funders to be aware of in order to 
create opportunities for French-speaking researchers. 
Conclusion 
Our research has provided a detailed account, based on 
various data sources, of the regions and institutions in 
sub-Saharan Africa where there is evidence of impact 
evaluation capacity. The capacity to conduct impact 
evaluations, produce and publish them appears to be more 
widespread than initially thought, although this capacity is 
concentrated in the health sector. The study found evidence 
of collaboration between local African institutions and 
international research organisations, but also nascent local 
capacity where the production of impact evaluations is by 
local teams. As ours was a scoping study to stake stock of 
the existing impact evaluation capacity in sub-Saharan 
Africa, it was outside of our scope to investigate why 
capacity appears to be concentrated in certain areas and 
fields, and this is an important area that needs further 
investigation.
Our interviews indicated that there is merit in trying to 
connect the different institutions more actively. Impact 
evaluation practitioners were sometimes not aware of 
others doing similar work at a different institution in 
their country, or even at their own institution. 
Bridging the language divide, particularly the access of 
French-speaking impact evaluation practitioners to funding 
opportunities, appears to be an important challenge to 
address in the further strengthening of capacity in West 
Africa. 
Accessing training opportunities remains an important 
means through which to strengthen capacity. There is a 
surprising number of M&E modules included in postgraduate 
accredited training in Southern, Eastern and Western Africa.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Page 11 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
The inclusion of impact evaluation methodology in these 
courses indicates intent from within these regions to 
strengthen impact evaluation capacity. However, training on 
its own does not mean that capacity is sustained, and 
trainees should receive continued support in their 
workplace to develop and maintain skills.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the project advisory 
group for their input and guidance throughout the lifespan 
of the project. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them 
in writing this research article.
Authors’ contributions
Y.E. and R.S. jointly made substantial contributions to the 
conception and design of this work. Y.E. and S.J. implemented 
the project and drafted the manuscript. R.S. further drafted 
and revised it for important intellectual content. All three 
authors reviewed the final version of the manuscript. 
Funding information
Funding to conduct the research on which this article is 
based was received in the form of a grant from the 
William and Flora Hewlett Foundation.
Data availability
Select data sets generated and/or analysed during the 
current study are available from the Africa Centre for 
Evidence website (www.africacentreforevidence.org).
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or 
position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
References
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, n.d., Introduction to evaluations,  viewed 
21 February 2020, from https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/
research-resources/Introduction-to-Evaluations.pdf.
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, 2017, Zambia to scale teaching at the right 
level program to 1,800 schools,  viewed 21 February 2020, from https://www.
povertyactionlab.org/blog/8-8-17/zambia-scale-teaching-right-level-program-
1800-schools.
Altshuler, N. & Staats, S., 2019, A new look at impact evaluation capacity in Sub-Saharan 
Africa – Research brief, viewed 28 November 2019, from https://hewlett.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/A-New-Look-at- Impact-Evaluation-Capacity-in-Sub-
Saharan-Africa.pdf.
Blaser Mapitsa, C. & Khumalo, L., 2018, ‘Diagnosing monitoring and evaluation 
capacity in Africa’, African Evaluation Journal 6(1), a255. https://doi.org/10.4102/
aej.v6i1.255
Chambliss, D.F. & Schutt, R.K., 2006, Making sense of the social world: Methods of 
investigation, 2nd edn., Pine Forge Press, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Crawley, K., 2017, ‘The six-sphere framework: A practical tool for assessing monitoring 
and evaluation systems’, African Evaluation Journal 5(1), a193. https://doi.
org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.193
Goldman, I., Byamugisha, A., Gounou, A., Smith, L.R., Ntakumba, S., Lubanga, T. et al., 
2018, ‘The emergence of government evaluation systems in Africa: The case of 
Benin, Uganda and South Africa’, African Evaluation Journal  6(1), a253. https://
doi.org/10.4102/aej.v6i1.253
Grosskurth, H., Todd, J., Senkoro, K., Newell, J., Klokke, A. & Changalucha, J. et al., 
1995, ‘Impact of improved treatment of sexually transmitted diseases on HIV 
infection in rural Tanzania: randomised controlled trial’, Lancet 346(8974), 
530–536. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(95)91380-7
Kalinga, C., 2019, ‘Caught between a rock and a hard place: navigating global research 
partnerships in the global South as an indigenous researcher’,  Journal of African 
Cultural Studies 31(3), 270–272. https://doi.org/10.1080/13696815.2019.1630261
Manning, R., Goldman, I. & Licona, G.H., 2020, WIDER Working Paper 2020/20. The 
impact of impact evaluation: Are impact evaluation and impact evaluation 
synthesis contributing to evidence generation and use in low- and middle income 
countries?, viewed 21 February 2020, from https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/
default/files/Publications/Working-paper/PDF/wp2020-20.pdf.
Mbembe, A., 2015, Decolonizing knowledge and the question of the archive , viewed 
13 January 2020, from http://wiser.wits.ac.za/system/files/Achille %20
Mbembe %20- %20Decolonizing %20Knowledge %20and %20the %20
Question%20of%20the%20Archive.pdf. 
Morkel, C. & Ramasobama, M., 2017, ‘Measuring the effect of evaluation capacity 
building initiatives in Africa: A review’, African Evaluation Journal  5(1), a187. 
https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.187
Ritchie, J., Spencer, L. & O’Connor, W., 2003, ‘Carrying out qualitative analysis’, in 
J. Ritchie & J. Lewis (eds.), Qualitative research practice: A guide for social science 
students and researchers, pp. 219–262, Sage, London.
Siedner, M.J., Mwebesa, B.B., Moosa, Y ., Paul, M., Pillay, S., McCluskey, S. et al., 2017, 
‘The REVAMP trial to evaluate HIV resistance testing in sub-Saharan Africa: A case 
study in clinical trial design in resource limited settings to optimize effectiveness 
and cost effectiveness estimates’, HIV Clinical Trials 4(18), 149–155. https://doi.or
g/10.1080/15284336.2017.1349028
Stewart, R., Dayal, H., Langer, L. & Van Rooyen, C., 2019, ‘The evidence ecosystem in 
South Africa: growing resilience and institutionalisation of evidence use’, Palgrave 
Commun 5, 90. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0303-0
Stewart, R., Erasmus, Y . & the UJ-BCURE team, 2017a, Working for solutions: a 
problem-based and relationship centred approach to building capacity to use 
research evidence in Africa, Africa Centre for Evidence, Johannesburg, viewed 17 
February 2020, from https://africacentreforevidence.org/project-outputs-2/.
Stewart, R., Nduku, P . & Langer, L., 2017b, Capacity in Africa: The results of a survey on 
support for and production of evidence maps and evidence syntheses, including 
systematic reviews, Africa Centre for Evidence as secretariat to the Africa Evidence 
Network, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg. 
Tarsilla, M., 2014, ‘Evaluation capacity development in Africa: Current landscape of 
international partners’ initiatives, lessons learned and the way forward’, African 
Evaluation Journal 2(1), a89. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v2i1.89
Van den Berg, R.D., Naidoo, I. & Tamondong, S.D. (eds.), 2017, Evaluation for agenda 
2030: Providing evidence on progress and sustainability , International 
Development Evaluation Association, Exeter.
World Bank, 2009, Making smart policy: Using impact evaluation for policy-making. 
Case studies of evaluations that influenced policy, Doing Impact Evaluation No. 14, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Wotela, K., 2017, ‘A proposed monitoring and evaluation curriculum based on a model 
that institutionalises monitoring and evaluation’, African Evaluation Journal 5(1), 
a186. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.186