<<<PAGE=1>>>
BRIEF
Ten years of the Ethiopian 
Agricultural Transformation Agency
An FAO evaluation of the Agency’s impact on agricultural 
growth and poverty reduction
In February 2020, Ethiopia’s Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA) requested the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO) to undertake an evaluation of the Agency’s work, spanning almost ten years, on pursuing agricultural 
development and transformation in the country. 1 A taskforce was established to carry out the evaluation, 2 which sought to 
answer two interconnected questions:  
 } What is the impact of the ATA’s interventions on smallholder household productivity and commercialization? 
 } How have the ATA’s interventions affected agricultural growth and poverty reduction?
Providing answers to these questions would not only assess the impact of the ATA per se, but would also inform its future work 
for the next ten years. This would include proving strategic guidance and support to Ethiopia’s Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
on investments that work best for the agriculture sector and smallholders, and on ways to improve the monitoring and impact 
evaluation of the Agency’s future operation.
Key features and scope of the FAO evaluation
FAO’s assessment of the extent of the ATA’s achievements was guided by a “theory of change”. Over the last ten years, 
the Agency supported the MoA and other partners in the agriculture sector in designing and delivering multiple agricultural 
development interventions, and in developing studies that influenced the design and policy orientation of agricultural projects. 
The ATA’s support was characterized by a problem-solving approach, swift action, the inclusion of gender-sensitive approaches, 
and enhanced stakeholder coordination, covering an extensive amount of land and a large number of farmers through scaled-up 
investments. 
The evaluation considered the following causal chain: first, FAO assessed the level of enhanced efficiency in both service delivery 
and the introduction of innovation as a result of the ATA interventions. The expected results would be a more efficient and 
productive agriculture system, impacting several key priority areas – access and enhanced utilization of agricultural inputs, 
extension services, irrigation, mechanization, and facilitation of market access. Then, FAO assessed the results of these inputs 
in terms of intermediary outcomes, namely, impacts on increased agricultural productivity of smallholders due to an enhanced 
environment for agricultural production, commercialization, and investment promoted by the ATA. Finally, FAO assessed the 
final outcomes of the aforementioned changes, which would lead to an increase in the growth of agriculture and that of other 
economic sectors, ultimately enabling poverty reduction.  
1 The ATA was established in 2010 as an “Accelerator Unit” supporting the Ministry of Agriculture of Ethiopia, with a mission to catalyse 
the sustainable development of agricultural value chains and markets, through promoting effective practices and approaches to address 
systemic constraints and coordinating the execution and integration of high-impact interventions at the farm level. 
2 FAO’s Chief Economist appointed a taskforce within FAO’s Agrifood Economics Division (ESA) to carry out the evaluation.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
A two-stage analytical approach was undertaken 
based on the “theory of change”, comprising a micro-level 
analysis and an economy-wide analysis, which together 
helped build a counterfactual scenario in order to identify 
the ATA’s impact. This approach considered as outputs the 
two main actions of the ATA: 
 } studies undertaken to identify systemic constraints on 
agricultural development and recommend solutions 
to ensure sustainability and structural transformation;
 } projects – implementation of the solutions 
recommended through specific studies.
The ATA has undertaken many strategy and policy studies 
as part of its monitoring and evaluation system. The studies 
(circa 250) have focused on designing and assessing the 
impacts of both policies and projects, and on several 
outcomes related to the Transformation Agenda. A number 
have focused on the implementation of the Agricultural 
Commercialization Cluster (ACC), the ATA’s flagship 
programme. Other studies have focused on, for example, 
individual value chain strategies, mechanization, seeds 
and inputs, irrigation, fertilizers and agricultural strategy. 
In addition to the studies, the ATA has directly implemented 
47 agricultural projects. The Agency’s main projects include 
EthioSIS (digital soil mapping/information), a farmer 
hotline, an input voucher system, a cooperative-based seed 
production project, direct seed marketing, an integrated 
shallow groundwater irrigation development project, and 
mechanization service centers. FAO’s evaluation focuses 
on 15 flagship projects (including EthioSIS) and the 
ACC programme.  
THE FOCUS OF FAO’S EVALUATION
Priority 
systemic area Outputs (studies and projects) Cross-cutting 
initiative
1. Seeds Input Voucher System (IVS)
Agricultural One Stop Shop 
(AOSS)
Wheat Initiative
Direct Seed Marketing (DSM)
Cooperative Based Seed Production 
Project (CBSP)
Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
2. Fertilizer Input Voucher System (IVS)
Agricultural One Stop Shop 
(AOSS)
Wheat Initiative
EthioSIS Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
3. Agrochemicals Input Voucher System (IVS)
Agricultural One Stop Shop 
(AOSS)
Wheat Initiative
EthioSIS Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
TWO-STAGE ANALYTICAL APPROACH
The first stage of the analytical approach was a 
micro-level analysis or evaluation, which aimed to answer 
the first of the aforementioned questions. Underpinning 
this stage was a quantitative quasi-experimental 
evaluation that assessed priority area outcomes in ATA 
treatment areas against a counterfactual population 
that was never exposed to the ATA’s work. The micro-
level analysis quantified the likelihood of accessing 
agricultural inputs and technologies, and the associated 
changes in agricultural yields and commercialization for 
ten priority crops. This stage provided impact estimates 
at agricultural household level across priority crops and 
agricultural systems.
The second stage of the analytical approach 
brought the results from the micro-level analysis to an 
economy-wide modelling framework to measure the 
ATA’s impact on the economy overall and its multisectoral 
functioning. The economy-wide modelling framework 
was used to develop scenarios for the 2012–19 period 
with and without the operation of the ATA. The scenario 
with the operation of ATA included the observed shifts 
in smallholders’ behaviour and output from the micro-
level analysis, combined with operations information 
regarding ATA’s projects’ coverage ratios and spending. 
The output of this second stage (that is, the comparison 
of scenarios with and without the operation of the ATA) 
resulted in an estimation of ATA’s overall impact on the 
Ethiopian economy as a whole, and its role in reducing 
poverty nationally but also in urban and rural areas.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Priority 
systemic area Outputs (studies and projects) Cross-cutting 
initiative
4. Extension/
advisory services
Agro-met
Re-engaging Senior Agricultural 
Researchers Project (RESARP)
Cooperative storage pilot (CSP)
Farmer Training Centers (FTC)
Teff improvement project (TIP)
EthioSIS
Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
5. Irrigation Integrated Shallow 
Groundwater Irrigation 
Development (ISGWID)
Sustainable Household Irrigation 
Value Chain Development (SHII-VCD)
Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
6. Mechanization Mechanization service centers (MSC) enhancement Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
7. Markets Farmer production clusters/
Acceleration full package  
(FPC-AFP)
Wheat Initiative
Commercial Farm Service Centers 
(CFSC)
Agricultural 
Commercialization 
Clusters (ACC)
Source:  FAO.  
Data availability enabled the evaluation to identify impacts for the ATA’s overall interventions, according to the systemic priority 
areas (seeds, fertilizers, agrochemicals, irrigation, mechanization, markets and extension and advisory services) and priority crops 
(wheat, maize, teff, barley, sesame and horticulture). The impacts of the ATA’s studies, implementation support and linkages and 
coordination activities – which are beyond the scope of the selected projects – were not included in the quantitative analysis for 
this evaluation.
Impact of the ATA on agricultural household production strategies
ROLE OF THE ATA IN SMALLHOLDERS’ ACCESS TO AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGIES AND 
PRODUCTIVITY
At the core of FAO’s overall evaluation of the ATA lies the micro-level analysis. This part of the evaluation took advantage of 
the extensive information on agricultural activities provided by the nationally representative Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey 
(ESS), and paired it with project and initiative implementation data from the ATA. This allowed the total impact of the Agency’s 
interventions from 2012–19 to be estimated. Using the available data, the micro-level analysis helped assess the ATA’s impact 
on the likelihood of using modern agricultural inputs (improved seeds, agrochemicals, chemical fertilizer), resources (extension 
services) and technologies (mechanization, irrigation) as well as on yields and commercialization of ten priority crops.
The evaluation found that the ATA had achieved many of the outcomes it was being measured against, in terms of input use, 
extension services, and agricultural technology. The outcomes observed point to the effective removal of bottlenecks 
in the rural agricultural economy that have improved the linkages between producers, input markets and agricultural services. 
The improvements in those priority areas are reflected in productivity gains for certain priority crops and in market orientation 
positions that confirm the ATA’s effectiveness in connecting producers to markets. The impacts documented by this evaluation are 
heterogeneous, a reflection of the unique context surrounding each crop’s production environment. 
The use of both organic and chemical fertilizers expanded as a result of the ATA. The likelihood of organic fertilizer use by 
households producing priority crops rose by 18 percentage points, whereas for chemical fertilizers it rose by 23 percentage points. 
The EthioSIS initiative has been the central input to produce new, geo-referenced, crop-specific fertilizer recommendations 
for producers across the country. Agricultural households’ use of nitrogen phosphate sulphur (NPS) fertilizer for priority crop 
production was over five times more likely due to the ATA intervention, and over ten times more likely due to ATA fertilizer and 
extension projects, when compared with not using any chemical fertilizers. These treatment effects are 1.5 to 3 times greater 
than for the use of only diammonium phosphate (DAP) and/or urea fertilizers, suggesting that ATA projects were a transmission 
mechanism for the EthioSIS-informed fertilizer recommendations. 
TWO-STAGE ANALYTICAL APPROACH
The first stage of the analytical approach was a 
micro-level analysis or evaluation, which aimed to answer 
the first of the aforementioned questions. Underpinning 
this stage was a quantitative quasi-experimental 
evaluation that assessed priority area outcomes in ATA 
treatment areas against a counterfactual population 
that was never exposed to the ATA’s work. The micro-
level analysis quantified the likelihood of accessing 
agricultural inputs and technologies, and the associated 
changes in agricultural yields and commercialization for 
ten priority crops. This stage provided impact estimates 
at agricultural household level across priority crops and 
agricultural systems.
The second stage of the analytical approach 
brought the results from the micro-level analysis to an 
economy-wide modelling framework to measure the 
ATA’s impact on the economy overall and its multisectoral 
functioning. The economy-wide modelling framework 
was used to develop scenarios for the 2012–19 period 
with and without the operation of the ATA. The scenario 
with the operation of ATA included the observed shifts 
in smallholders’ behaviour and output from the micro-
level analysis, combined with operations information 
regarding ATA’s projects’ coverage ratios and spending. 
The output of this second stage (that is, the comparison 
of scenarios with and without the operation of the ATA) 
resulted in an estimation of ATA’s overall impact on the 
Ethiopian economy as a whole, and its role in reducing 
poverty nationally but also in urban and rural areas.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
ATA AND ACC IMPACTS ON ACCESS TO AGRICULTURAL INPUTSIMPACT ON INPUT USE 
(percentage points)
IMPROVED SEED USE: ACC IMPACT AGROCHEMICALS USE: ATA IMPACT FERTILIZER USE: ATA IMPACT
OrganicOverall
priority crops
Overall
priority crops
Teff
(ACC)
Teff Wheat Chemical 
25
15
20
10
5
0
Source: FAO.
The effects on agrochemical and improved seed use emerged as less striking than those for fertilizers; however, the market 
environment for such inputs is different from that for fertilizers whose supply is sourced from government imports and is 
increasingly expected to be domestically produced in blending factories located in each of the four priority regions. The ATA was 
found to increase the likelihood of agrochemicals use by slightly more than 10 percentage points, which could be a reflection of 
rising demand for herbicides in lieu of crop rotation as smallholders tend to rely on less-diverse production portfolios. 
For improved seeds, significant impacts emerged only for the ACC initiative, which was found to increase the likelihood of 
their use by 15 percentage points among households producing priority crops, due to a greater share of households using them 
for teff and wheat production. The growth in demand for improved seeds, as for agrochemicals, is linked to projects such as 
Cooperative-Based Seed Production, Direct Seed Marketing and Agricultural One Stop Shops, which have sought to improve 
production and the distribution of improved seeds. The Input Voucher System project, which most recently has initiated linkages 
to improved seeds in Tigray and Oromia, is also seeking to alleviate the liquidity constraints that limit their use. The results point 
to the potential to expand the share of agricultural households accessing these seeds, in the context of greater innovation and 
dissemination of improved seed varieties across a broad range of crops. The analysis linking systemic priority areas and crop 
productivity provided evidence of the linkages between shifts in input use and production practices that shifted productivity. 
Shifts in the fertilizer portfolio, linked to the EthioSIS initiative, improved yields for priority crops overall, and specifically for 
maize,3 teff and wheat. Since EthioSIS fertilizer recommendations have been mobilized through information dissemination via 
extension and advisory services, the results point to the importance for yields of filling knowledge gaps and supporting  
on-farm decision making.
Exposure to projects addressing improved seeds, fertilizer and agrochemicals was found to improve yields for wheat. For this crop, 
yields were found to approximately double on average, improving returns by 1 593 kg/ha. The treatment effects for wheat could 
be anticipated, as the crop was the subject of two crosscutting interventions: The Wheat Initiative and the ACC wheat clusters.
ATA AND ACC IMPACT ON PRODUCTIVITY
WHEAT SESAME TEFF MAIZE
ATA
overall impact
ATA
overall impact
ATA project
impacts: inputs
ATA project
impacts: markets
ACC 
cluster impacts
ATA project
impacts: fertilizer
1 600
1 200
800
400
0
IMPACT ON PRODUCTIVITY
(kg/ha)
Source: FAO.
3 Maize is single priority crop for which sufficient observations enabled to identify the impact of fertilizer use intensity across treatment status.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
ACC teff clusters were linked to higher yields for teff, due to the greater likelihood of improved seed and agrochemical use in this 
crop’s production, which emerged from the ACC clusters. For the subset of teff-producing households in ACC teff cluster areas, 
exposure to the cluster-specific interventions was found to contribute to 35 percent greater yields - or approximately 69 kg/ha. 
However, the ATA's impacts were not equal across the stock of teff-producing households in treatment areas. Instead, larger-
scale producers with stronger market linkages and/or greater production diversity were found to be more likely to gain from the 
interventions. For example, among the subsample of households exposed to market priority area projects teff yields increased by 
38 percent - a gain that instead represents 1 124 kg/ha - suggesting the importance of market access to optimize returns from 
the ATA's support.
From a commercialization standpoint, the ATA’s work to remove bottlenecks that limit market access proved effective as treatment 
area households became more engaged with markets. The share of harvested output sold on the market grew significantly for teff 
and to a lesser extent for barley and wheat as a result of the ATA’s overall interventions. Narrowing in on market-specific projects 
revealed that commercialized shares also grew for fruit-tree crop producers. The degree to which commercialization impacts 
emerged from the ATA’s work is asserted to be linked to the extent to which value chains for each crop are developed. For certain 
crops, the ATA strengthened market orientation, with greater shares of output sold on the market, even if the Agency did not 
impact production or yields for those crops. This outcome indicates that the ATA’s support in removing market bottlenecks helped 
producers face a more favourable environment for engaging in value chains for marketable priority crops. 
ROLE OF THE ATA IN REDUCING GENDER INEQUALITIES IN AGRICULTURE
The operational work of the ATA is designed to be gender-sensitive in its implementation and its results. The Agency indicates 
that most projects seek to meet national targets of at least 30 percent participation of female beneficiaries, pursued through the 
explicit targeting of certain interventions towards women. Indeed, agricultural households headed by women in Ethiopia produce 
significantly smaller quantities of land than those headed by men, with fewer units of working-age adult labour and fewer units 
of livestock. 
FAO’s micro-level evaluation found that female-headed households disproportionately gained from priority area interventions 
related to fertilizer and extension, but not from the rest of the priority areas. The disproportionate gains to female-headed 
households from fertilizer and extension interventions are indicative of the ATA’s successful targeting within its gender 
prioritization strategy, and of the underlying demand among female-headed households for improved access to these resources. 
However, higher effects for improved seeds and agrochemicals use did not emerge for female-headed households, or were 
not significantly different across male and female headship. For these indicators, male-headed households were equally or 
significantly more likely to benefit from the ATA interventions. Furthermore, yield effects were not found to differ along gender 
lines, which reflects in part the lower likelihood of female-headed households to cultivate certain priority crops, particularly teff, 
but also wheat. These differences could reflect the commercialization potential of the respective crops. 
ACC IMPACT ON ACCESS TO INPUTS, BY HOUSEHOLD HEAD GENDER
IMPROVED SEEDS
IMPACT ON INPUT USE 
(percentage points)
AGROCHEMICALS CHEMICAL FERTILIZER EXTENSION
Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male
70
60
10
20
30
40
50
0
Note: Dashed bar denotes impact was not significant at 95 percent confidence level.
Source: FAO.
The issue of crop choice and production strategies is defined by a myriad of factors not limited to agroecological conditions, 
access to seeds, labour availability and concomitant livelihoods activities. Nevertheless, the differences across gender raise the 
question of how smallholder producers define their crop portfolios, and which mechanisms can be employed to expand or diversify 
production portfolios in order to promote an inclusive production landscape in the context of a gender prioritization strategy.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Contribution of the ATA to economic growth and poverty reduction 
The productivity gains that the ATA has helped generate have been enabled through the stepping up of spending for 
interventions in priority areas and crops. 4 Based on information provided by the ATA, most of the Agency’s spending on the 
selected projects considered in FAO’s evaluation took place during the period 2017–19. Overall, the total 2012–19 spending 
considered in the economy-wide analysis of ATA impacts was USD 138.9 million, with 13.4 percent (USD 18.6 million) spent on 
support functions and overheads.5 But the analysis takes into account the fact that the ATA’s spending began to increase very 
gradually in 2012 and was notably scaled up only from 2017; hence, the economy-wide evaluation – for which this spending is 
an important aspect – focused on the growth of key macro aggregates for the 2013–19 period.
ATA EXPENDITURES – TOTAL FOR ALL PROJECTS WITH DATA ON COST
SELECTED PROJECTS OTHER SPENDINGS SUPPORT
201920182012 2015 20162013 2014 2017
20
12
16
8
4
0
Million USD
Source: FAO.
The main upshot of the economy-wide evaluation is that the ATA’s operations have brought about economic and social payoffs 
beyond what the Agency’s interventions had actually targeted. Understanding the extent to which the ATA has contributed to 
the economy at large and to reducing poverty at the national level is particularly important if one considers that Ethiopia’s gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth has been steadily losing steam since 2013. The positive economy-wide impact of the ATA’s 
operations has contributed to reducing the slowdown in GDP growth.
ROLE OF THE ATA IN ETHIOPIA’S ECONOMIC GROWTH 
In every year during the period 2013–19, the level of GDP was on average 0.30 percent (or USD 243 million) higher due to the 
productivity effect triggered by the spending associated with the ATA interventions in the priority areas and crops covered by the 
FAO evaluation. These gains were much higher towards the end of the period, when spending was stepped up most significantly, 
which brought about more impactful productivity gains. Thus, the level of GDP in 2019 was 0.75 percent (or USD 666 million) 
higher as a result of the ATA’s interventions. As a whole, the ATA contributed USD 1.7 billion to GDP during the 2013–19 period. 
Also, the ATA interventions increased private consumption by a total of USD 1.3 billion during the same period.
Faster growth in priority crops as a result of the ATA interventions stimulated additional growth in the non-agricultural 
sectors. The demand for priority crops has risen as their prices have fallen given the increase in their supply, not only that of 
the final consumer, but also that of other actors downstream along food supply chains who are using more of those crops as 
intermediate inputs for food processing. As household income also increased, not only could they consume less costly priority 
crops, but also more non-agricultural products. Consequently, the GDP for the overall food-processing sector rose gradually 
– in 2019, for example, it was 1.3 percent higher as a result of the ATA interventions. Increased production of priority crops 
was also found to generate additional demand for chemicals and transport services, which further stimulated growth in other 
manufacturing and service sectors.
4 All the ATA interventions in the economy-wide analysis include crop-specific ACC clusters; seeds, fertilizers and agrochemicals priority 
areas; markets priority area; extension priority area; and fertilizer priority area.
5 This figure does not include USD 20.1 million of funding provided by donors to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and 
the World Food Programme (WFP) during this study period to hire international staff consultants and provide corporate-level support to the 
ATA. Due to the nature of these expenditures, which do not represent support functions and overheads on the ground with direct effects 
on productivity, they are not a part of the economy-wide assessment.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
WHAT ATA'S OPERATIONS HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO ETHIOPIA'S ECONOMY
Ten times more than the USD 138.9 million investment
TO GDP TO AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT TO PRIVATE CONSUMPTION
TotalAnnual average20192013 2016 20172014 2015 2018
1 250
1 500
1 750
750
1 000
500
250
0
Million USD
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Annual 
average
Of GDP 0.03% 0.03% 0.06% 0.08% 0.39% 0.74% 0.75% 0.30%
Of agricultural output 0.01% 0.01% 0.05% 0.06% 0.67% 1.42% 1.48% 0.53%
Of private consumption 0.03% 0.04% 0.07% 0.08% 0.38% 0.72% 0.75% 0.30%
Source: FAO.
Private consumption and investment were critical drivers of such GDP growth gains, particularly during the period with the 
highest ATA spending (2017–19). But other macroeconomic aggregates also seem to have evolved better as a result of the ATA, 
particularly in the area of trade. For example, the ATA interventions mostly increased the exports of food products and imports 
of non-food products, with the Agency making a significant contribution to enlarging the creation of value added along value 
chains. In turn, the findings show a relatively large decrease in the imports of food products – even if wheat imports could not 
have declined to fully accommodate boosted domestic supply of wheat due to, for example, the existence of a quota. For instance, 
imports of processed foods, on average, decreased by as much as 1.4 percent. 
ROLE OF THE ATA IN ETHIOPIA’S EMPLOYMENT CREATION AND POVERTY REDUCTION
“Moving up” the real economy in such ways would have not been possible without increasing the use of factors of production 
in general, and labour in particular. The labour market is, and will continue to be, increasingly important for Ethiopia, given the 
size of its growing population and a context of increasing land scarcity and fragmentation. Expanding employment opportunities, 
particularly outside farming, is a key area for the Government, as reflected in the second Growth Transformation Plan (GTP-II). 
More specifically, due to the aforementioned favourable economic effects on non-agricultural sectors, the operation of the ATA 
contributed to creating a total of 11 000 jobs in the 2013–19 period.
BY 2019, ATA'S OPERATIONS HAD CONTRIBUTED TO CREATING THOUSANDS OF JOBS 
AND LIFTING THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE OUT OF POVERTY
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Jobs 1 2 3 3 7 5 11
Rural poverty 16 21 29 34 118 199 210
Urban poverty 4 5 8 9 43 73 76
Total poverty 20 25 37 44 162 273 286
Note:  This is the average cost of moving people out of poverty across all years. The total cost from 2013 to 2019 will be USD 485*286 000 people 
moved out of poverty, i.e. USD 138.9 million.
Source: FAO.
USD 485 per person 
per year*
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Some rights reserved. This work is available 
under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence
© FAO, 2020
CB2434EN/1/12.20, Last updated 14/12/20
Agrifood Economics – Economic and Social Development 
ESA-Director@fao.org  |  www.fao.org/economic/esa
Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations 
Rome, Italy
The full FAO report Ten years 
of the Ethiopian Agricultural 
Transformation Agency: An
 F
AO 
evaluation of the Agency’s impact 
on agricultural growth and 
poverty reduction is available at  
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb2422en
Ten	years	of	the	Ethiopian	
Agricultural	Transformation	Agency		
An	FAO	evaluation	of	the	Agency’s	impact	
on	agricultural	growth	and	poverty	reduction	
Productivity gains from the ATA interventions resulted in wage growth in agriculture (therefore, higher household income) 
and in a reduction in food prices that, combined with the employment creation, resulted in a considerable effect on poverty 
reduction. The number of rural and urban poor individuals shrank by about 210 000 and 76 000, respectively, by the end of the 
evaluation
 
period. 
 
ATA’S COST EFFECTIVENESS 
In the face of such results, the investments by the ATA are found to have been largely cost effective. With a modest total 
effective project spending of USD 138.9 million since 2012, the ATA boosted GDP and private consumption by USD 1 700 and 
USD
 1
 308
 million over the period 2013–19,
 respectively – compared with a counterfactual situation in the absence of ATA 
interventions. The ATA’s impact on the national economy over the period 2013–19 is thus ten times higher than its cost. This
 is 
indicative 
of the cost-effectiveness of ATA projects in their own right, but also through the economy-wide effects they have 
triggered. The cost of the ATA interventions in terms of poverty reduction, over the seven-year period, is USD 485 per person per 
year, with a cumulative number of individuals exiting poverty by 2019 of about 286 000.
6
Recommendations 
Through a rigorous, multi-stage analysis, FAO’s evaluation has demonstrated the effectiveness of the ATA’s business plan 
for achieving measurable changes in Ethiopia’s agriculture sector, at both micro and economy-wide levels. The assessment also 
identified areas for renewed and refined emphasis, as well as strategies for the future planning and monitoring of the ATA’s work. 
In particular, value addition could be maximized through the fine-tuning of interventions to expand inclusiveness, not only in 
terms of gender, but also in terms of producers who are at the margin for taking advantage of the ATA’s interventions. Tailoring 
strategies to the different needs of producers in recognition of their constraints and risk aversion would have potential for further 
maximizing the take up of modern agricultural production practices. 
Drawing linkages to other policies outside the agriculture sector has the potential to further enhance the ATA’s poverty reduction 
footprint, especially as most small-scale producers in Ethiopia are more likely to exit poverty through the labour market of other 
sectors that gain from improvements in agricultural productivity, which the evaluation demonstrated are not insignificant. Future 
priorities could thus enhance supporting the adoption of agroterritorial approaches in rural development planning and infrastructure 
investments, and designing interventions that consider the agriculture sector as one component of a broader agrifood sector.
Finally, the gains from any strategy refinement could also be adequately monitored and assessed through the scaling up of data 
collection practices in such way that is representative of the ATA’s interventions and builds a counterfactual scenario, and record 
keeping for existing and pipeline interventions, which would enhance the ATA’s monitoring and evaluation systems and enable 
assessments of even greater rigour to be undertaken. FAO’s evaluation of the ATA would have been even more comprehensive 
if adequate data to assess the ATA’s impacts at both farm/household level and economy-wide level had been available. Bridging 
such data gaps should be a major priority for the ATA moving forward if a better structured and more precise and robust 
evaluation is envisioned in five to ten years' time.
Similarly, future efforts by the ATA need to identify and document the key processes and institutional changes that are required 
for interventions to work, particularly for scaling up successful interventions promoted by the Agency. Evidence and information 
relating to initiatives and processes that did not work well should also be properly documented so that lessons learned can be 
derived from the Agency’s operation. Doing so will facilitate not only evidence generation, but also the effectiveness of scaling up 
interventions to transform Ethiopia’s agrifood system.
6 Therefore, multiplying 286 000 by USD 485 results in the total effective project spending of USD 138.9 million since 2012.