<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 11 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Tebogo Fish1 
Ayabulela Dlakavu1,2 
Matodzi Amisi1 
Steven Masvaure1 
Affiliations:
1Centre for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results – 
Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA), 
Faculty of Commerce, Law and 
Management, University of 
the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
2Department of Politics and 
International Relations, 
Faculty of Humanities, 
University of Johannesburg, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Ayabulela Dlakavu,
ayabulela.dlakavu@wits.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 26 Jan. 2022
Accepted: 30 May 2022
Published: 12 July 2022
How to cite this article:
Fish, T., Dlakavu, A., Amisi, 
M. & Masvaure, S., 2022, 
‘Transforming voluntary 
organisations for professional 
evaluation into central pillars 
of national evaluation 
systems’, African Evaluation 
Journal 10(1), a608. https://
doi.org/10.4102/aej.v10i1.608 
Copyright:
© 2022. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
Since the Paris Declaration (PD) on Aid Effectiveness in 2005 and the Accra Agenda for Action 
(AAA) of 2008, there has been a shift in National Evaluation Capacity Development (NECD) 
towards building country-led and owned evaluation systems (Lomeña-Gelis 2013). In the PD, 
over 100 countries and international agencies had pledged to improve the effectiveness of 
development aid, in order to ensure better development outcomes. Country ownership, donor 
alignment with national development priorities, donor programme harmonisation, results-
focused development planning and management, and mutual accountability were the five core 
principles of the PD (KPMG 2011). To operationalise the PD, government ministers of development 
planning and the heads of bilateral and multilateral development institutions adopted the AAA 
in September 2008 in Accra, Ghana. Through the AAA, represented governments and development 
agencies agreed to promote country ownership of development endeavours, building partnerships 
for development among governments, donors, the private sector and civil society and attaining 
intended development results that improve people’s lives (African Development Bank 2008).
Since the endorsement of the above-mentioned declarations, some countries in Africa have made 
strides in developing National Evaluation Systems (NESs) through institutionalising evaluation 
within government (Goldman et al. 2018). The development of NESs is based on the premise that if 
African countries can monitor and evaluate their development programmes, they will be in a position 
to use evidence in development decision-making and achieve better development outcomes.
The development of NESs has been an agenda item for several international development 
organisations, specifically those that are responsible for funding development interventions. 
Several approaches have been used to develop NESs, and some of these approaches include 
strengthening individual monitoring and evaluation (M&E) skills and knowledge and  
Background: Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation (VOPEs) have proliferated 
across the African continent, seeking to contribute to building effective national evaluation 
systems (NESs) that enhance development planning, implementation and appraisal. 
Objectives: A study commissioned by the Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results  - 
Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) and the African Evaluation Association (AfrEA) in 2021 
highlights key strengths and challenges faced by African VOPEs in their quest to help 
strengthen NESs across the continent.
Method: The study was qualitative by design, employing document analysis, key informant 
interviews and focus group discussions with selected VOPEs across Africa.  
Results: While African VOPEs have proliferated in number, they take different forms, and 
their focus tends to be shaped by their respective national contexts. A key challenge for African 
VOPEs is internal human and financial capacities, while the external environment within 
which these national evaluation associations operate also presents risks such as co-optation 
and opportunities such as networking and resources. 
Conclusion: This article argues for the need for African VOPEs to improve their internal 
financial and human capacity, thereby enabling these professional associations to endeavour 
to contribute to strengthening the supply and demand sides of NESs, as well as refining their 
advocacy to reflect Africa-centred evaluation approaches and criteria.
Keywords: VOPEs; Africa; capacity building; evaluation systems; capacity development.
Transforming voluntary organisations for 
professional evaluation into central pillars 
of national evaluation systems
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
strengthening institutional M&E architecture by developing 
M&E policies, strategies and frameworks (Fraser & Morkel 
2020). Within these various approaches, there is also a 
realisation that professional organisations like voluntary 
organisations for professional evaluation (VOPEs) can play a 
significant role in NESs in Africa (Kosheleva & Segone 2013). 
This realisation led to the formation and further development 
of VOPEs with the key objective of making them a key 
partner in the development of NESs. Voluntary organisations 
for professional evaluation are regarded as pillars of NESs, as 
their primary objective is to professionalise evaluation 
practice and ensure an adequate supply of evaluators with 
the requisite skills and capacity to evaluate national 
development plans, policies, programmes and projects 
(Beney et al. 2015; Ngwabi, Mpyana & Mapatwana 2020). The 
need to strengthen VOPEs led the International Organisation 
for Cooperation in Evaluation (IOCE) and United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to set up the EvalPartners 
Initiative in 2012 to support national VOPEs through peer-to-
peer support and a toolkit that VOPEs can draw on to build 
their institutional capacity (Carter 2013). Voluntary 
organisations for professional evaluation in Africa have also 
mushroomed and joined the global campaign for 
institutionalising evaluation within processes of governance 
and development practice (Ngwabi et al. 2020).
This article examines the role that VOPEs in Africa are 
playing to support NESs, including contributing to the 
institutionalisation of evaluations within the public sector in 
Africa. The latter is routinely done through evaluation 
guidelines and related evaluation frameworks. The article 
further explores the form, functions and current state of 
VOPEs in Africa. It also examines what VOPEs have achieved 
so far and the challenges they face vis-à-vis supporting NESs. 
This article emanates from a discussion paper commissioned 
by the Centre of Learning on Evaluation and Results – 
Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) and the Africa Evaluation 
Association (AfrEA) in 2021. The discussion paper documented 
the experiences of a select number of VOPEs in Africa.
Context, background and concepts
A VOPE is defined as an association of evaluation 
professionals whose mission is to serve as a forum that 
discusses and shares professional experiences and challenges 
of the evaluation profession (Ojha 2013). Through these 
deliberations, a VOPE seeks to advance the profession and 
develop professional evaluation standards (Kosheleva & 
Segone 2013:8). Similar to other professional associations, 
VOPEs are, therefore, self-organised communities of practice 
whose membership is open to both evaluation practitioners 
(evaluators) and commissioners of evaluation (Ojha 2013). 
The core objective of VOPEs is to develop evaluation as a 
distinct profession that induces favourable development 
outcomes. Voluntary organisations for professional 
evaluation use modes such as conferences, workshops, 
seminars and publications as platforms through which they 
share evaluation best practices and knowledge. The European 
Commission recognises VOPEs as central pillars of NECD 
interventions. The European Commission, through its 
EVALSED Evaluation Capacity Development Indicators, 
identifies VOPEs as communities of practice that should be 
established to engage in open and systematic dialogue with 
policymakers (European Union 2008:30).
The origins of national VOPEs can be traced back to the last 
quarter of the 20th century when the Evaluation Research 
Society (founded in the United States of America in 1978) and 
the Canadian Evaluation Society (established in 1981) came 
into existence. These two VOPEs are widely recognised as the 
first two national VOPEs (Kosheleva & Segone 2013:9). In 
2003, the IOCE was established as a global umbrella 
association of regional and national VOPEs. The mandates of 
the IOCE include contributing to the building of evaluation 
capacity and leadership (particularly in the Global South), 
bridging the relationship between evaluation theory and 
practice, addressing challenges facing evaluation theory and 
practice and assisting the evaluation profession in being 
responsive to global challenges (Ojha 2013:1). The database 
of the IOCE recognises 154 national VOPEs globally 
(International Organization for Cooperation in Evaluation 
2022). This is evidence of the proliferation of VOPEs in the 
21st century, compared with 15 VOPEs worldwide in the 
1990s (eds. Rugh & Segone 2013). This mushrooming of 
VOPEs in the new millennium is also indicative of the impact 
of the IOCE in identifying and nurturing VOPEs worldwide 
through its network.
Despite the proliferation of VOPEs worldwide, the IOCE 
Directory lists only three African VOPEs: the Africa Gender 
and Development Evaluators Network (AGDEN), the African 
Evaluation Association (AfrEA) and the South African 
Monitoring and Evaluation Association (SAMEA) (IOCE 2022). 
Given the IOCE’s extensive network of regional and national 
VOPEs, it would be strategic for African VOPEs to integrate 
into such an extensive network of evaluation associations.
Conceptualising national evaluation systems 
and their core features
An NES is defined as the collection of M&E frameworks that 
guide the commissioning and undertaking of M&E and the 
individual and institutional M&E capacity to use M&E 
information to inform development planning, policymaking 
and decision-making (Chirau et al. 2020:2). It is, therefore, 
discernible that an NES exists when M&E, and use of 
evidence therefrom, has become institutionalised in an 
organisation or institution such as government. The United 
Nations (2012:7) affirmed the above definition by asserting 
that an NES ought to develop an equilibrium between the 
supply of M&E information (i.e. undertaking programme 
monitoring and evaluations) and the demand for M&E 
information by policymakers and other development 
decision-makers. Goldman (2018:2) identified six constitutive 
elements of a functional public sector NES:
1. the existence of an M&E policy that conceptualises 
monitoring and evaluation and assigns M&E roles to 
various public sector institutions
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
2. methodology whereby development indicators are 
identified, criteria for selecting government interventions 
(development programmes) to be evaluated and the 
identification of data collection methodologies to be used 
for performance monitoring and evaluations
3. defining the M&E roles of the various public sector 
institutions (government ministries, departments, 
agencies and offices)
4. individual and institutional M&E capacity in the public 
sector, including capacity building plans
5. integration of nongovernment institutions in the 
government-wide NES, including parliament, 
nongovernmental organisations and development 
partners (donors)
6. quality of M&E products (reports) and their utility in 
decision-making, policymaking and budgeting.
This conceptualisation of VOPEs and NESs is important 
given the article’s primary focus on VOPEs and their efforts 
to strengthen NESs. The conceptualisation of an NES and its 
constituent elements is also important as it provides a 
conceptual framework against which to analyse VOPE 
evaluation capacity development efforts, as well as provides 
strategic recommendations about how African VOPEs can 
contribute to the building and/or strengthening of various 
elements of NESs across Africa.
Methodology
This article used a qualitative phenomenological study 
design. The initial phase of the study was a desktop review 
of the literature on VOPEs across Africa. The goal was to 
build a sufficient data set to look for emerging themes on 
VOPEs and to use the data set and the developed themes for 
further validation with key informant interviews and 
facilitated focus groups. The extensive literature review on 
VOPEs covered how evaluation associations have evolved 
over the years, the form they take and the challenges they 
face. In addition, a detailed analysis of the work of nine 
VOPEs in Africa was also performed. This included an 
analysis of information on their websites such as 
membership, activities, annual plans and constitutions, 
among others. The analysis was conducted on VOPEs in 
Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, Cameroon, Namibia, 
Zimbabwe, Zambia and Ghana. Information about 
Namibia’s VOPE was sourced primarily through interviews 
because this particular evaluation association is in its 
formative stages. The VOPEs were purposefully selected 
and represent anglophone African VOPEs and two 
francophone African VOPEs.
Validation of the findings workshop (facilitated focus group) 
was held with 27 participants from different countries and 
organisations in November 2020. Fifteen of the participants 
represented VOPEs; this included representatives from the 
continental VOPE umbrella body, the AfrEA. Ten of the 
validation workshop participants were partner organisations, 
including the UNICEF regional and country offices, CLEAR-
AA, CLEAR-FA, IOCE and the African Development Bank, 
while a further two participants were from government 
ministries and departments. The workshop was useful both 
for testing out the emerging findings and to close some of the 
gaps in the findings. After the virtual workshop, three follow-
up interviews were held with three VOPEs as a follow-up on 
some of the information they had provided during the 
workshop. These interviews gave more insights into the 
functions of the individual VOPEs. Although three VOPEs 
are not representative of all VOPEs in Africa, the intention 
was not to be representative but to identify some of the 
innovative evaluative work that is happening and specific 
challenges that these VOPES might face because of their 
context. Moreover, the follow-up interviews with the three 
VOPEs served the purpose of triangulating the information 
already collected. The VOPEs and other institutions that 
informed the study on which this article’s content is based are 
reflected in Table 1.
Limitations
The methods used in this study have their limitations. Most 
VOPEs do not update their websites, and some of the 
information was dated. This shortcoming has a material 
impact on the analysis; however, follow-ups were done with 
three VOPEs individually to get the latest information and 
updates. The three VOPEs were the Zimbabwe Evaluation 
Association (ZEA), the Namibia Evaluation Association 
(NEA) and the Senegal Evaluation Association (SenEval). In 
addition, data that were collected during the project have 
been triangulated with existing literature on VOPEs and 
follow-up interviews with the aforesaid three VOPEs, and 
there was a great deal of alignment between the different 
sources. This provides a level of reliability and validity to 
the data used in this study, despite its limitations. The 
findings presented are, therefore, valid and can be a basis for 
a conversation about ways to strengthen VOPE work in 
Africa.
TABLE 1:  Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation and other 
institutions contributing to the Centre of Learning on Evaluation and Results – 
Anglophone Africa and African Evaluation Association discussion paper 
validation workshop (2021).
Number Organisation
1 Zimbabwe Evaluation Association (ZEA)
2 Namibia Evaluation Society
3 Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association (ZaMEA)
4 Tanzania Evaluation Association (TaNEA)
5 Uganda Evaluation Association (UEA)
6 Senegalese Evaluation Association (SenEval)
7 Cameroon Development Evaluation Association (CaDEA )
8 Evaluation Society of Kenya (ESK)
9 United Nations Children’s Fund, Eastern and Southern Africa Regional 
Office (UNICEF ESARO)
10 ZimEval
11 African Evaluation Association (AfrEA)
12 UNICEF West Africa Regional Office
13 Twende Mbele
14 World Food Programme (WFP)
15 African Development Bank (AfDB)
Source: Adapted from CLEAR-AA & AfrEA, 2021, Professional associations in the M&E sector: 
Discussion paper, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Ethical considerations
Ethical clearance to conduct this study was obtained from 
the University of the Witwatersrand Human Research Ethics 
Committee (Non-Medical) (reference number: H20/05/21).
Findings
Voluntary organisations for professional 
evaluation in Africa: Normative design versus 
actual experiences
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation in 
Africa take different organisational forms that are shaped 
by context, access to resources, organisational capacity and 
the nature of leadership. In addition, VOPEs are referred to 
by different names. Some incorporate themselves as 
evaluation societies, such as the Evaluation Society of Kenya 
(ESK), or forums, as in the case of the Ghana Monitoring 
and Evaluation Forum (GMEF). Other VOPEs use the 
concept of associations, such as the ZEA. Some VOPEs 
focus exclusively on evaluations, as is the case of SenEval, 
ZEA, NEA and ESK. This is interesting because the VOPEs 
referred to in this paragraph are situated in countries where 
there has not been significant progress on expanding the 
evaluation of public policies and programmes because the 
governments generally do not have a standing budget for 
the evaluation of programmes (CLEAR-AA 2019). Other 
VOPEs incorporate both monitoring and evaluation practice 
within their name, as is the case of the Zambia Monitoring 
and Evaluation Association (ZaMEA) and the GMEF.
Even where a VOPE’s name suggests the exclusion of 
monitoring, this is often just in the name and not in practice. 
For example, the ESK’s mission includes promoting 
professionalisation, capacity building, advocacy, utilisation 
and sound governance of monitoring, evaluation and 
research practice (CLEAR-AA & AfrEA 2021). In Tanzania, 
although the Tanzania Evaluation Association (TanEA)’s 
mission (articulated in its website and constitution) has been 
articulated as promoting and strengthening evaluation 
practices in the country through capacity building, advocacy, 
professional development and networking, in practice the 
VOPE has incorporated monitoring professionals and 
provides capacity-building activities targeting these 
monitoring professionals (CLEAR-AA & TanEA 2020).
Given their advanced years of existence, some VOPEs in the 
Global North play an integral role in sustaining NESs. For 
instance, the Canadian Evaluation Society (CES) runs a 
Professional Designation Program (PDP) that provides 
credentialing for evaluators (eds. Rugh & Segone 2013). 
Through the PDP , the CES supports the development of quality 
evaluators, thereby contributing to the supply of professional 
evaluators in the Canadian NES. What the analysis of African 
VOPEs suggests is that unlike evaluation-focused VOPEs in 
the Global North, monitoring practitioners are an important 
part of African VOPEs because performance monitoring is a 
more pronounced practice compared with evaluation (Porter 
& Goldman 2013). African VOPEs also recognise the symbiotic 
relationship between M&E and other related subjects like data 
management, data visualisation, research and policy analysis, 
and they have focused on a wide variety of activities related to 
these focus areas. A further paramount aim for African VOPEs 
is to promote the value and use of M&E evidence in policy 
development and implementation (CLEAR-AA & AfrEA 2021).
Membership
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation 
membership are characterised by heterogeneity: commissioners 
and users of evaluation, students, researchers, performance 
monitoring practitioners, evaluators, data scientists, as well as 
evaluation trainers or capacity-building practitioners all 
constitute the membership of a typical African VOPE. 
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation in Africa 
represent a range of development professions. The diversity of 
membership can be a strength that enables VOPEs to access a 
broad range of development stakeholders: government, civil 
society, development partners and higher education 
institutions (HEIs). However, our analysis found that most 
VOPEs are yet to fully utilise this heterogeneity of membership 
to promote the demand and use of evaluative evidence in 
policies and programme implementation within the wider 
NES where their membership is employed.
An important observation is that VOPEs are experiencing 
membership growth; however, despite the growth, there are 
indications that VOPEs in the continent are still having 
challenges in retaining members and getting members to 
fully participate in the execution or management of VOPE-
related activities. Furthermore, the lack of resources is a 
perennial challenge for African VOPEs, which is not unique 
to VOPEs in Africa (CLEAR-AA & AfrEA 2021). As a result 
of limited resources, VOPEs like ZEA and TanEA still did 
not have the proper software to manage their membership 
database, although they are working on addressing this. 
SenEval was implementing a basic survey to gain a better 
understanding of the needs of the membership and improve 
VOPE offerings. Despite these challenges, there is a clear 
indication from the CLEAR-AA and AfrEA (2021) VOPEs 
discussion paper that in different African countries, there is 
a latent membership base that VOPEs can leverage with 
improved membership management strategies and 
improved value offering to members, especially emerging 
evaluators. As M&E gains traction in different public service 
institutions on the continent, demand for M&E is set to 
increase, and so will the number of practitioners in the field.
Voluntary organisations for professional 
evaluation’s role in the national evaluation 
system
The United Nations Evaluation Group (2012:13) asserted that 
a strong civil society is an essential building block for a strong 
national monitoring and evaluation system. Voluntary 
organisations for professional evaluation are an important 
group within the civil society umbrella, actively building a 
culture of regular and systematic M&E practice and evidence
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
use. The role of VOPEs within the wider NES is further 
explained in the ensuing subsections.
Building a community of practice
From the data collected, it is evident that VOPEs are creating 
platforms where evaluators can disseminate their evaluation 
findings, learn new evaluation techniques, think about the 
role of evaluation in society from different perspectives and 
promote professional and ethical standards, thereby 
contributing to the development of the evaluation profession. 
By participating in international networks and forums, 
VOPEs are maintaining a platform for discourses on the 
interface between development interventions and evaluation 
and engage in outreach and publicity to recruit new members 
and forge strategic partnerships (Holvoet & Dewachter 2013).
Strengthening members’ capacity
A review of activities that VOPEs implement demonstrates 
that capacity building is an area VOPEs are most involved in 
and in which they have had relative success in implementing 
their goals. Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation 
implement a range of activities to strengthen members’ 
technical capacity. This includes continuous professional 
development training on specific methods or tools, for 
example, Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 
training provided by ZEA to members or training on data 
collection, analysis and visualisation provided by GMEF. It 
also includes the development of educational programme 
curricula in cooperation with local and foreign educational 
institutions. For example, SenEval has been innovative in 
using international evaluators who are visiting Senegal to 
provide workshops or training at minimal to no cost to the 
association. Voluntary organisations for professional 
evaluation have also been active in hosting regular webinars 
on topical issues in M&E. Voluntary organisations for 
professional evaluation also reported peer-to-peer learning 
exchanges. The ZEA reported carrying out peer-to-peer 
exchanges with GMEF and ESK and organising some 
exchanges with ZaMEA. All selected VOPEs for this study, 
except for the one in Namibia that is still starting up, reported 
hosting regular conferences and workshops. The conferences 
or M&E weeks are important activities in the calendar of M&E 
practitioners in different countries. Some VOPEs have been 
able to secure the participation of governments and other key 
partners in their conferences and workshops. For example, the 
Government of Uganda is a key participant in the Uganda 
M&E week hosted by the Uganda Evaluation Association 
(UEA). Ghana Monitoring and Evaluation Forum regularly 
partners with the Government of Ghana in carrying out 
evaluation capacity-building activities. Even when the 
government is the main host, as was the case with the Kenya 
Evaluation Week in 2018, the VOPEs are collaborating with the 
government in the delivery of workshops.
Despite these initiatives, there is no record of any of the 
VOPEs empirically evaluating whether the activities they are 
implementing are effective and are reaching their members 
and how these are contributing to building national M&E 
capacity. This raises questions about the extent to which 
VOPEs understand the M&E capacity gaps they are 
addressing and how effective their interventions are. 
Nonetheless, capacity building remains an important area of 
work; most practitioners enter the M&E field without any 
formal training on M&E and from different academic 
disciplines. Considering that VOPE members also occupy 
different roles in their organisation and within the M&E field, 
it also makes sense that VOPEs need to implement a variety 
of activities. As most VOPEs do not know their exact baselines 
in terms of capacity gaps and needs, they are unable to know 
with certainty if what they are providing (accredited and 
otherwise) is what members need or what is needed in the 
country to progress the M&E agenda.
Strengthening national evaluation system
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation such as 
TanEA, ZEA, UEA and GMEF identify promoting evidence-
informed decision-making, development planning and 
policymaking as their objectives. In addition, these VOPEs 
have been working with their respective governments to 
strengthen M&E capacity. For example, ZEA signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Parliament 
of Zimbabwe to support parliamentarians to use M&E 
evidence in their oversight function. Although ZEA has 
struggled with implementing some of the activities in the 
MoU, this is an important initiative that indicates the demand 
that exists and a recognition of the value of M&E – and the 
VOPE – by parliament. In addition, ZEA has been working 
closely with the cabinet office. In 2019, TanEA in collaboration 
with CLEAR-AA conducted training on the importance of 
evaluation as an accountability tool for the Tanzanian 
parliamentarians who are members of the Tanzanian Chapter 
of the African Parliamentarians Network on Development 
Evaluation (APNODE). The Tanzania Evaluation Association 
also partnered with UNICEF to raise awareness on the need 
for parliament to demand evaluation reports finalised by 
government ministries, departments and agencies. Such 
evaluations can strengthen parliament’s oversight vis-à-vis 
the executive. Access to M&E evidence has the potential to 
strengthen parliamentary portfolio committees’ performance 
oversight function over respective government institutions 
over which they have oversight jurisdiction.
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation have 
increasingly been supporting governments in their efforts to 
institutionalise the evaluation function. For example, the 
UEA works closely with the Ugandan government on 
evaluation capacity building to enable the practice of 
evaluation to flourish in the country (Goldman et al. 2018). 
Likewise, the Senegalese government is increasingly talking 
about evaluations and also invites members of SenEval to 
comment on government evaluation Terms of Reference 
(ToRs) as covered in the quote below:
‘So we’ve done work with government advocating for evaluation; 
perhaps we should have done more, but we’ve had a few 
significant events …. The government is doing some strategic
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
evaluations at the moment, they say … on universal healthcare, 
cash transfers and the national strategy for child protection, and 
… I have given comments on the terms of reference either 
directed to ministry when they ask me or through UNICEF….’ 
(Workshop participant, male,  representing the Senegalese 
Evaluation Association [SenEval])
Lomeña-Gelis (2013) also argued that it was SenEval’s 
advocacy for the institutionalisation of evaluation that 
contributed to the March 2012 government decision to 
establish the Commission for the Evaluation and Monitoring 
of Public Policies and Programmes. This Commission is 
situated in the President’s Office. Despite not being fully 
operational almost 10 years later, the Commission for the 
Evaluation and Monitoring of Public Policies and 
Programmes is a key step towards the institutionalisation of 
M&E within the Senegalese public sector.
The CLEAR-AA and AfrEA study (2021) revealed that the key 
functions of VOPEs are to advocate for both the building of 
evaluation capacity among its members (who are M&E 
professionals that supply and demand M&E information) and 
creating demand from the M&E system for M&E information 
through advocacy and dialogue with parliamentarians, 
policymakers and development planning and programming 
entities such as government, civil society organisations and 
donors. Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation 
should, therefore, be designed to help M&E systems to 
achieve an equilibrium between the supply of M&E evidence 
and the demand thereof from the users of M&E evidence.
The authors believe that VOPEs have made great progress in 
promoting evaluation; however, they are still finding it 
difficult to establish themselves and to achieve sufficient 
capacities to significantly contribute to and influence the way 
NESs are developing. Our analysis is supported by Karkara 
(2013), who argued that VOPEs require the capacity to 
develop effective policy advocacy strategies, including 
finding ways to mobilise resources for advocacy.
Enabling partnerships
Findings suggest that the degree to which a VOPE can make 
an impact on NESs is also determined by its relations with the 
other stakeholders in the NES. Governments, development 
partners and other VOPEs are the stakeholders with which 
VOPEs co-exist within the national NESs and thus with which 
they should build relations. Successful VOPEs are those that 
are able to build networks with the entire NES (including 
international organisations) and leverage these networks to 
advance their members’ interests and the interests of the M&E 
profession. For example, the UEA works closely with the 
Directorate of M&E in the Prime Minister’s Office, a key 
oversight entity within the Government of Uganda. The UEA’s 
work with the government is strengthened by the deployment 
of government staff within the VOPE’s management 
committee. Ghana Monitoring and Evaluation Forum has 
established relationships with the Ministry of M&E in Ghana. 
Likewise, TanEA is establishing relationships with the 
President’s Office, Public Service Management and Good 
Governance (PO-PSMGG). Such linkages between VOPEs and 
the government provide gravitas and legitimacy for a national 
evaluation association, providing it with avenues to influence 
the government development agenda.
It, therefore, follows that partnerships with governments are 
key as they legitimise the existence and operations of VOPEs. 
In the African context, government-recognised VOPEs should 
form partnerships with public sector entities (ministries, 
departments, agencies, offices and commissions) to promote 
the undertaking, institutionalisation and use of information 
and evidence from M&E across government institutions and 
the NES more broadly. Through such partnerships, VOPEs 
participate in government-commissioned evaluations of 
development plans, policies, programmes and projects. 
Recognition by the government, therefore, enhances a VOPE’s 
legitimacy and credibility within a national NES and the 
international M&E economy (CLEAR-AA & AfrEA 2021:23).
Partnerships with development partners, such as United 
Nations (UN) agencies, also provide a vital source of funding 
and technical support for VOPE activities, conferences and 
evaluation capacity-building interventions (CLEAR-AA & 
AfrEA 2021:31).  Both UNICEF and the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) have been instrumental 
in the founding and growth of several VOPEs. For example, 
the Nairobi M&E Network was initiated by the M&E officer 
of the UNICEF Regional Office for Eastern and Southern 
Africa in 1997. This group held about 50 meetings over 3 
years. The meetings took place on UN premises, and 
participants were from a range of UN agencies and NGOs, 
the University of Nairobi and sometimes from various 
government departments and donors. Likewise, the Niger 
M&E Network (ReNSE, Réseau Nigérien de Suivi et 
Evaluation) was initiated by the UNICEF M&E officer based 
in Niger (Segone et al. 2006). Similar experiences are reported 
in Zimbabwe and Senegal, where UNICEF and UNDP have 
been critical in the earlier processes of establishing these two 
countries’ evaluation associations.
The evolution of M&E in the continent shows a reliance on 
international donor funding for development initiatives, access 
to advanced M&E systems and internationally renowned 
M&E experts. International development partners wield 
immense influence within African countries’ NESs (Cloete 
2016). However, the power of international development 
agencies is increasingly being counterbalanced by a growing 
cohort of regional capacity-building agencies that have actively 
advocated for Afrocentric evaluation practice.
Regional NECD partners frequently mentioned by VOPEs 
include CLEAR-AA, CLEAR-FA, the African Capacity 
Building Foundation and the African Leadership Initiative. 
In Uganda and Ghana, Twende Mbele is also mentioned as 
an influential NECD collaborator. The role of these partners 
is slightly different from that of international development 
partners. The growing influence of regional partners is an 
important development in the continent, indicating growing 
M&E technical capacity and expertise in the continent.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Although much of the funding for NECD activities originates 
from the Global North, the shift towards using Africa-based 
evaluation capacity development institutions can only be 
beneficial in the long run. It opens opportunities to construct 
M&E practice and capacity-building approaches that are 
responsive to the context of different countries and VOPEs.
Notwithstanding the benefits of networking and partnering 
with the other NES stakeholders, there is an inherent risk of 
VOPEs being co-opted by these financially endowed and more 
influential stakeholders. Stakeholders such as governments, 
regional and global evaluation formations such as EvalPartners 
present both opportunities and risks that VOPEs must navigate 
and manage to preserve their relevance, sustainability, impact 
and responsiveness to the unique national M&E systems and 
development contexts that vary from one African country to 
the next. Should a VOPE compromise its independence, its 
M&E advocacy, originality and relevance could be suppressed 
in favour of pursuing the agenda of the more powerful co-
opting partner(s). Such an event is antithetical to a VOPE’s 
standing objective of advocating for the mainstreaming of 
M&E practice that is relevant, appropriate and responsive to 
unique country contexts.
Peer-to-peer learning
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation are not 
homogenous and have different areas where they excel. 
Furthermore, VOPEs are taking opportunities to learn from 
each other; for example, in 2017, ZEA sent a delegation to 
GMEF to learn from the work that GMEF was doing in the 
Ghanaian NES. This was followed by another ZEA exchange 
programme with ESK on membership management. The 
ZEA also reached out to the SAMEA to learn how the latter 
was managing members, the costs and the general 
functionality of the South African VOPE. The ZEA also 
participated in the 2019 SAMEA conference, and before the 
COVID pandemic, ZEA had extended an invitation to 
SAMEA leadership to participate in the 2020 Zimbabwe 
Evaluation Week. Although the Namibia Evaluation 
Association (NamEA) is still in its formative days, it has also 
expressed a willingness to learn from the more established 
national evaluation associations on the continent. The 
Southern African VOPEs have also formed a network with 
the chairpersons of SAMEA, NamEA and ZAMEA connecting 
to share experiences and resolve challenges they face. SenEval 
also mentioned the importance of learning from other 
VOPEs; they have been trying to establish formal partnerships 
with the American Evaluation Association (AEA) and others. 
The francophone VOPEs are also collaborating through the 
Francophone Network of Evaluation (RFE).
Although most of the peer-to-peer learning has occurred 
without external facilitation, some requires funding. United 
Nations Children’s Fund, EvalPartners and AfrEA have 
been hesitant about funding peer-to-peer exchanges 
between VOPEs. More VOPE-to-VOPE interactions need to 
be facilitated to encourage sharing of experiences and mutual 
learning.
Strengthening the work of voluntary 
organisations for professional 
evaluation
A significant challenge facing VOPEs in Africa is resource 
limitation. Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation 
have limited sources of revenue, and this challenge is not 
unique to VOPEs in Africa. Across the globe, associations 
have relied on revenue from conferences and capacity-
building workshops. Even then, the conferences and 
workshops can only be profitable when there is sponsorship 
from external partners to reduce the input costs of such 
events. The success of this conference and workshop model 
also relies on members being able to pay a fee to attend the 
events. The challenge is compounded by the formative stage 
of the M&E profession in Africa, whereby a significant 
number VOPE members are consultants without full-time 
employment or consistent work opportunities (CLEAR-AA & 
AfrEA 2021). Such a challenge is common in African countries 
whose economies are developing. Consequently, VOPEs in 
Africa cannot charge exorbitant fees for their activities, as this 
may make them inaccessible to the majority of the 
membership base. This exclusionary outcome is not desirable 
as the profession is still being nurtured. This is the complex 
challenge of revenue generation most African VOPEs face.
Membership fees are another source of income; however, 
they are not sufficient for making VOPEs financially 
sustainable entities (CLEAR-AA & AfrEA 2021:29). The 
VOPEs interviewed during the CLEAR-AA and AfrEA study 
(2021) have kept fees inexpensive so that costs are not a 
barrier for individuals and institutions to sign up. For 
example, ZEA charges $20 for individual members, $10 
for students and $180 for institutions. With approximately 
150 paying members, these fees are inadequate to cover 
operation costs – including paying for an administrator. 
Uganda Evaluation Association charges both annual 
subscription and one-time registration fees. For individuals, 
this amounts to $53.80 and an annual subscription of $26.90. 
For institutions, UEA charges $538.00 per organisation, with 
annual fees of $403.50. In SenEval, 100 members generally 
pay for their membership, and largely through membership 
fees, the VOPE can raise between $5000 and $6000, which has 
been enough to cover their minimum operational costs, 
including affiliating fees. However, this does leave the 
association with limited resources for other activities. Table 2 
outlines disaggregated membership fees of select African 
VOPEs.
TABLE 2:  Disaggregated annual membership fees of two selected African 
voluntary organisations for professional evaluation.
VOPE Membership fees for 
individuals (employed)
Membership fees 
for students
Membership fees 
for institutions
Zimbabwe 
Evaluation 
Association
$20 $10 $180
Uganda Evaluation 
Association
$26.90 Not applicable $403.50
Source: Adapted from CLEAR-AA & AfrEA, 2021, Professional associations in the M&E sector: 
Discussion paper, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
VOPE, Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Limited resources mean that VOPEs often do not have 
the means to employ full-time staff to manage activities. 
This then limits the ability of VOPEs to fully implement 
their strategies and activities aimed at building the M&E 
capacity of members. Such strategies and activities include 
developing evaluation guidelines as a means of advancing  
the evaluation  profession. Moreover, limited resources also 
hinder the capacity of VOPEs to carry out their evaluation 
advocacy mandate vis-à-vis the broader NES. Voluntary 
organisations for professional evaluation that find ways to 
fund full-time secretariats such as SenEval, UEA and ZEA 
(before UNICEF funding expired) find that they improve 
the coordination of their work, freeing the volunteers to 
focus on key NECD activities.
An added challenge is that only a few VOPE members tend 
to understand and promote the mandate of the VOPE. This 
means that VOPE members are not maximising their potential 
impact on a given country’s M&E system. Furthermore, 
several study respondents indicated that the same VOPE 
members are often called upon to volunteer for different 
activities, serving on boards and concurrently implementing 
various NECD initiatives of the VOPE. This can lead to 
volunteer fatigue. One respondent suggested that this is 
partly because of the country’s formative stage regarding 
M&E practice:
‘In Namibia – the concept of M&E is emerging, and professionals 
are not a lot – hardly time to volunteer to do VOPE work. Most 
people are doing other things, such as consultancy.’ (Workshop 
participant, female, representing the Namibia Evaluation 
Society)
It is unlikely that African VOPEs are going to get an injection 
of additional human and financial capacity. Voluntary 
organisations for professional evaluation, therefore, need to 
be innovative in how they counteract their current capacity 
limitations. SenEval’s example is demonstrative of how 
VOPEs can reduce expectations, capitalise on partnerships 
and use legacy board members to implement the VOPE’s 
evaluation agenda.
A related challenge is that VOPEs in Africa lack clear strategies 
on how to execute their mandates and mission (CLEAR-AA & 
AfrEA 2021:30). Voluntary organisations for professional 
evaluation are, therefore, unable to unify members around a 
common programme of action that is well articulated and 
codified in organisational documents. Without practical 
strategies and action plans, VOPEs cannot systematically 
operationalise their visions and objectives for growing M&E 
practice and entrenching it in development practice and 
governance processes such as development planning, policy 
and programme formulation, implementation, budgeting and 
general decision-making.
Discussion
The nascent literature and data on VOPEs suggest that these 
professional associations are prospective pillars of resilient 
NESs. National Evaluation Capacity Development 
interventions are increasingly recognising the value of 
VOPEs and their prospective impact on strengthening 
country M&E systems. The established assumption in NECD 
discourses is that a stronger NES that entrenches M&E 
practice organically results in greater availability and use of 
M&E evidence in developmental and governance processes 
of budgeting, agenda-setting, development planning and 
policy and programme formulation and implementation. 
Furthermore, entrenched M&E practice results in regular and 
systematic performance monitoring of development 
programmes and policies, as well as periodic evaluation of 
such development interventions to appraise their outcomes 
and impact. The use of monitoring and evaluation evidence 
is crucial in policy, programme development planning and 
budgeting cycles. The value of VOPEs to NECD interventions, 
therefore, lies in their ability to advocate for the strengthening 
of supply, demand and use of M&E information. The integration 
of M&E practice into the practices of budgeting, development 
planning, agenda setting, policy and programme formulation 
and implementation is, therefore, a strategic objective to 
which African VOPEs should work towards.
The findings of this study have shown that two critical 
components are important for VOPEs to be effective in 
contributing to NECD. The first component is strengthening 
their human and financial capacity, which will enable them 
to be sustainable, function better and respond to the needs of 
their members and the broader NES. To this end, this 
article recommends that VOPEs attract more evaluation 
professionals, which will in turn lead to greater membership 
fees, more financial resources and human resources 
and capacity. To attract a greater number of evaluation 
professionals and professionals in related fields (i.e. research 
and consultancy), VOPEs ought to position themselves as 
associations of choice for evaluation professionals. Being 
attractive to evaluation professionals requires VOPEs to be 
clear and strategic in terms of their vision, mission and 
strategic objectives for the broader NES within which they 
operate and that they seek to strengthen. Moreover, VOPEs 
should then make concerted efforts to operationalise such an 
organisational declaration of intent vis-à-vis the NES, which 
shall serve as a clarion call for evaluation professionals to join 
such a noble effort. By attracting a greater number of members 
(including pre-eminent evaluators), VOPEs will also be 
creating a favourable internal environment that allows the 
evaluation association to better articulate its vision, mission 
and objectives vis-à-vis the NES to external stakeholders of 
this evaluation ecosystem.
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation should 
also commit to a common strategy of recruiting young and 
emerging evaluators by approaching upcoming evaluation 
practitioners at graduate and postgraduate levels of study in 
universities. To this end, VOPEs ought to consider stronger 
relationships with universities and other HEIs. In particular, 
VOPEs should reach out to university departments that offer 
M&E modules and qualifications and recruit students from
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Page 9 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
such departments as interns, volunteers or learnership 
programme candidates. An important caveat for this strategy 
is for VOPEs to not engage in practices of exploitation. Should 
VOPEs be in a financial position to offer paid internships and/
or learnerships, then they should offer such as the first course 
of action rather than going for the option of  appointing 
unremunerated volunteers. Recruiting experienced and 
emerging evaluation professionals is one area VOPEs should 
constantly work towards, as they have not saturated the entire 
evaluation economy and its labour market.
As the article has established that membership fees are 
insufficient, the article recommends that VOPEs intensify 
their fundraising efforts vis-à-vis the broader NES 
stakeholders such as bilateral and multilateral donors, 
private entities and intergovernmental organisations 
(i.e. development partners). Voluntary organisations for 
professional evaluation ought to emphasise their vision, 
mission and strategic objectives vis-à-vis the NES and also 
emphasise the value of evaluation when approaching these 
potential donors, highlighting the importance of evaluation 
in enhancing development planning, policymaking, 
development programming, resourcing and implementation. 
Countries across Africa have a common implementation 
challenge, and by positioning evaluation as one of the 
potential remedies to this implementation malaise, VOPEs 
can mobilise donations.
Recommendations
Contributing towards strengthening the broader NES is the 
central theme of this article. The article recommends that 
African VOPEs strive to contribute to the six constitutive 
elements of an NES referred to in the earlier conceptualisation 
section of the article. To this end, the strategic 
recommendations of the article are as follows:
1. Firstly, VOPEs ought to cultivate stronger relations with 
their respective country governments and lobby for 
involvement in processes that lead to the formulation of 
M&E frameworks such as evaluation policies and the 
supplementary policy implementation frameworks such 
as national evaluation plans and national evaluation 
guidelines. It is only after forming good relations with 
governments that VOPEs stand a chance of being 
included in the development of such M&E frameworks. 
Upon inclusion into the process of developing these M&E 
frameworks, VOPEs ought to amplify their impact by 
advocating for the inclusion of high-priority areas such as 
decolonising evaluation, gender mainstreaming, social 
inclusion and youth empowerment within these M&E 
frameworks. These are topical developmental issues with 
which professions such as M&E should be engaged, and 
that can attract members to VOPEs. By so doing, VOPEs 
will be leveraging their participation to shine a spotlight 
on these critical priority areas that dominate current 
global development and evaluation discourse.
2. Secondly, when appraising the implementation or extent 
to which development interventions have achieved their 
objectives, VOPEs ought to raise awareness among their 
respective governments about the value of evaluative 
evidence in highlighting what has worked, what has not 
worked and why. Such evaluative information is vital 
for resolving programme implementation challenges, 
resource allocation for programmes and future 
development planning. This recommendatio n seeks to  
amplify the contribution of VOPEs in positively impacting 
government demand for evaluations. By raising 
awareness about the value of evaluative evidence in the 
policy cycle and decision-making, VOPEs can elevate 
evaluation to the centre of the governance and 
development agenda. It is through such a position that 
VOPEs will be able to play a central role in the NES, such 
as producing key evaluation frameworks that can help 
build an evaluative culture in public and non-public 
sectors in respective countries. This recommendation is 
informed by the reality whereby the practice of evaluation 
is intrinsically linked to public policy, development 
programmes and projects and the shift towards results-
based budgeting. It is through its integration in these 
governance and development spaces that evaluation 
practice – and VOPEs – will gain hard currency as central 
pillars of NESs.
3. Thirdly, African VOPEs should contribute to and 
advance scholarship and the gradual transition towards 
Africa-centred evaluation practice that is responsive to 
African development values, aspirations and diverse 
African cultures and community needs. This can be 
collaboratively done with other NES stakeholders such 
as HEIs who produce and deliver monitoring and 
evaluation curricula to both current and future 
evaluation practitioners. As advocates of M&E practice, 
African VOPEs require a more nuanced and context-
responsive approach when planning and executing 
evaluation capacity-building initiatives (i.e. M&E 
training workshops at national and regional VOPE 
conferences) across the continent. It is perhaps time to 
intensify discourse regarding the need for African 
VOPEs to advocate for Afrocentric development and 
M&E practice centred on the identification of African 
development values such as social justice and greater 
opportunities for the marginalised groups in society (i.e. 
women, youth, children, rural emerging farmers and 
people living with disabilities). Such Afrocentric M&E 
practice should focus on developing participatory and 
inclusive M&E data collection and analysis 
methodologies, in collaboration with HEIs offering 
M&E courses. Such methodologies should be 
linguistically inclusive and gender and culturally aware. 
In essence, African VOPEs must dedicate time and 
scholarship to developing participatory data collection 
and analysis methodologies such as participatory action 
research, ethnography and observation. Even when 
such seemingly inclusive methodologies are being 
developed, greater care must be taken by African VOPEs 
and their membership in ensuring that such 
methodologies empower the marginalised and do not  
expose them to heightened marginalisation, discrimination
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Page 10 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
and abuse. One of the common developmental 
challenges in Africa is access to education for rural 
children and adolescents. Africa-centred evaluation 
methodologies ought to be able to appraise the extent to 
which development interventions targeted at these 
disadvantaged groups are ameliorating  the lack of 
access to education. Such context-relevant evaluation 
data collection methodology will enable evaluations to 
make consi dered and appropriate recommendations on 
how development should augment access to early 
childhood development education, basic education and 
higher education to the historically marginalised rural 
youth and children in African societies. African VOPEs, 
therefore, need to understand and reflect on the 
development and M&E context in which they are 
situated. An African VOPE should, therefore, be 
constituted by Afrocentric M&E practitioners who 
collectively and tenaciously promote M&E practice that 
measures development from an African lens.
4. Fourthly, pursuing sustainability while managing the 
risk of co-optation by donors. As mentioned in the earlier 
section addressing VOPE human and financial resource 
constraints, VOPEs need to develop and strengthen 
relationships with other stakeholders. While such 
partnerships are important for resource mobilisation, 
African VOPEs must balance the risk of co-optation and 
compromising their authentic vision, mission and 
objectives vis-à-vis NESs within which they operate.
5. Fifthly, VOPEs also need to understand the capacity of 
their membership so that their capacity development 
initiatives are relevant and critical to improving the 
quality of monitoring and evaluative capacity.
Conclusion
Voluntary organisations for professional evaluation are 
emerging as vital NES stakeholders that ought to be targeted 
for technical capacity building as part of NECD 
interventions. In the long term, technically capacitated 
VOPEs have the potential to play a major role in helping to 
build an M&E culture that sustains NESs in many countries. 
The M&E profession and NECD fraternity have embraced 
VOPEs as foundational actors in the construction of strong 
NESs systems that are able to inform development planning, 
policy and programme formulation, implementation, 
budgeting and evidence-based decision-making. To effect a 
positive impact on national NESs and national development 
agendas, VOPEs need to build capable memberships, 
improve their financial sustainability and promote a 
paradigm, methodologies and ideology of evaluation 
rooted in Afrocentric conceptualisations of development  
and indicators thereof. Thus, African VOPEs ought to 
internalise the challenge of advocating for evaluation 
criteria that inquire about the degree to which development 
interventions address pressing socio-economic and political 
challenges facing African populations. This is important if 
African VOPEs are to transcend the blind imitation of the 
Western-centric VOPE model that is not necessarily 
cognisant of and responsive to the African context. A key 
risk to mitigate for VOPEs when embarking on fundraising 
is to balance the threat of co-optation by larger and 
financially endowed NECD partners such as governments, 
development partners and larger VOPEs.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the CLEAR-AA staff who 
contributed to the collection of data for the African VOPEs 
discussion paper. Special thank you to all sampled African 
VOPEs who participated in the study.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced 
them in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
T.F. contributed to the original discussion paper curation and 
the development of this article. A.D. contributed to the 
development of the article. M.A. contributed to both the original 
discussion paper from which the article is written and the 
article itself. S.M. contributed to the conceptualisation of the 
VOPE discussion paper and the development of this article.
Funding information 
This research received funding from CLEAR-AA and the 
African Evaluation Association (AfrEA).
Data availability 
The data that support the findings of this study can by made 
available by the corresponding author, A.D., upon reasonable 
request.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or 
position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
References
African Development Bank, 2008, Accra agenda for action , third high level forum on 
aid effectiveness, African Development Bank, Abidjan.
Beney, T., Mathe, J., Ntakumba, S., Basson, R., Naidu, V. & Leslie, M., 2015, ‘A reflection 
on the partnership between government and South African monitoring and 
evaluation association’, African Evaluation Journal 3(1), 1–6. https://doi.
org/10.4102/aej.v3i1.164
Carter, B., 2013, Evaluation capacity development , Governance and Social 
Development Resource Centre (GSDRC), Birmingham.
Chirau, T.J., Blaser-Mapitsa, C., Amisi, M., Masilela, B. & Dlakavu, A., 2020, ‘A 
stakeholder view of the development of national evaluation systems in Africa’, 
Africa Evaluation Journal 8(1), a504. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v8i1.504
CLEAR-AA, 2019, Monitoring and evaluation systems in five African countries , 
University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
CLEAR-AA & AfrEA, 2021, Professional associations in the M&E sector: Discussion 
paper, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
CLEAR-AA & TanEA, 2020, Developing the Tanzania Evaluation Association visibility 
strategy: Report from the scoping study , University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Page 11 of 11 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Cloete, F., 2016, ‘Developing an Africa-rooted programme evaluation approach’, 
African Journal of Public Affairs 9(4), 55–70.
European Union, 2008, Developing evaluation capacity: A study for the commission , 
European Commission, Brussels.
Fraser, D.I. & Morkel, C., 2020, ‘State of monitoring and evaluation in anglophone Africa: 
Centre for learning on evaluation and results in anglophone Africa’s reflections’, 
African Evaluation Journal 8(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v8i1.505
Goldman, I., 2018, ‘The emergence of government evaluation systems in Africa: The 
case of Benin, Uganda and South Africa’, in Monica Lomeña-Gelis (ed.), eVALUation 
matters, second quarter 2018, pp. 1–12, Africa Development Bank, Abidjan.
Goldman, I., Byamugisha, A., Gounou, A., Smith, L.R., Ntakumba, S., Lubanga, T. et al., 
2018, ‘The emergence of government evaluation systems in Africa: The case of 
Benin, Uganda and South Africa’, Africa Evaluation Journal 6(1), a253. https://doi.
org/10.4102/aej.v6i1.253
Holvoet, N. & Dewachter, S., 2013, ‘Building national M&E systems in the context of 
changing aid modalities: The underexplored potential of national evaluation 
societies’, Evaluation and Programme Planning  41, 47–57. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2013.06.001
International Organization for Cooperation in Evaluation (IOCE), 2022, VOPE directory, 
viewed 23 May 2022, from https://ioce.net/vopes/vope-directory/.
Karkara, N., 2013, Advocating for Evaluation: A toolkit to develop advocacy strategies 
to strengthen an enabling environment for evaluation,  United Nations Children’s 
Fund, New York.
Kosheleva, N. & Segone, M., 2013, ‘EvalPartners and the role of voluntary organisations 
for professional evaluation in the development of national evaluation capacity’, in 
J. Rugh & M. Segone (eds.), Voluntary organizations for professional evaluation 
(VOPEs): Learning from Africa, Americas, Asia, Australasia, Europe and Middle 
East, pp. 8–12, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), New York, NY .
KPMG, 2011, The Paris declaration on aid effectiveness and impact: What’s next in 
Busan?, KPMG International, London.
Lomeña-Gelis, M., 2013, ‘Evaluation development in Senegal’, African Evaluation 
Journal 1(1), a23. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v1i1.23
Ngwabi, N.T., Mpyana, O.G. & Mapatwana, A., 2020, ‘Reflections from emerging 
evaluators in shaping voluntary organizations for professional evaluation capacity-
building initiatives’, African Evaluation Journal 8(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.4102/
aej.v8i1.509
Ojha, V., 2013, Role of CSOs and VOPEs in strengthening national evaluation capacity 
development, EvalPartners, New York, NY .
Porter, S. & Goldman, I., 2013, ‘A growing demand for monitoring and evaluation 
in Africa’, African Evaluation Journal  1(1), a25. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.
v1i1.25
Rugh, J. & Segone, M. (eds.), 2013, Voluntary organizations for professional evaluation 
(VOPEs): Learning from Africa, Americas, Asia, Australasia, Europe and Middle 
East, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), New York, NY .
Segone, M., Patel, M., Rouge, J.C. & Russon, C., 2006, ‘National and regional 
evaluation organizations as a sustainable strategy for evaluation capacity 
development’, in M. Segone & A. Ocampo (eds.), Creating and developing 
evaluation organizations: Lessons learned from Africa, Americas, Asia, 
Australasia and Europe , pp. 217–240, Desco, Lima. 
United Nations, 2012, National evaluation capacity development: Practical tips on 
how to strengthen national evaluation systems , United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), New York, NY .
United Nations Evaluation Group, 2012, National evaluation capacity development: 
Practical tips on how to strengthen national evaluation systems , United Nations, 
New York, NY .