<<<PAGE=1>>>
DOI: 10.1111/issj.12357
SPECIAL ISSUE
Use of research evidence in the policy domain: A
best-evidence synthesis of social science research in
Africa, Asia, and Latin America
Daniel Sidney Fussy1,2
1Mkwawa University College of Education
(A Constituent College of the University of
Dar es Salaam), Iringa, Tanzania
2Global Development Network, New Delhi, India
Correspondence
Daniel Sidney Fussy, Mkwawa University College
of Education (A Constituent College of the
University of Dar es Salaam), Iringa, Tanzania.
Email: dfussy@gdn.int; daniel.fussy@muce.ac.tz
[Correction added on 5 Aug 2022, after ﬁrst online
publication: country name India corrected to
Indonesia at two places and second afﬁliation
added.]
Abstract
The use of research evidence in policymaking provides
policymakers with a sound basis for policy decisions and
actions. While the use of research evidence is on the rise,
its evidence remains largely under-reported especially from
social sciences and developing world context. This may per-
petuate the prevailing myth that policymakers do not use
research evidence in policy deliberations and, thus, discour-
age researchers, funders, and policymakers from making
greater investment in producing, disseminating, and using
research evidence. Using the intersection of Weiss’ typology
of research use and a best-evidence synthesis approach, this
paper reviews and reports evidence on the use of research evi-
dence in the policy domain from four national level studies
undertaken in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Concep-
tual and instrumental uses of research evidence are evident
through a demand for research evidence, research-based pol-
icy products, and citations of research in policy documents.
The paper broadens our understanding on the use of research
evidence from developing countries context and social sci-
ence research, and informs different funders, researchers,
and policymakers about the potential utility of research they
respectively fund and/or undertake.
1 INTRODUCTION
Social science researchers, research institutions, and funding agencies normally ask about how to
increase the chances that the policymaking process is informed by research evidence. In the course
of ﬁnding answers to the question, they increasingly realise that the primary concern to evidence-
based policy is not getting evidence being produced, but getting the evidence being used (Gamoran
2018; Gitomer and Crouse2019; Goldman and Pabari2020; Gunn and Mintrom2021). The use of
research evidence in policymaking gives policymakers a sound basis for their policy decisions and
actions, enables them to ask critical questions when presented with counter or supportive evidence,
and evaluate successes or failures in implementing various policies (Yanovitzky and Weber2020).
Int Soc Sci.2022;72:1181–1194. © 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1181wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/issj
<<<PAGE=2>>>
1182 FUSSY
Literature shows that the use of research evidence (URE) in policymaking is increasing in recent
years; however, evidence on URE remains largely under-reported in the current literature (Kathryn and
Boaz 2019; Yanovitzky and Weber2020). Studies on URE have been mostly conducted in developed
countries (e.g., Gough et al.2018 in the United Kingdom, Tseng et al.2018 and Nutley and Tseng
2014 in the United States, Amara et al.2004 in Canada, Wehrens et al.2010 in the Netherlands,
Blewden et al.2010 in New Zealand). Some initiatives in URE are evident in developing countries
as reported in Using Evidence in Policy and Practice– an edited volume by Goldman and Pabari
(2020) which focuses on eight African countries. Even then, little is known about URE in developing
countries. Additionally, previous URE studies are not distributed and shared across disciplines, as
most of these studies have been dominated by health and medical disciplines, a situation which leaves
much to be desired for social science disciplines. Yet, ﬁndings on URE cannot be generalised across
disciplines and contexts. Davies et al. (2008) maintain that the use of research evidence is normally
context-dependent and that URE ought to be studied in relation to local priorities, cultures, as well as
organisational structures.
Similarly, most of the evidence and examples of URE studies tend to be testimonies of a spe-
ciﬁc funder who initially funded an intervention or an empirical investigation. As existing lessons on
research use are not shared and mostly conﬁned to the funding agency-sponsored studies, different
funders and researchers become less informed about the potential utility of research they respectively
fund or undertake. This may perpetuate the prevailing myth that policymakers do not use research
evidence in policy deliberations and, thus, discourage researchers and policymakers from investing
greater efforts on producing and making better use of research evidence (Kathryn and Boaz2019;
Tseng 2015). Thus, using the intersection of the Weiss’ typology of research use and a best-evidence
synthesis approach, the current paper reviews and reports evidence on URE in the policy domain
from four national level studies undertaken in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. By providing evidence
on research use, this paper broadens our understanding on URE from developing countries context
and social science research, and informs different funders, researchers, and policymakers about the
potential utility of research they respectively fund and/or undertake.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
The concept of URE ﬁnds its root in knowledge utilisation, which refers to “research, scholarly, and
programmatic intervention activities aimed at increasing the use of knowledge to solve human prob-
lems” (Backer1991, p. 226), such as employment, education, and healthcare. This suggests that URE
denotes the incorporation of research evidence in decision making, thinking about problems and pos-
sible solutions, as well as rationalising the present resolution of problems (Weiss1979). W.T Grant
Foundation (2020) expands further on conceptualising research evidence by referring to it as the type
of evidence generated through systematic and transparent collection and analysis of data that addresses
a predetermined question or hypothesis. The stated evidence can be generated from descriptive studies
– both qualitative and quantitative – meta-analyses studies, cost-effectiveness studies, intervention and
evaluation studies undertaken within or outside research organisations. Broadening Backer’s (1991)
and Weiss’s (1979) conceptions of URE, the W.T Grant Foundation aptly states:
use of research evidence can happen in many ways and may involve the direct application
of research evidence to decision making, conceptual inﬂuences on how decision makers
think about problems and potential solutions, strategic uses of research to justify existing
stances or positions, or imposed uses that require decision makers to engage with research
(2020, p. 4).
The W.T Grant Foundation offers a depth and breadth deﬁnition of URE as it suggests the multiple
and different use of research evidence by policymakers and practitioners, which can be summarised as
instrumental, conceptual, and symbolic uses of research.Instrumental useinvolves a direct application
<<<PAGE=3>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1183
of research evidence in decision-making. For example, when a policymaker adopts a new mathematics
curriculum after perusing a study or studies that show the new curriculum had positive student out-
comes (Lawlor et al.2019; Tseng 2015). Conceptual useoccurs when research evidence enlightens
policymakers’ and practitioners’ thinking about different issues, problems, and/or potential solutions.
For example, when a policymaker or practitioner uses a review of literature to guide their thinking
about a problem that they are currently working on to improve (Lawlor et al.2019; Tseng2015). Such
information generated from the literature review may serve as a frame to start designing policies.
Finally, symbolic use, also calledtactical use, occurs when research evidence is used to rationalise or
justify particular decisions or positions that have already been made, such as using research evidence
to support a piece of legislation or challenge a current implemented practice (Lawlor et al.2019; Tseng
2015).
This classiﬁcation of three types of research builds on the pioneering work of Weiss (1979) and
has been commonly adopted in different theoretical and empirical literature (e.g., Blewden et al.
2010; Lawlor et al. 2019) as well as organisations which support the use of research evidence
(e.g., W. T. Grant Foundation). Scholarship on research use has recently expanded due to efforts
of funders to promote greater use in both policy and practice of the research ﬁndings they fund
(Gamoran 2018). For example, the W. T. Grant Foundation has been supporting a portfolio on the
use of research evidence in informing policies and practices especially that affect youth since 2009,
with a continued effort to the present. Studies produced as a result of this initiative showed that
URE is never linear and single-sourced (Nutley and Tseng2014; Tseng et al. 2018). This ﬁnd-
ing echoes a study funded by the EU commission which found that policymakers use a range of
sources in searching for evidence and more often than not these policymakers make an indirect use
of research evidence (Oliver and de V ocht2017). Blewden et al. (2010) drew evidence of research
use from two examples of immigration policy development in New Zealand. The study found that
the conceptual use and enlightenment were largely evident in the earliest stages of policy formula-
tion such as agenda-setting, while the instrumental use of research evidence was most evident in later
stages – policy implementation stage – where researchers were more likely to be interacting with
policymakers.
In a survey that involved 833 respondents who were professionals and managers in Canadian and
provincial government agencies, Amara et al. (2004) found that the conceptual use of research was
more frequent than instrumental use. The authors concluded that the three types of URE simultane-
ously play a signiﬁcant role in government agencies. They then recommended that more URE could
be achieved by encouraging researchers to increase the production of rigorous research especially
large-scale quantitative studies and relevant research to the needs of government agencies, pay more
attention to the work context in which government agencies operate, and intensify their interactions
with those professionals and managers in government agencies.
The political nature of policymaking normally makes the concept of URE complex. In this sense,
since URE in the policy domain involves two sides (research evidence and policymaking process), it is
worth examining the idea of evidence-based policymaking. Evidence-based policymaking is generally
understood as a process that transparently uses rigorous and robust evidence to inform public policy
development and implementation (Nutley et al.2009). There are three main characteristics underly-
ing the concept of evidence-based policy making, namely evidence should be rigorous, tested, and
capable of replication; robust and methodically sound; and the entire process of evidence use should
be transparent. The concept has evolved from the ﬁeld of medicine as evidence-based medicine, and
gained popularity in recent decades in the ﬁeld of social sciences (Pahlman2014; Nutley et al.2007).
In particular, the concept gained popularity in 1999 during the election of the Tony Blair Government
in the UK on the platform of “what matters is what works” (Nutley et al.2009, p. 4). Considered
as pragmatic and anti-ideological, the Blair Government questioned “inherited ways of doing things”
(Blair and Cunningham 1999, p. 16) and avowed to develop public policies which were based on
evidence rather than interim responses to political pressures and elections largely informed by part
ideologies. Additionally, the increase of educated, critical, and questioning public has promoted the
<<<PAGE=4>>>
1184 FUSSY
rise of evidence-based policymaking, as policymakers have to be able to elaborate the relevance and
usefulness of their policy choices in consideration to their cost-beneﬁt and efﬁciency (Pahlman2014;
Solesbury 2001).
Evidence is imperative to ensuring success in the policymaking process and implementation. Evi-
dence is viewed as a mechanism to persuasively overcome the inﬂuence of special interest and political
ideology and ensure robustness in the policy debate (Nutley et al.2009). Based on this discussion, the
idea of evidence-based policymaking appears to be straightforward; however, it is largely problematic
and has attracted a corpus of criticism from critics of evidence-based policymaking. First, policy-
making in itself is an inherently political process. It would be naïve to assume that research evidence
can provide completely objective solutions or remedies to political problems such as those relating to
education, criminal justice, or social welfare (Nutley et al.2009; Pahlman2014). Second, the process
of evidence generation and evaluation itself is political as all knowledge is socially constructed and
in many ways contingent (Pawson2006; Taylor and Balloch2005). Policymaking will never detach
from politics, nor will scientiﬁc research negate its political nature because the process of researching,
as with any other human endeavour, inevitably relies on researchers’ interpretation and judgement
despite being guided by methodological principles (Banks2009). With the fallible nature of evidence,
it should be rational to expect policymakers to analyse and assess research claims critically, based on
their professional knowledge and experiences.
Third, the question of how evidence is produced, who produces it, and how it is disseminated to
the public domain and discussed is another critical area for comprehending the reliability of evidence
(Nutley et al.2009; Pahlman2014). Networks of organisations outside of government and public enti-
ties have emerged in many policy areas to play a major role in shaping policy (Nutley et al.2009).
These include think tanks, charitable agencies, lobby groups, and campaign organisations which nor-
mally have an active research function. While these groups are considered to be democratic in the
policy process, in that they are more participatory and have a greater diversity of perspectives, the
assumptions and values entrenched in their research should not be overlooked (Nutley et al.2009;
Pahlman 2014). In most cases, the research and analyses conducted by these groups is not “in the
interest of knowledge, but as a side effect of advocacy” (Weiss1986, p. 280).
Fourth, the issue of selective framing and partisan use of evidence (McConnell2010; Nutley et al.
2009). This means that the typical policymaking context is made up of competing and diverse inter-
ests which tend to favour the wishes and values of certain policy actors over others. While they may
emphasise using evidence in legitimising their policy choices, policymakers can cherry pick the evi-
dence that best suits and supports their prior established opinions and ideologies (McConnell2010).
This means, evidence will only be used when it supports one’s politically motivated priorities to ensure
their political survival. One may not be surprised to see the same research evidence is used by com-
peting interests to support opposing arguments. The selective framing of evidence has considerable
implications for research and scientiﬁc knowledge. Nowadays, politics play an inﬂuential role on
what kind of research gets funded, endorsed, or supported, and the way it is conducted (Nutley et al.
2009). This is extremely challenging especially for one who considers the separation of research and
policy as necessary to holding governments accountable in the sense that independent research and
analyses can “speak truth to power” (Nutley et al.2009,p .8 ) .
The criticism levelled against evidence-based policymaking suggests that tracking research use in
policymaking has been a complex undertaking. The complexity of tracking URE is enhanced by lim-
ited capacity of established data collection methods such as surveys, interviews, document analyses,
observations, social network analyses, and experiments, which are used to study policymakers’ use of
research evidence. These methods have been praised for their ability to capture evidence of research
use however criticised for their inability to capture the use of research evidence (Gamoran2018;
Yanovitzky and Weber2020). Considering the limitations of established methodologies, the current
study reviews and reports evidence on URE using a best-evidence synthesis approach applied to four
national level studies from Bolivia, Indonesia, Myanmar, and Nigeria.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1185
3 BEST EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS
This paper employs a best-evidence synthesis (Slavin1986; 2008) to systematically and critically
review social science reports from Bolivia, Indonesia, Myanmar, and Nigeria. The best-evidence
synthesis (BES) is a research approach for synthesising empirical studies that allows researchers
to combine results from a purposefully and carefully selected number of studies to provide a more
focused and interpretable account and arrive at a given conclusion (Cheung et al.2017;S l a v i n1986;
2008). The BES method is unlike a meta-analysis which necessitates the combination of results from
multiple studies. Cheung et al. (2017) maintain that BES is distinctive in that it provides further
descriptions of key studies under review in addition to numerical summaries, with the intention of
enabling readers to comprehend the programmes and studies, and to gain insight into the research
under review beyond that which meta-analyses could ordinarily provide. The reader is thus famil-
iarised with the nature of the original studies, methodological issues they raise, and ﬁndings that go
beyond the focus of the review.
An example of BES is Willems and Van den Bossche (2019), who purposefully selected ﬁve studies
that reported the effectiveness of a lesson study as a powerful professional development approach for
teachers’ professional learning. Their review concluded that a signiﬁcant change or improvement for
knowledge, skills, beliefs, and behaviour were reported among teachers. Using the BES method and
following Willems and Van den Bossche (2019) procedures, this review sought to establish evidence of
URE from four country reports, namely Egbetokun et al.2020 in Nigeria, Cuba et al.2020 in Bolivia,
Rakhmani et al.2020 in Indonesia, and Glutting et al.2020 in Myanmar. The four country reports were
purposefully selected and included in the current review because they employed and were guided by a
standard methodology of data collection in social science research called Doing Research Assessment
(DRA). The four country studies used the same data generation methodology and research variables as
guided by DRA to undertake research in their respective countries to study the social science research
system in the three core areas of research production, diffusion, and use (uptake) from 2018 through
2020.
The DRA is the methodology developed by the Global Development Network (GDN) to study
the research system, after its 2014–2016 pilot in 11 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin Amer-
ica. DRA speciﬁcally aims to assess systematically how the features of national research system
impact the capacity to produce, diffuse, and use quality social science research to the beneﬁt of
social and economic development (GDN 2020). As an analytical framework of research system,
the DRA consists of 12 determinants (four for each of the three core areas of production, diffu-
sion, and uptake of social science research). While the four country studies report the ﬁndings on
all the three core areas, the current paper reviews the reports’ ﬁndings on the third core area –
the (research) uptake – by demonstrating evidence of URE in the policy domain within the four
countries.
Research uptake is deﬁned in DRA as “the exploitation and adoption of research-based knowl-
edge for use or application in speciﬁc policy domains” (GDN2020, p. 3). In the DRA methodology,
the research uptake has four determinants including policy-friendly research, research-based pol-
icymaking, research-based policy tools, and research for better policies (see Appendix1). These
four determinants with their respective 13 indicators were used as key variables in generating data
on research use by policymakers in four country reports under review. The author has access to
the full dataset linked to each report following the permission granted by GDN. The author is
among the GDN’s fellows who were involved in reviewing and commenting on the four studies’
design and draft reports. Therefore, the current review is done by the author who has ﬁrst-hand
knowledge of how the four studies were designed, how their data were collected, analysed, and
reported.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
1186 FUSSY
4 CONTEXT OF THE FOUR COUNTRIES
It is useful to characterise the four countries based on their four different settings in ways relevant
to the current review of research use. Indonesia is a place where research is much polarised along
ideological lines and capacity is fragmented because of the geomorphological features of the coun-
try. Most of the active researchers and universities are based on the industrial and heavily urbanised
island of Java, with implications for the equitable distribution of research capacity across the coun-
try. The Indonesia report under review indicates that its sample was represented by 102 participants
distributed as 28 policymakers, 40 research administrators, and 34 researchers. Bolivia is a country
where the commissioning of research is polarised too, and where researchers work in extreme iso-
lation, within and outside the country. The Bolivia report under review indicates that its sample was
represented by 221 participants distributed as 155 researchers, 59 research administrators, and seven
policymakers.
Myanmar is a country characterised by difﬁculty in ﬁnding research output, and supposedly social
science graduates are 0.2 per cent. Most research is produced by international actors and not translated,
and informality prevails in research-policy interactions. The Myanmar report under review shows that
its sample was represented by 136 participants in the category of eight policymakers, 114 researchers,
and 14 research administrators. Finally, Nigeria is a large country with a lot of social scientists,
but there is no clear quality or accreditation system for nationally published research. The Nigeria
report under review shows that its sample was represented by 710 individuals in the category of 504
researchers, 145 administrators, and 61 policymakers.
Data in all the four reports under review were collected through surveys and in-depth interviews
from three groups of participants – researchers, research administrators, and policymakers – who
were sourced from individual countries’ higher education institutions, government agencies, and civil
society organisations. The study’s participants in the four reports were accessed through purposive,
simple random, and snowballing sampling depending on the context and nature of the participants.
Interview data in the four reports were analysed using thematic analysis based on the indicators and
determinants of the DRA, and the survey data were coded and run into the computer using Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS). Survey data were then subjected to descriptive analysis, where
frequencies and percentages were generated.
5 EVIDENCE ON URE IN BOLIVIA, INDONESIA, MYANMAR, AND
NIGERIA
Analysis of the four country reports revealed three indicators which are used to evidence URE, namely
demand for research evidence, research-based policy products, and citations of research inputs.
5.1 Demand for research evidence
Evidence from the four country reports indicate that policymakers from different government organi-
sations commissioned research so that researchers can produce evidence that is needed to inform the
policymaking process. The commission of research by policymakers is an indication of the recognition
that research evidence is vital to evidence-based policymaking.
5.1.1 Nigeria
Data from the Nigeria report show that an encouraging number of policymakers (23 per cent of 61)
commissioned research in the last three years since 2020. The commissioned research was conducted
<<<PAGE=7>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1187
by both national and international researchers. Most requests to undertake policy research were infor-
mal, only a small share of researchers (17 per cent of the 504 researchers) did receive a formal request
from policymakers. The frequency of these requests was also encouraging at both individual and
institutional levels. About one-third of researchers had received more than one request at both the
individual and institutional levels (62 per cent of 117 institutions).
5.1.2 Myanmar
A considerable level of engagement with policymakers’ commissioned research projects is also
reported in Myanmar, as 18 per cent of 114 researchers have worked on at least one research project
commissioned by policymakers within the past three years. Like what is prevailing in Nigeria, the
Myanmar government also makes use of informal channels to commission research work. Only 38
per cent of commissioned researchers had received any funding for the research. Commissioned
research in Myanmar is considered as a means of developing or maintaining good relationships with
policymakers.
5.1.3 Indonesia
Most researchers (66.7 per cent) in Indonesia had received requests from policymakers for their inputs
on social science issues during policy development in the last three years. Similarly, the majority of
researchers (68.3 per cent) have worked on policymakers’ commissioned research. This suggests an
increasing recognition of the signiﬁcance of evidence-based policymaking in Indonesia, which has
resulted in a greater research demand.
5.1.4 Bolivia
About one-third of researchers (33 per cent of 155) in Bolivia had received requests for inputs for
public policy, and half of surveyed research institutions (50 per cent of 59) had worked directly with
policymakers over the last three years. More than half of these institutions (56 per cent) had worked
two or three times with policymakers over the same period. Equally, 65 per cent of seven policymak-
ers had requested research inputs in the last three years. Additionally, interview data was reported
in a Bolivia report where a director in a social science research institute at one university in Bolivia
explained an incident that made their municipality consider taking an active role in pushing for legis-
lation after being presented with the research ﬁndings that encouraged the municipality to reach out
to local communities and teach techniques for self-diagnosing cervical cancer.
5.2 Research-based policy products
The four country reports also provide evidence on the involvement of researchers in the production
of research-based policy products including policy briefs, technical reports, and white papers resulted
from social science research ﬁndings.
5.2.1 Nigeria
A number of organisations, including universities and research institutes in Nigeria, regularly pro-
duce communication materials aimed at policymakers. For example, the research and training
<<<PAGE=8>>>
1188 FUSSY
department of National Institute for Legislative and Democratic Studies (NILDS) regularly produces
policy briefs on social issues. These materials are made directly available to policymakers. Simi-
larly, an encouraging number of researchers (23 per cent of 500) had produced technical reports
as an outcome of consultancies or commissioned projects, and 289 researchers (58 per cent) had
produced policy briefs. Nigeria’s report also indicates that policymakers were also involved in the
authoring or co-authoring of these research-based policy materials. More than one-third of poli-
cymakers (37 per cent of 60) reported to have authored or co-authored policy materials based on
social science research. One researcher at the university setting reported to obtain feedback from
the Nigerian Government on some of his research-based policy materials published in the public
domain.
5.2.2 Myanmar
There is no reported data on the number of policy briefs or technical reports produced in Myan-
mar; however, there is evidence of use of research-based policy materials. For example, the Myanmar
report indicates that the tripartite minimum wage committee established in 2017 has been using
labour force survey data owned by the Ministry of Labour and providing relevant inputs to stake-
holders when the minimum wage policy is adjusted every two years. The tripartite minimum wage
committee is made up of government representatives, employers, workers, and ﬁve economics
researchers.
5.2.3 Indonesia
The report shows that most policymakers in Indonesia (82 per cent of 28) have collaborated with
researchers in co-authoring policy-based materials. However, the total number of annually produced
policy materials was not reported.
5.2.4 Bolivia
There is no mention of the quantity of produced research-based policy products in Bolivia. However,
evidence of use of research results is present as shown in section 4.3.
5.3 Citations of research inputs
Citations of research inputs refer to the extent to which policymakers consult and use policy-related
research inputs/ﬁndings. This can be indicated by examining citations of research papers or reports in
policy documents and policymakers’ references of research in their communications.
5.3.1 Nigeria
More than two-thirds of policymakers (68 per cent of 60) in Nigeria had access to research communi-
cation materials and have used them to deliberate on various policies. Data reported from interviews
indicate that policymakers in legislative departments had listened to research ﬁndings during public
and investigative hearings. The report, however, does not indicate the frequency with which those
policymakers use research evidence to support decision making.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1189
5.3.2 Myanmar
While the number of research citations in policy documents is not readily available, the Myanmar
report offers examples of recent policy documents that have cited a number of social science research
studies. For instance, the Agriculture Development Strategy and Investment Plan of the Ministry
of Agriculture, Livestock, and Irrigation (the Ministry’s ﬂagship policy document), cites 15 other
research studies undertaken by various international organisations and individual researchers. The
National Aquaculture Development Plan of the Department of Fisheries also contains several cita-
tions of research studies conducted by international and local researchers. Likewise, several research
administrators shared their perception on the rise of research use in recent years. The report also states
that at least half of the research administrators (seven out of 14) believed that their research products
were used to inform policy decisions.
5.3.3 Indonesia
Almost all policymakers (93 per cent of 28) in Indonesia reported to have had beneﬁtted from research-
based products including peer-reviewed papers, working papers, research reports, presentations, and
position papers.
5.3.4 Bolivia
Most policymakers (71 per cent of seven) in Bolivia reported to have had beneﬁtted personally and
through their institutions, from the researchers’ products, and nearly half of these policymakers (48
per cent) have used the researchers’ products to produce policy-relevant materials.
6 DISCUSSION
Evidence on the use of social science research to inform the policymaking process in Bolivia, Indone-
sia, Myanmar, and Nigeria has been established in this paper. Three indicators are presented as
evidence of research use in four country reports, namely demand for research evidence, research-based
policy products, and citations of research inputs.
The review shows that the demand of research evidence was evident in the four studies through poli-
cymakers’ commissioning of research projects and direct request of inputs and advice from researchers
during the development of policy. This ﬁnding suggests the conceptual use of research evidence as pol-
icymakers sought evidence to enlighten their thinking about the policy problem at hand. The ﬁnding
is similar to past research which found the prevalence of conceptual use of research evidence during
the earliest stages of policy formulation (Blewden et al.2010; Gamoran 2018; Gitomer and Crouse
2019; Yanovitzky and Weber2020) and in the managers’ day-to-day professional activity in Canadian
government agencies (Amara et al.2004).
Policymakers in three country reports often used informal approaches to request researchers to
undertake policy relevant research and/or share their inputs and advice during policy development.
This ﬁnding reﬂects a South African study which found that the primary source of evidence for poli-
cymakers was informal rather than formal sources of evidence (Cronin and Sadan2015). In this regard,
the current review and that of Cronin and Sadan (2015) suggest that the use of research evidence is not
normally straightforward and systematic. As the process is usually indirect and not easily noticeable,
the general public may not trace the impact of a particular study or a speciﬁc ﬁnding on a public deci-
sion. Similarly, the social science researchers themselves who conduct policy research could not often
<<<PAGE=10>>>
1190 FUSSY
be aware of the impact of their studies on policy, something which may compel the social science
researchers to give up on their efforts to produce policy-relevant research and sometimes write denun-
ciations to journals criticising policymakers for their neglect of research evidence (Gamoran2018;
Weiss 1977). Gunn and Mintrom (2021) have provided two justiﬁcations on the tensions which arise
from demonstrating the impact of research evidence in the policymaking process. First, with the use
of the informality approach, policymakers may not be aware of the origins of the research evidence or
knowledge they are using. Second, policymakers may sometimes need a high degree of conﬁdentiality
and thus formulate policies and use evidence in a “safe space” in which ofﬁcials and experts come
together to discuss policy development with total anonymity.
A concern worthy of noting is how social science researchers can leverage informality in policy-
makers’ use of research evidence. There is a body of research (Newman et al.2013) and some evidence
from four country reports (Egbetokun et al.2020; Cuba et al.2020; Rakhmani et al.2020; Glutting
et al.2020) which suggest informality is being preferred by policymakers because they want to invite
in researchers who will just support policymakers’ initial hypotheses/preferences, rather than analyse
the reality objectively. In contrast, a semi-structured interview study conducted in Australia to 26 Aus-
tralian civil servants, ministers, and ministerial advisors – as group of policymakers – reported how
policymakers ﬁnd and evaluate researchers of whom they expect to consult or collaborate. The ﬁndings
shown that policymakers valued researchers who possess three key attributes: competence (exemplary
academic reputation with pragmatic knowledge of government processes, adept at communicating and
collaboration), integrity (independence and faithful in reporting research ﬁndings), and benevolence
(commitment to policy reform) (Haynes et al.2012). The implication is that regardless of the approach
that policymakers could use to reach or request researchers, researchers who wish to inﬂuence policy
should at least conform to these three attributes.
The ﬁndings on research-based products show that researchers took initiatives to produce policy
briefs, technical reports, and white papers on social science research ﬁndings they conducted. This
ﬁnding reﬂects what Blewden et al. (2010) found in their in-depth interview study with policymakers
and social science researchers working in the immigration area in New Zealand. Both researchers and
policymakers stressed the imperative of researcher-initiated research which is not necessary closely
connected to current policy issues. The researcher self-initiated research enables the researcher to have
content for production of policy communication materials such as policy briefs, technical reports, and
white papers. Indeed, researchers and policymakers in Blewden et al.’s study felt that researcher self-
initiated research should rather be informed than driven by policy concerns to allow researchers to
address questions or issues which were not yet thought of by policymakers. The implication is that
in order for URE to occur, social science researchers do not need to cling to policymakers such that
they produce research conceptualised largely in project-based or instrumental terms (Blewden et al.
2010; Gunn and Mintrom2021; Nutley and Tseng2014; Oliver and de V ocht2017). This view is
also evident in the current review especially in the Nigeria, Indonesia, and Myanmar reports, where
researchers who were producing policy briefs reported to obtain feedback from their respective pol-
icymakers in the governments while original studies for those policy briefs were not commissioned
by the policymakers. Some policymakers even reported getting involved in the co-authoring of those
policy briefs based on generated social science research results.
Furthermore, the ﬁndings on the citations of research inputs indicate that policymakers make direct
use of research evidence in policy development. This is evident through referencing research stud-
ies/ﬁndings in a given policy. The Myanmar report provides a case where different public policies
have cited research studies, while the Nigeria, Indonesia, and Bolivia reports provide examples where
policymakers had directly used research ﬁndings from researchers’ presentations to develop policies.
In Weiss’ typology of research use, these ﬁndings suggest the instrumental use of research evidence,
where research evidence or ﬁndings are direct and speciﬁcally applied in policy deliberations and
decision-making processes. While the ﬁndings suggest policymakers’ instrumental use of research
evidence, participation or engagement of these policymakers in research design was mentioned as
a challenge throughout the four country reports. For example, one participant researcher in the
<<<PAGE=11>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1191
Nigeria report explained that “they [policymakers] are only interested in your research ﬁnding, so
they don’t participate in the research design or anything like that” (Egbetokun et al., p. 103). This
ﬁnding contrasts the tenets of instrumental use of research ﬁndings, where it is anticipated to occur at
the policy development stages, with researchers more likely to be working consensually and collabora-
tively with policymakers, as Blewden et al. (2010) found in their study that examined the development
of immigration policy in New Zealand.
A substantial body of knowledge has highlighted the beneﬁts of researchers and policymakers’
engagement at the earliest stages of research and ways to increase the level of engagement between
social science researchers and policymakers (Blewden et al.2010; Gitomer and Crouse2019; Landry
et al.2001; Landry et al.2003; Luukkonen and Nedeva2010; Nutley et al.2007). Kano and Hayashi
(2021), for example, have recently developed a framework to enable researchers and policymakers
to align themselves in dealing with evidence in policymaking and increase the level of engagement.
The framework contains ﬁve elements, namely methodological rigorousness, consistency, proximity,
social appropriateness, and legitimacy. Methodological rigor refers to the quality of research evi-
dence derived from systematic research designs or scientiﬁc methodologies that were selected and
designed by both researchers and policymakers. Consistency refers to the steadiness of research evi-
dence even when it is generated from multiple studies or analyses. Proximity considers the relevance of
the research evidence to policy targets and context. Legitimacy requires policymakers to anchor their
decision-making on research evidence rather than on events and experiences. Social appropriateness
refers to whether the production and use of research evidence adequately considers the socio-political
context including being ethical, legal, and socially acceptable. With Kano and Hayashi (2021)’s frame-
work for implementing evidence in policymaking, the onus is on reinforcing a two-way interactive
relationship between the two sides so that researchers undertake studies that likely answer the real
needs of policymakers, while policymakers shape research questions to guide researchers on the right
direction in producing policy-relevant research.
7 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Research evidence enters the policy domain through a variety of ways, and policymakers use the evi-
dence in a number of different ways during policy development (Tseng2015). The current review
has established evidence on URE in policy deliberations and decision making from four country
reports in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Both conceptual and instrumental uses of research evi-
dence as per Weiss’ typologies of research use were evident in the reports. There was a demand
for research evidence by policymakers in all four country reports, and it was met through commis-
sioning various research projects and consulting various researchers mostly in informal ways. There
were also some considerable initiatives for researchers to produce research-based policy materials
such as policy briefs, working papers, and technical reports from researchers’ self-initiated research.
With the research-based policy materials generated through researchers’ self-initiated research, pol-
icymakers are being presented with ready-made and objectively analysed research evidence. There
are also instances of direct use of research evidence as evident through citations of research in policy
documents in some country reports such as the Myanmar report, and testimonies of policymakers’
direct use of research ﬁndings from researchers’ presentations to develop policies as in the Nigeria,
Indonesia, and Bolivia reports.
Based on this analysis, this paper broadens our understanding on URE from developing countries
where such studies are scarce and based mainly in healthy and medical-related ﬁelds. By providing
evidence on URE, different funders and researchers are better informed about the potential utility of
research they respectively fund and/or undertake. As such, the paper argues that it can take time for
research evidence to inﬁltrate the policy domain and contribute to policy decisions. Indeed, policymak-
ers may not be aware or even able to account for how research ﬁndings have shifted their ideas and
have contributed to policies (Farrell and Coburn2016; Tseng et al.2018). Tracing such changes take
<<<PAGE=12>>>
1192 FUSSY
patience and willingness to continue observing how research evidence travel across policy domains in
different settings.
The paper recommends an increase of the level of mutual engagement between social science
researchers and policymakers from the earliest stages of research, as this will also increase an under-
standing of what kind of evidence is being produced by researchers and maximise policymakers’ use
of research evidence in conceptual, instrumental, or symbolic terms. Kano and Hayashi (2021, p. 86)
highlight that “an essential task for the effective use of evidence in policymaking is for scientists
and policymakers to share a common understanding of how evidence should be produced and used”.
Additionally, the paper recommends that future research on URE could focus on how URE happens in
speciﬁc contexts, the type of evidence which policymakers prefer to use in making policy decisions,
and the characteristics of researchers whom policymakers prefer to consult and collaborate.
DATA A VAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request.
PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available athttps://publons.com/publon/10.1111/issj.12357
REFERENCES
Amara, N., M. Ouimet, and R. Landry. 2004. “New evidence on instrumental, conceptual, and symbolic utilization of university
research in Government agencies.”Science Communication26(1): 75–106.https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547004267491
Backer, T. E. 1991. “Knowledge utilization: The third wave.” Knowledge 12(3): 225–40. https://doi.org/10.1177/
107554709101200303
Banks, G. 2009. Evidence-based policy making: What is it? How do we get it?Canberra: ANU Public Lecture Series.
Productivity Commission.
Blair, T., and J. Cunningham. 1999.Modernising government. London: Prime Minister and Minister for the Cabinet Ofﬁce.
Blewden, M., P. Carroll, and K. Witten. 2010. “The use of social science research to inform policy development: Case studies
from recent immigration policy.”K¯otuitui: New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences Online5(1): 13–25.https://doi.org/10.
1080/1175083X.2010.498087
Cheung, A., R. E. Slavin, E. Kim, and C. Lake. 2017. “Effective secondary science programs: A best-evidence synthesis.”
Journal of Research in Science Teaching54(1): 58–81.
Cronin, P. G., and M. Sadan. 2015. “Use of evidence in policy making in South Africa: An exploratory study of attitudes of
senior government ofﬁcials.”African Evaluation Journal3(1): 1–10.https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v3i1.145
Cuba, L. P., R. Laserna, S. Ribera, and M. Gomez. 2020.Doing research in Bolivia country report. GDN CERES,http://gdn.
int/DRA_Bolivia2020
Davies, H., S. Nutley, and I. Walter. 2008. “Why ‘knowledge transfer’ is misconceived for applied social research.”Health
Services Research & Policy13: 188–90.
Egbetokun, A., A. Oloﬁnyehun, A. Ayo-Lawal, O. Oluwatope, M. Sanni, and U. Yusuff. 2020.Doing research in Nigeria
country report. GDN NACETEM.http://gdn.int/DRA_Nigeria2020
Farrell, C., and C. Coburn 2016. “What is the conceptual use of research and why is it important?” Available at:http://
wtgrantfoundation.org/conceptual-use-research-important
Gamoran, A. 2018. “Evidence-based policy in the real world: A cautionary view.”Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science678: 180–91.
GDN 2020. “Doing Research Assessment.” Available at:http://www.gdn.int/doing-researchassessment
Gitomer, D. H., and K. Crouse 2019. “Studying the use of research evidence: A review of methods.” A William T. Grant Foun-
dation Monograph. Available athttp://wtgrantfoundation.org/library/uploads/2019/02/A-Review-of-Methods-FINAL003.
pdf
Glutting, J. R., Z. Oo, Z. X. Anders Lee, N. L. Htet, N. Lin, N. C. Win, N. C. Aung, and T. Z. Oo. 2020.Doing research in
Myanmar country report. GDN CESD.http://gdn.int/DRA_Myanmar2020
Goldman I., and Pabari M., eds. 2020.Using evidence in policy and practice. 1st edition. New York, NY: Routledge.
Gough, D., C. Maidment, and J. Sharples 2018. “UK What Works Centres: Aims, methods and contexts.” London. Available
at: https://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Default.aspx?tabid=3731
Gunn, A., and M. Mintrom. 2021. “Where evidence-based policy meets research impact.”A u s tJP u b lA d m i n80: 544–53.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8500.12499
<<<PAGE=13>>>
USE OF RESEARCH EVIDENCE IN POLICY DOMAIN 1193
Haynes, A. S., G. E. Derrick, S. Redman, W. D. Hall, and J. A. Gillespie. 2012. “Identifying trustworthy experts: How do
policymakers ﬁnd and assess public health researchers worth consulting or collaborating with?”PLoS ONE7(3): e32665.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0032665
Kano, H., and T. I. Hayashi 2021. “A framework for implementing evidence in policymaking: Perspectives and phases of
evidence evaluation in the science-policy interaction.”Environmental Science and Policy116: 86–95. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.envsci.2020.09.001
Kathryn, O., and A. Boaz 2019. “Transforming evidence for policy and practice: Creating space for new conversations.”
Palgrave Communications. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0266-1
Landry, R., M. Lamari, and N. Amara. 2003. “Extent and determinants of utilisation of university research in public
administration.” Public Administration Review63(2): 191–204.
Landry, R., N. Amara, and M. Lamari. 2001. “Utilization of social science research knowledge in Canada.”Research Policy
30: 333–49.
Lawlor, J., K. Mills, Z. Neal, J. W. Neal, C. Wilson, and K. Mcalindon. 2019. “Approaches to measuring use of research
evidence in K-12 settings: A systematic review.”Educational Research Review27: 218–28.
Luukkonen, T., and M. Nedeva. 2010. “Towards understanding integration in research and research policy.”Research Policy
39(5): 674–86.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.02.008
McConnell, A. 2010.Understanding policy success: Rethinking public policy. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Newman, K., A. Capillo, A. Famurewa, C. Nath, and W. Siyanbola 2013. “What is the evidence on evidence-informed policy
making?” Lessons from the international conference on evidence-informed policy making. International Network for the
Availability of Scientiﬁc Publications.
Nutley, S. M., and V . Tseng. 2014. “Building the infrastructure to improve the use and usefulness of research in education.”
In K. S. Finnigan. and A. J. Daly (Eds.).Using research evidence in education: From the schoolhouse door to Capitol Hill.
Policy implications of research in education.163–75. Springer.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-04690-7_11
Nutley, S., I. Walter, and H. Davies. 2007.Using evidence: How research can inform public services. Bristol: Policy Press.
Nutley, S., I. Walter, and H. Davies. 2009. “Past, present and possible futures for evidence-based policy.” In A. George (Ed.).
Evidence for policy and decision-making: A practical guide.(1–23). Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Oliver, K. A., and F. de V ocht. 2017. “Deﬁning ‘evidence’ in public health: A survey of policymakers’ uses and preferences.”
European Journal of Public Health27(2): 112–7.
Pahlman, K. 2014. “A critical examination of the idea of evidence-based policymaking.”The ANU Undergraduate Research
Journal 6: 83–93.
Pawson, R. 2006.Evidence-based policy: A realist perspective. London: Sage.
Rakhmani, I., Z. Sakhiyya, A. S. Ramadhan, and W. Agahari 2020. “Doing research in Indonesia country report.” GDN CIPG,
http://gdn.int/DRA_Indonesia2020
Slavin, R. E. 1986. “Best-evidence synthesis: An alternative to meta-analytic and traditional reviews.”Educational Researcher
15(9): 5–11.
Slavin, R. E. 2008. “What works? Issues in synthesizing educational program evaluations.”Educational Researcher37: 5–14.
Solesbury, W. 2001. “Evidence based policy: Whence it came and where it’s going.” Working Paper 1. ESRC UK Centre for
Evidence Based Policy and Practice, University of London.
Taylor, M., and S. Balloch. 2005. “The politics of evaluation: An overview.” In M. Taylor, and S. Balloch (Eds.).The politics
of evaluation: Participation and policy implementation.(1–17). Bristol: The Policy Press.
Tseng, V . 2015. “Studying the use of research evidence in policy & practice.”http://wtgrantfoundation.org/library/uploads/
2015/09/Studying-the-Use-of-Research-Evidence-in-Policy-and-Practice.pdf
Tseng, V ., J. Q. Easton, and L. H. Supplee 2018. “Research-practice partnerships: Building two-way streets of engagement.”
Soc Policy Report.https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2379-3988.2017.tb00089.x
W.T Grant Foundation 2020. “Research grants on improving the use of research evidence: 2020 application guide-
lines.” Available at http://wtgrantfoundation.org/library/uploads/2020/01/2020-Guidelines-Research-Grants-Improving-
Use-of-Research-Evidence.pdf
Wehrens, R., M. Bekker, and R. Bal 2010. “The construction of evidence-based local health policy through partnerships:
Research infrastructure, process, and context in the Rotterdam ‘Healthy in the City’ programme.”J Public Health Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1057/jphp.2010.33
Weiss, C. 1986. “The circuitry of enlightenment: Diffusion of social science research to policymakers.”Science Communication
8(2): 271–81.
Weiss, C. 1977. “Research for policy’s sake: The enlightenment function of social research.”Policy Analysis3(4): 531–45.
Weiss, C. H. 1979. “The many meanings of research utilization.”Public Administration Review39(5): 426–31.https://doi.org/
10.2307/3109916.
Willems, I., and P. Van den Bossche. 2019. “Lesson Study effectiveness for teachers’ professional learning: A best evidence
synthesis.” International Journal for Lesson and Learning Studies8(4): 257–71. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLLS-04-2019-
0031
Yanovitzky, I., and M. Weber. 2020. “Analysing use of evidence in public policymaking processes: A theory-grounded content
analysis methodology.”Evidence & Policy16(1): 65–82.https://doi.org/10.1332/174426418x15378680726175
<<<PAGE=14>>>
1194 FUSSY
How to cite this article:Fussy, Daniel Sidney. 2022. “Use of research evidence in the policy
domain: A best-evidence synthesis of social science research in Africa, Asia, and Latin
America.” International Social Science Journal, 72, 1181–1194.
https://doi.org/10.1111/issj.12357
APPENDIX 1: DOING RESEARCH ASSESSMENT – TABLE OF
INDICATORS FOR RESEARCH UPTAKE
Factor Indicators Type Sources
3 Uptake (policy) (1/3)
3.1 Policy-friendly research (20%)
Products of research speciﬁcally aimed at supporting policymaking.
3.1.a. Political value of
research
∙ Level of independence of the research
produced
∙ Demand for research inputs into
policymaking
∙ # of grants received from policymakers,
per institution or per researcher
Rating
Rating
Absolute
Survey +interviews
Desk Review+Survey +
Interviews Survey
3.1.b. Policy-relevant
research
∙ Quality of participation of policymakers
in research design
∙ Number of communication materials
produced for policymakers, per
researcher
Rating
Absolute
Interviews
Desk review+Survey
3.1.c Research-to-
Policy nexus
∙ # of lectures and policy learning
packages for technical ofﬁcers and
policymakers, per institution
∙ # of researchers holding political
positions
Absolute
%
Interviews
Desk review+Survey
3.2 Research-based policymaking (20%)
Activities, capacities, rules, and structures of policymaking that foster the use of research in the policy process.
3.2.a Formal collaboration:
researcher participation
∙ Share of researcher membership in
bodies advising policymakers at the
central and decentralized levels
% Desk review +Survey
3.2.b Informal
collaboration: researcher
consultation
∙ Frequency of interaction with
policymakers
∙ Perceived inﬂuence on policy
development
Rating
Rating
Policy Community
surveys/Researcher surveys
Policy Community
surveys/Researcher surveys
3.3 Research-based policy products (30%)
Policy products that make use of research.
3.3.a Instrumental
utilization
∙ # of research citations in policy
documents
∙ Frequency of policy implementation
support
Absolute
Rating
Altmetrics data or Survey
Interviews with policy
community
3.4 Research for better policies (30%)
End results: policies are based on independent, robust, and transparent evidence and bring improved outcomes.
3.4.a Inﬂuence of research
on policy outcome
∙ Perceptions of the utility of social
science research for policymakers
Rating Survey +interviews
Source: GDN (2020).