<<<PAGE=1>>>
Please cite the Published Version
Lai, Y anqing
 , Garavan, Thomas, McCarthy, Alma, Sheehan, Maura, Carbery, Ronan and Mur-
phy, Kevin (2021) Training and Organizational Performance: A Meta-Analysis of Temporal, Insti-
tutional and Organizational Context Moderators. Human Resource Management Journal, 31 (1).
pp. 93-119. ISSN 0954-5395
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/1748-8583.12284
Publisher: Wiley
Version: Accepted Version
Downloaded from:https://e-space.mmu.ac.uk/624801/
Usage rights:
 In Copyright
Additional Information:This is an Author Accepted Manuscript of a paper accepted for publica-
tion in Human Resource Management Journal, published by and copyright Wiley.
Enquiries:
If you have questions about this document, contact openresearch@mmu.ac.uk. Please in-
clude the URL of the record in e-space. If you believe that your, or a third party’s rights have
been compromised through this document please see our Take Down policy (available from
https://www.mmu.ac.uk/library/using-the-library/policies-and-guidelines)
<<<PAGE=2>>>
1 
 
Training and Organizational Performance: A Meta-Analysis of Temporal, Institutional 
and Organizational Context Moderators 
 
ABSTRACT (150 words max) 
Drawing on systems theory, we conducted a moderated meta-analysis of the training and 
organizational performance relationship using 119 primary studies.  We examined the 
moderating effects of quality versus quantity of training, time, institutional, and 
organizational context factors in the relationship between training and organizational 
performance. Our findings reveal that training is positively and directly related to 
organizational performance with no statistically significant difference between measures of 
training quality and quantity.  We found that the relationship was stronger over time and that  
country performance orientation and country labor cost moderate the training and 
organizational performance relationship.  We found no evidence for the moderating effects of 
the three organizational context moderators we examined (i.e., industry sector, organizational 
size and technology intensity). Finally, our results reveal that training type (i.e., general or 
firm-specific) does not moderate the training and organizational performance relationship.   
 
KEYWORDS 
Training 
Organizational performance 
Meta-analysis 
Moderators
<<<PAGE=3>>>
2 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Training consists of formal on- and off-the-job structured activities focused on the 
development of knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) for current and future job roles (Kim 
& Ployhart, 2014; Tharenou, Saks, & Moore, 2007).  These activities have become 
widespread HRM practices in organizations worldwide (ATD, 2018; Hughes, Zajac, Woods, 
& Salas, 2019). Through investment in structured training, organizations enhance employee 
and organizational human capital which, in turn, contribute to better organizational 
performance (Jiang, Lepak, Hu, & Baer, 2012; Tharenou, Saks, & Moore, 2007).  While 
earlier research focused on investigating the direct relationship between training and 
organizational performance (e.g., Bartel, 1994; Beugelsdijk, 2008), more recent studies have 
started to take into account the role of moderators (e.g., Arunprasad, 2017; Sing, Darwish, 
Wood, & Mohamed, 2017).  Much of this more recent research has focused on the role of 
internal organizational context moderators such as frim size (e.g., Lee, 2012), human capital 
levels (e.g., Sung & Choi, 2014) and organizational climate (e.g., Van Esch, Wei, & Chiang, 
2018).  However, the strength of the training and organizational performance relationship 
may also depend on external institutional factors within which the organization operates 
(Budhwar, Pereira, Mellahi & Singh, 2018; Farndale & Paauwe, 2018).  
 
Drawing on systems theory and three of its principles (i.e., congruence, adaptation and 
equifinality) (Kast & Rosenzweig, 1972; Shin & Konrad, 2017), the primary purpose of the 
current meta-analysis is to investigate the role of temporal, institutional and organizational 
context moderators in the training and organizational performance relationship.  The 
congruence hypothesis embedded in systems theory (Nadler & Tushman, 1980) suggests that 
organizational performance is a function of the congruence between various organizational 
components, in this case training, and the context within which the organization operates.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
3 
 
Specifically, we explore country performance orientation (a national cultural difference) and 
country labor cost as two institutional context moderators of the training and organizational 
performance relationship.  We also shed light on how quality versus quantity of training 
impacts organizational performance.  By doing so, we address important gaps in the literature 
on moderators of the training and organizational performance relationship.  In addressing 
these gaps, researchers and practitioners will acquire a greater understanding of how context 
impacts the training and organizational performance relationship and have greater insights 
into whether it is the amount or quality of training, or both, that is important.  
 
The adaptation principle of systems theory (Schleicher et al., 2018) provides a useful 
theoretical framework to support our proposition that training must adapt to changing 
environmental conditions to be effective, which therefore allows us to take a temporal 
perspective to examine whether the strength of the training and organizational performance 
relationship has increased or decreased over time (Johns 2006; Wegman, Hoffman, Carter, 
Twenge & Guenole, 2018).  Finally, the equifinality principle argues that organizations can 
utilize different paths to achieve the same outcome.  In this context, there is much debate 
concerning the value of investment in firm-specific or general training for organizational 
performance (Riley, Michael, & Mahoney, 2017).  Utilizing the principle of equifinality, we 
argue that the type of training (i.e., firm-specific or general training) does not moderate the 
relationship between training and organizational performance and we examine this 
relationship in our meta-analysis.   
 
In the context of the scarcity of talent in the external labor market, firms strive to develop a 
competent workforce, which is a critical factor impacting competitive advantage. Training 
has been acknowledged as a key HR practice to improve employee morale, productivity and
<<<PAGE=5>>>
4 
 
ultimately organizational performance (Tharenou et al 2007; Sun & Choi 2014).  Industry 
reports reveal continuous investment in employee KSAs (ATD, State of Industry Report, 
2018) indicating that firms increasingly appreciate the strategic importance of investment in 
training to gain competitive advantage. To justify such resource investment in training, 
organizations look to research findings to provide evidence that training impacts 
organizational performance. However, the research findings to date are heterogeneous with 
many studies showing a relatively weak training-organizational performance relationship.  In 
addition, training researchers have been eager to understand why and in what ways the 
training-organizational performance link is so heterogeneous (Sung & Choi, 2018; Magableh, 
Kharabsheh & Al-Zuba, 2011). Accordingly, researchers have called for the consolidation of 
empirical findings to understand the role of context factors as moderators in explaining the 
variation in findings on the training-organizational performance relationship and this paper 
responds to that call.     
 
The objective of our paper is fourfold: (i) to examine how the relationship between training 
and organizational performance varies over time; (ii) to examine whether the relationship 
differs for the quantity versus the quality of training undertaken in organization; (iii) to 
examine to what extent the relationship is influenced by two institutional context variables 
(country performance orientation and country labor costs) and three organizational contextual 
factors (industry sector, organizational size and technology intensity); and (iv) to examine if 
type of training (i.e., firm-specific or general training) moderates the training and 
organizational performance relationship.  To achieve our objective, we conduct a three-level 
meta-analysis aggregating 119 primary studies consisting of 313 effect sizes derived from 
studies published between 1985 and 2019.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
5 
 
We make four significant contributions to the training and HRM literature.  First, within a 
field of study that is still maturing and where empirical findings are inconsistent, a meta-
analysis can help synthesize key findings and identify new research avenues (Rosenbauch, 
Gusenbauer, Hatak, Fink, & Meyer, 2019). To the best of our knowledge, one meta-analysis 
has been conducted to date on the training-organizational performance relationship (Tharenou 
et al., 2007). Since publication of Tharenou et al.’s (2007) meta-analysis, a significant 
number of empirical studies have been added to the existing literature investigating the 
training-organizational performance relationship.  Second, our meta-analysis contributes to 
theory by utilizing concepts and principles derived from systems theory (congruence, 
adaptation and equifinality) to understand the role of institutional and organizational context 
moderators of the training-organizational performance relationship.  By doing so, we shed 
light on the significance of these contextual moderators in explaining the heterogeneity of 
findings.  Third, using insight from the adaptation principle of systems theory, we incorporate 
a temporal perspective into the theoretical framework and methodologi cal design to test if 
the relationship between training and organizational performance varies across time thus 
supporting arguments that organizations are investing more in training in the expectation of 
higher organizational performance returns.  The current meta-analysis also investigates the 
issue of quality versus quantity of training in explaining organizational performance thereby 
helping to resolve the debate as to whether more of the same is better or should there be less 
training but of higher quality.  Finally, we make a methodological contribution by employing 
a three-level meta-analytic approach to address the issue of inter-dependency of effect sizes 
in meta-analysis techniques employed in the training/HRM field.  
 
THEORY AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT 
The Relationship between Training and Organizational Performance
<<<PAGE=7>>>
6 
 
In line with prior research (Kim & Ployhart, 2014; Tharenou et al., 2007), we define training 
as consisting of formal on- and-off the job activities focused on the development of KSAs for 
current and future roles. Tharenou et al (2007) in their meta-analysis emphasized KSAs for 
the current role.  However, scholars argue that training also includes development 
components for future organizational roles (Kraiger, Passmore, Dos Santos, & Malvessi, 
2014).  For example, Sitzmann & Weinhardt (2018) argued that while a significant amount of 
training in organizations emphasizes the development of KSAs that are directly applicable to 
the current role, they increasingly provide training activities focused on the development of 
general or soft skills that have application to future organizational roles.  
 
We propose a number of reasons as to why training is linked to organizational performance. 
First, training enhances employees KSAs for current and future roles which results in 
enhanced organizational performance (Kim & Ployhart, 2014; Wright & McMahan, 2011). 
Second, training enables the development of a greater depth of KSAs enabling employees to 
be more flexible and perform different tasks more effectively (Somaya, Williamson & 
Lorinkova, 2008) leading to enhanced organizational performance. The increase in flexibility 
is critical to a variety of organizational outcomes such as innovation (Zhou & Wu, 2010), 
customer service (Johnson, 1996) and labor productivity (Guerrazzi, 2016). Third, training 
can enhance skill depth and enable employees to develop specialized knowledge and skills 
and general skills to help the organization build core competencies within the organization 
staying ahead of the competition (Coff, 1997).  Hence, we argue that both unique, valuable 
and rare human capital developed through firm-specific training and general training leads to 
higher organizational performance.  In addition, there are theoretical arguments suggesting 
that higher quality training will have a greater impact on training than the quantity of training 
provided.  Where training is of higher quality, employees will learn more quickly (Aquinis &
<<<PAGE=8>>>
7 
 
Kraiger, 2009). Quality training will also shorten learning times and motivate the transfer of 
training to the workplace (Hughes et al., 2019) and enhance the motivation of employees to 
transfer the outcomes of training to the organization. Studies to date have utilized different 
measures of training quantity including the percentage of employees trained (e.g., Ely, 2004), 
the amount spend on training (e.g., Choi & Yoon, 2015) and the number of days training 
(e.g., Appleyard & Brown, 2001). Studies of training quality focus on measures of 
effectiveness and evaluation of training (e.g., Otoo, 2019).   
Therefore, we propose the following hypotheses: 
Hypothesis 1a: Training is positively and directly related to organizational 
performance 
Hypothesis 1b: The relationship between training and organizational performance 
will be stronger for measures of the quality compared to measures of the quantity of 
training.  
 
The Training-Organizational Performance Relationship and Time  
The adaptation principle of systems theory (Von Bertalanffy, 1968) asserts that organizations 
utilize various mechanisms, one of which is training, to adapt to changing and shifting 
internal and external context factors to maintain effectiveness.  This principle suggests the 
need to adopt a temporal perspective on the training-organizational performance relationship 
to account for changes over time.  Wright, Nyberg and Ployhart (2018) emphasized the need 
for a dynamic understanding of the relationship between HRM and organizational 
performance, given the increased pace of change in the external environment, such as 
increased globalization, changes and skill gaps in the labor market, and the fast pace of 
technological change.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
8 
 
The literature suggests that the global business environment has experienced significant 
transformation and change over the past three decades. Such business environment changes 
include the emergence of technology-based organizations (Montealegra & Cascio, 2017), 
knowledge workers, the globalization of organizations (Friedman, 2016), difficulties in 
recruiting talent (Cascio & Graham, 2016), job changes (Wegman et al., 2018), and 
generational differences in work, career and development expectations (Hirsch-Kreinsen, 
2016). Based on the proposition that time can be considered as a surrogate for all these 
changes, which Johns (2006) terms ‘omnibus context’, these changes shape organizational 
HR practices (Johns, 2006; Wegman et al., 2018).  In turn, we argue that organizations may 
respond to these external context changes by investing more in training.   
 
There is evidence that organizations have responded to the external environment by 
increasingly investing in training. The Association of Talent Development (2017) State of 
Industry Report on Training reported a spend of US$90.6 billion in 2017 representing an 
increase of 325% on 2016 and the relevant figure for 2010 was $125.9 million.  Data for the 
UK indicate that expenditures on training have increased by 600% between 2000 and 2016 to 
$29 billion (CIPD, 2017). As such, training is an important and pervasive HRM practice in 
organizations (Kim & Ployhart, 2014; Riley, Michael & Mahoney, 2017; Training Industry 
Report, 2018).  The research indicates that organizations are increasing investment in training 
over time.  Many organizations have devoted extra financial resources to training to garner 
accreditations such as Investors in People in the UK (www.investorsinpeople.com), Training 
Magazine’s Best Training Organizations list (Riley et al., 2017) and to be ranked highly in 
workplace rankings such as the Great Place to Work (www.greatplacetowork.com
).  Coupled 
with increased investment in training, there is evidence that the quality and impact of training 
has improved as the field has developed (Kraiger, 2014; Kraiger et al., 2014) resulting from
<<<PAGE=10>>>
9 
 
more research and growing practitioner education and expertise in training, learning and 
development over time (Ruona, 2016).  Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 2: The strength of the relationship between training and organizational 
performance has increased year on year over time. 
 
Institutional Context Factors and the Training-Organizational Performance Relationship 
The congruence hypothesis (Nadler & Tushman, 1980) proposes the role of fit and the need 
for various components of a system to be consistent and in balance.  In organizational 
settings, the performance outcomes of training are conditional upon the levels of congruence 
between the training and both the external institutional context and the internal organizational 
context (Farndale & Paauwe, 2018; Purcell & Boxall, 2015). In the HRM and organizational 
performance literature, a stream of research argues that both external institutional factors 
(such as labor markets, national and regional institutions and cultures, competitive 
mechanisms, industry sector and market conditions) and internal organizational context 
characteristics (such as ownership, size, sector, strategic objectives and culture) impact the 
HRM and performance relationship (Jackson, Schuler & Jiang, 2014; Farndale & Paauwe, 
2018).  The concept of fit or congruence, which is embedded in systems theory, between 
external and internal context factors and HR practices provides a theoretical logic to 
understand the moderating role of external moderators of the training and organizational 
performance relationship (country performance orientation and country labor cost) as well as 
important institutional factors (sector, size and technology intensity) impacting HR and 
training policy and practice (North, 1990; Meyer & Peng, 2016).  
 Country Performance Orientation. Scholars studying the HRM-performance 
relationship in cross-cultural contexts have suggested that the strength of the training and 
organizational performance relationship will be influenced by the country performance
<<<PAGE=11>>>
10 
 
orientation where the organization is situated (Ahmad & Schroeder, 2003; Rabi, Jayasingh, 
Gerhart, & Kuhlmann, 2014). The GLOBE study included performance orientation as an 
important cultural dimension that influences leadership and organizational decision-making 
(House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, & Gupta, 2004).  Grove (2005) characterized high 
performance orientated cultures as encouraging and rewarding the setting of challenging 
goals, and high standards, innovation excellence and performance improvement.  These 
performance-driven characteristics potentially exert a positive effect on the strength of the 
relationship between training and organizational performance. Specifically, the emphasis on 
performance improvement encourages and promotes employees to apply and integrate new 
knowledge and skills in their workplace. Organizations located in high performance oriented 
cultures are likely to achieve increased efficiency in training delivery, the transfer of the 
training to the job setting and better performance (Rabi et al., 2014). In addition, the 
emphasis on knowledge sharing, participation in team activities and quick decision making 
(Rabi et al., 2014) lead to better job and business performance. In contrast, low performance 
oriented cultures place greater emphasis on values including social and family relationships, 
loyalty, harmony, tradition and seniority (Javidan, House, Dorfman, Hanges, & Sully de 
Luque, 2006, Grove, 2005), which may potentially undermine the effectiveness of training 
and training transfer.   
Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:      
Hypothesis 3a: The relationship between training and organizational performance 
will be stronger for organizations from countries with a high performance orientated 
culture than for organizations in a low performance orientated culture.  
 
Country Labor Costs. A second institutional condition that may potentially moderate the 
relationship between training and organizational performance is the level of labor costs
<<<PAGE=12>>>
11 
 
within the country. Countries vary in their labor cost structure, and higher labor costs may 
inhibit the degree to which training translates into organizational performance. Countries 
such as the US and European nations generally have significantly higher labor costs 
compared to emerging or developing countries like China, South Korea, Taiwan and African 
countries (International Labor Organization, 2016; United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
2017). Differences in country labor costs reflect currency evaluation and cost of living 
differences as well as educational attainment and skill levels, in that lower educational 
attainment and skills reflect lower labor-cost economies. A number of researchers have 
shown that training can help low-skilled employees to increase their skills and earnings 
(Prince 2008; Washington State Board for Community and Technical College, 2005), and 
that the impact of training is stronger among low-skilled rather than higher skilled employees 
(Kim, Hawley, Cho, Hyun, & Kim, 2016). Budria and Pereira (2007) found that less educated 
workers experience larger returns from training compared to well educated workers. They 
suggest that training plays a remedial role in place of education shortage and that returns 
from training can be greater for low-skilled workers. Training may help organizations in low 
labor cost countries to attract capable employees and retain them subsequently generating 
better organizational performance. Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:      
Hypothesis 3b: The relationship between training and organizational performance is 
stronger for organizations in low labor cost countries compared to high labor cost 
countries.   
 
Organizational Context Factors and the Training-Organizational Performance 
Relationship  
The congruence principle of systems theory suggests that it is important to have a fit or 
balance between training and internal organizational context factors and we examine the
<<<PAGE=13>>>
12 
 
moderating effect of industry sector, organizational size and intensity of technology on the 
training-organizational performance relationship.  
 Industry sector. Industry sector is highlighted as an important context factor 
explaining the training-organizational performance relationship, however, findings regarding 
its impact are mixed and unclear.  Tzabber et al. (2016) found that training had a stronger 
relationship with organizational performance in the service sector whereas Subramony (2009) 
found that the relationship for all HRM practices, including training, was stronger in 
manufacturing compared to service sector organizations. Combs et al. (2006) found that the 
relationship between all HRM practices and performance was significantly stronger in 
manufacturing organizations compared with service organizations.  Dipoye (2018) argued 
that tasks are more clearly defined in manufacturing organizations, they lend themselves 
more effectively to training, and that the results of training will be more quickly realizable.  
An alternative argument is that the benefits generated from training in manufacturing 
organizations are less because they rely heavily on technology and automation compared to 
service organizations where there is a need to continuously maintain employee KSAs at a 
high level. In service sector organizations, employee competencies are key to achieving 
organizational goals whereas the manufacturing sector is typically characterized as highly 
capital-intensive with a reliance on plant, equipment and technology to achieve 
organizational goals. Service organizations may benefit more from formal training because 
their employees generally have greater flexibility and discretion to exert their KSAs 
compared with their counterparts in manufacturing organizations (Rosenthal, Hill, & Peccei, 
1997).  Training opportunities, particularly development-focused training, may act as a 
motivational tool for service sector employees to demonstrate extra-role behaviors and 
discretionary effort (Tharenou et al., 2007), which is particularly important in customer 
service-focused organizations.  A counter argument is that jobs in service organizations are
<<<PAGE=14>>>
13 
 
less structured and less clearly defined and not as easily trainable with a significant lapse in 
time between the training and its impact on organizational performance. Overall, the theory 
proposes that training in manufacturing organizations is more structured, skills are more 
trainable and the impact on organizational performance will occur faster.  Therefore, based 
on these theoretical arguments, we propose the following hypothesis:      
 Hypothesis 4a:  The relationship between training and organizational performance is 
 stronger in manufacturing organizations than in service organizations.  
  
Organizational Size.  Like sector, findings on the impact of organizational size on the 
training-organizational performance relationship are also unclear.  For example, Rauch and 
Hatak (2016) found that there were differences between small and medium sized firms for 
skill-enhancing practices. Tzabbar, Tzafrir, & Baruch (2017) found that training had the 
strongest impact on medium rather than large firms.   
 
A number of conflicting arguments are proposed regarding the moderating effect of 
organizational size on the training-organizational performance relationship.  First, it is argued 
that large organizations have more financial resources to invest in training compared to 
resource-constrained small organizations (Kortekaas, 2007).  Large organizations also have a 
greater training resource and expertise base to design and implement training effectively 
which is more unlikely in the case of small organizations (Garavan, Shanahan, Carbery, & 
Watson, 2016). The level of expertise and knowledge involved in developing, implementing 
and evaluating training programs determines the effectiveness of training, the quality of the 
human capital pool, and ultimately organizational performance.  A second reason is that 
small firms are more labor intensive and job roles are broad with employees required to
<<<PAGE=15>>>
14 
 
perform multiple tasks whereas in large organizations employees perform more specialist 
tasks (Messersmith and Guthrie, 2010; Rauch and Hatak 2016).    
 
A third reason for expecting organizational size to moderate the training-organizational 
performance relationship relates to strategic goal ambiguity.  Organizations that take a more 
strategic approach to training tend to have better alignment of training with strategic goals 
(Blom, Krunyen, Van der Heijden and van Thiel, 2018; Garavan, 2007; Noe, 2017).  
Fernandez and Moldogaziev (2010) argued that high levels of strategic goal ambiguity 
undermine the positive influence of HR practices (including training) on organizational 
performance. Following this line of reasoning, we expect that small organizations will 
experience greater strategic goal ambiguity because organizational objectives and goals tend 
to be less tangible, more fluid and dynamic (Chadwick, Way, Kerr, & Thacker, 2013). As a 
result, training may lack clarity, and thus decrease the impact of training on organizational 
performance (Wu, Bacon, & Hoque, 2013). In large organizations, there will be less goal 
ambiguity and, as a result, training will be more aligned to organizational strategy (Garavan, 
Watson, Carbery, & O’Brien, 2016). In addition, there will be greater emphasis on the 
identification of training need and their linkage with strategy suggesting large organizations 
may benefit more from training than smaller organizations. Therefore, based on these 
theoretical arguments we propose the following hypothesis:       
 Hypothesis 4b:  The relationship between training and organizational performance is 
 stronger in large organizations than in small organizations. 
  
Technology Intensity. We selected technology as a potential moderator because these firms 
rely on the implementation and use of “sophisticated and complex methods, practices and 
techniques” (Rauch & Hatak, 2016, p. 489) that are based on extensive research and
<<<PAGE=16>>>
15 
 
development.  These firms operate in dynamic and complex environments where innovation 
is essential to competitiveness. Technology intensive organizations can attain enhanced 
organizational performance when they build human capital through strategic training 
investment (Bettis & Hitt, 1995; Chatterjee, 2017; Grant, 1996).  They implement training to 
ensure their employees possess appropriate levels of KSAs to perform challenging tasks 
(Rauch & Hatak, 2016; Utterback, 1996). Technology intensive organizations are required to 
be innovative (Bouncken & Kraus, 2013) and to implement complex processes and routines 
to stay competitive in a dynamic and changing environment (Khandwalla, 2006). In this case, 
training is an effective mechanism to develop a set of complex KSAs to manage complex 
processes and generate innovative solutions for clients (Anand, Gardner, & Morris., 2007).  
Given the significant changes in technology as an external environment context factor 
impacting organizational functioning, and in line with the congruence hypothesis of systems 
theory, we argue that a stronger positive relationship between training and organizational 
performance will exist in high technology intensive organizations.  Therefore, we propose the 
following hypothesis:       
Hypothesis 4c:  The relationship between training and organizational performance is 
stronger for high technology intensity organizations than for low technology intensity 
organizations. 
 
Type of Training 
The equifinality principle of systems theory advocates that an organization can reach the 
same end-state by taking different paths (Katz & Kahn, 1978).  Drawing on this principle, we 
argue that both firm-specific and general training may be equally valuable to organizations in 
achieving organizational performance. We utilize the equifinality principle to argue that 
where organizations have a choice between investment in firm-specific and general training,
<<<PAGE=17>>>
16 
 
they can take either path as both will positively impact organizational performance.  
Empirical findings point to the value of investment in firm-specific and general training for 
organizational performance. For example, Kim and Ployhart (2014) and Ahmad & Schroeder 
(2003) found a positive relationship between firm-specific training and organizational 
performance and Riley et al. ( 2017) and  Georgiadis and Pitelis,( 2014) found a positive 
relationship between general training and organizational performance. 
There are theoretical arguments supportive of both relationships. For example, human capital 
theory (Becker, 1964) and the resource based view (Barney, 1991) argue that human capital 
investment can only lead to superior organizational performance when the accumulated 
human capital is firm-specific. Training used to develop KSAs that is firm-specific and 
unique to organizational performance needs to possess the valuable, rare, inimitable, non-
substitutional conditions proposed by the RBV (Barney, 1991). Chadwick and Dabu (2009) 
argued that organizations are more likely to capture the returns from investment in firm-
specific training and achieve enhanced organizational performance.   
 
Theory also supports a positive relationship between investment in general training and 
organizational performance. For example, Riley et al. (2017) and Campbell et al. (2012) have 
argued that, contrary to the arguments of human capital theory, organizations may be able to 
gain performance advantages from investment in general training.  This occurs because first 
of all, employees may view organizational investment in general training as a signal of its 
commitment to employees and the potential for future training investments, promotion 
opportunities and commitment to retention. Second, while human capital theory argues that 
employees who receive general training will be more likely to move organization, Riley et al. 
(2017) argued that due to established networks and connections within the current 
organization, employees may choose to stay.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
17 
 
In terms of the organizational performance benefits of investment in firm-specific and general 
training, research highlights that firm-specific training enhances existing knowledge and 
deepening of job skills (Kang et al., 2007) whereas general training helps the development of 
a broader set of KSAs and enhanced connectivity between employees (Shipton et al., 2017).  
Both types of KSAs therefore enhance organizational performance.  Therefore, we propose 
the following hypothesis:       
Hypothesis 5:  Organizations will achieve the same organizational performance from 
investment in specific or general human training.  
 
METHOD 
Literature Search and Data Collection  
To identify studies that could be included in the meta-analysis, we began by searching online 
and electronic databases – specifically, ABI/INFORM, Business Source Complete, Emerald, 
Google Scholar, JSTOR, PSYCHINFO, Web of Science, and Business Source Complete for 
studies published until May 2019. We used multiple keywords. For training, we used the 
keywords “training”, “human capital development”, “human resource development” or 
“ability/skill-enhancing HR practices”.  For organizational performance, we searched for 
studies that also included the keywords “organisational/organizational effectiveness”, 
“operational performance”, “financial performance”, “business performance”, “productivity”, 
“quality”, “innovation”, “service”, “sale”, “ROE/ROA” or “profitability”. In addition, we 
also searched the references lists of several reviews that focused on the relationship between 
training/HRM and organizational performance (Tzabbar et al., 2017; Rauch & Hatak, 2016; 
Jiang et al., 2012; Subramony, 2009; Tharenou et al., 2007; Combs et al., 2006).
<<<PAGE=19>>>
18 
 
The following inclusion criteria were utilized: first, only empirical studies were included; 
second, we focused only on studies that reported a relationship between training and 
organizational performance (i.e., the unit of analysis was the organization); third, we included 
each identified sample once in order to avoid overrepresentation of particular organizations in 
the sample and we excluded studies with overlapping samples; and fourth, we excluded 
studies lacking the key statistical information necessary to extract effect sizes (correlation 
coefficient r) and sample sizes (N). Two authors independently coded half of the studies 
(Lipsey & Wilson, 2001) to assess the levels of agreement regarding effect sizes, sample 
sizes and moderators. The inter-rater agreement score of 95 percent suggested an acceptable 
level of agreement among two raters (McHugh, 2012). Our final meta-analytical database 
comprises 313 effect sizes nested in 119 independent studies. Appendix A displays the 
reference list for primary studies included in our meta-analysis.    
 
Coding1 
The focal independent variable was training. We operationalized training as that which 
enhanced skills for a current job or future role in an organization. Specifically, we identified 
five primary training measurements in the 119 primary studies, three of which were measures 
of quantity and two were measures of quality.  The three quantity measures were: absolute 
measures (e.g., amount of money spent on training) (e.g., Choi & Yoon, 2015); proportional 
measures (e.g., percentage of employees trained) (e.g., Esteban-Lloret et al., 2016); and 
content measures (e.g., type of training provided) (e.g., Chuang & Liao, 2010).  The two 
quality measures were: emphasis measure (e.g., importance or emphasis given to training) 
(e.g., Russell, Terborg, & Powers, 1985); and training effectiveness (e.g., effectiveness of 
training) (e.g., Delaney & Huselid, 1996, Tharenou et al., 2007).  
                                                           
1 A complete coding sheet is presented in Appendix B.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
19 
 
 
Our dependent variable was organizational performance. According to previously published 
meta-analytical studies (Tharenou et al., 2007; Jiang et al., 2012), we categorized 
organizational performance into operational performance and financial performance. 
Operational performance (also known as internal performance) reflects the effectiveness and 
efficiency by which an organization deploys its internal resources including human capital 
resources (Kim & Ployhart, 2014). Examples of operational performance measures include 
labor productivity (e.g., Barrett & O’Connell, 2001), innovation (e.g., Nieves & Quintana, 
2016), product or service quality (e.g., Vlachos, 2008) and customer satisfaction (e.g., Wood, 
Holman & Stride, 2006).  Financial performance, on the other hand, is influenced by both 
internal (e.g., HR practices that affect costs or revenues) and external factors (e.g., economic 
conditions and market competition) (Barney & Wright, 1998, White & Hamermesh, 1981). 
Financial performance consists of a number of organizational ‘bottom-line’ performance 
outcomes such as return on assets (ROA) (e.g., Darwish, Singh & Mohamed, 2013), return on 
equity (ROE) (e.g., Kwon & Rupp, 2013), sales (e.g., Chi, Wu, & Lin, 2008) and profitability 
(e.g., Khatri, 2000). As our meta-analysis focused on examining how contextual variables 
shaped the strength of the relationship between training and performance measured at the 
organizational level, we coded the above mentioned operational and financial performance 
measures as organizational performance. Training quality was captured by measures of 
training effectiveness and importance whereas training quantity was reflected in three 
objective dimensions: training time (i.e., training hours or training days); percentage of 
employees trained; and training expenditure. 
  
We used the year of data collection to capture the potential moderating effect of time on the 
training-organizational performance relationship. Whenever the data collection occurred over
<<<PAGE=21>>>
20 
 
a longer timeframe, the mean year of data collection was used (Rosenbusch et al., 2019).  For 
studies that did not specify the time point of observations, following the method introduced 
by Schommer, Richter and Karna (2019: 280), we used “the three years prior to the 
publication date”.  
 
We coded the country performance orientation according to the GLOBE study of country 
clusters and leadership styles
2 (House et al., 2004). Anglo, Germanic, Nordic, SE Asian, 
Latin European and Latin American countries were classified as high performance oriented 
cultures (coded as “1”), whereas Confucian, African, Eastern European and Middle Eastern 
countries were categorized as low performance oriented cultures (coded as “0”)
3.  
 
We used the International Labor Organization’s Global Wages Report (2016) to distinguish 
high (coded as “1”) and low (coded as “0”) labor cost countries. Industry sector is coded as 
either manufacturing (coded as “0”), such as machinery, manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, oil 
refinery, and textiles or services (coded as “1”) such as banking and financing industry, 
software industry, health industry, retail stores and transportation and logistics.  
 
Organizational size was categorized into two groups: Following the definition of SMEs 
provided by the European Commission (2003), SMEs with 249 or fewer than employees 
(coded as “0”), and large organizations with 250 or more employees (coded as “1”) (Tzabbar 
                                                           
2 The GLOBE study groups the country clusters into six leadership style according to the responses of 17,000 
middle managers from 61 countries to 21 leadership scales. The performance- oriented style stresses high 
standards, decisiveness and innovation, seeks to inspire people around a vision, creates a passion among them to 
perform, and does so by organizationally holding on to core values.  
3 The participating organisations in a primary study were drawn from multiple countries, and these countries are 
involved in both high and low performance oriented cultures (labour costs economies). They were coded as 
mixed cultures, and were not considered in the meta-analytical estimation as our hypothesis focuses on 
comparing the strength of the training-organisational performance relationship in the high and low performance 
oriented culture. In addition, we ran extra tests to include mixed category (coded as 2, treating low performance 
orientation /low labor cost category (coded as 0) as reference category ) in the estimation, the results showed 
performance orientation/ labor costs remained as significant moderators.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
21 
 
et al., 2017). Regarding the intensity of technology, studies that focused specifically on 
knowledge-based or knowledge-intensive industries (Rodwell & Teo, 2008) and high-
technology industries as classified by the OECD (Hatzichronoglou, 1997) were coded as high 
technology industries (coded as “1”). All other industries were classified as low-technology 
industries (coded as “0”).  
 
Training type was classified as general training (coded as “0”) if it builds KSAs that adds 
value both to the organization providing the training and to other organizations (Riley et al., 
2017) or firm-specific training (coded as “1”) if it creates firm-specific human capital that 
only benefits the training organizational (Coff & Raffiee, 2015; Crook et al., 2011).  
 
Finally, consistent with the approach taken in previous meta-analytical studies (e.g. Tzabbar 
et al., 2017; Subramony, 2009; Tharenou et al., 2007; Combs et al., 2006), we included a 
number of control variables concerning study methodological characteristics. First, we 
grouped the primary studies into cross-sectional (coded as “0”) or longitudinal datasets 
(coded as “1) to consider the path dependence. For cross-sectional studies, training and 
organizational performance measures were taken at the same time during the data collection 
process (Crook et al., 2011). For longitudinal studies, performance measures were taken a 
period of time after the training was implemented in the organization (Ployhart & 
Vandenberg, 2010). Second, we distinguished subjective training measures (coded as “0”) 
and objective training measure (coded as “1”). Subjective training measures are based on 
respondents’ awareness, perceptions and/or experience of training in the organization 
whereas objective training measures are quantifiable, measurable and independent of 
respondents’ perceptions and experiences. Similarly, the organizational performance 
measure was also coded as a subjective measurement (coded as “0”) or an objective one
<<<PAGE=23>>>
22 
 
(coded as “1”). In general, subjective performance measures are typically framed by using 
ordinal type response categories and ask respondents to rate the organization’s performance 
relative to their competitors or previous years’ performance (Forth & McNabb, 2008) 
whereas objective organizational performance measures are absolute and obtained from 
company accounts/records or independent sources (Wall et al., 2004).  Finally, the 
organizational performance control measure also captured operational performance measures 
coded as “0” and financial performance measures coded as “1”.  
 
Method of analysis  
Our final dataset contained many interdependent effect sizes (i.e. 313 effect sizes nested in 
119 studies) resulting from the utilization of multiple training and/or organizational 
performance measures in some primary studies. In other words, the inter-effect size 
dependencies are influenced by the way the dependent and independent variables are 
operationalized (Cooper, 2009). Cheung (2014) warns that if the dependence effect is ignored 
in the meta-analysis, standard errors of fixed effects and heterogeneity of the random effects 
may be biased. Hence, we applied an appropriate multilevel analytical approach (i.e., a three-
level meta-analysis) to account for dependency of effect sizes within and across studies 
(Cheung, 2014; Van den Noortgate, Lopez-Lopez, Marin-Martinez & Sanchez-Meca, 2013; 
2015). The three-level analytical approach estimates three different variance components 
distributed over the three-levels of the model: the sampling variation of each effect size (level 
1), within-study variation (level 2) and between-study variation (level 3) (Van den Noortgate 
et al., 2013). We used the rma.mv function of the metafor package that can be invoked in R to
<<<PAGE=24>>>
23 
 
conduct the three-level random effect meta-analysis4 (Viechtbauer, 2019; Assink & 
Wibbelink, 2016). 
 
To examine potential boundary conditions as set out in Hypotheses 1-5 that may influence the 
strength of the training-organizational performance relationship, we implemented the 
following steps. First, the overall association between training and organizational 
performance was estimated by fitting a three-level meta-analytical model that only consisted 
of an intercept representing the overall effect. Second, we estimated several heterogeneity 
statistics to examine the presence of potential moderators. In three-level meta-analyses, 
statistics pertaining to the amount of variation in level 2 and the amount of variation in level 
3 (τ2(3)) along with the regular Q statistic are provided. However, these results were not 
informative in terms of determining the within-study (level 2) and between-study variance 
(level 3) (Assink & Wibbelink, 2016). Instead, two one-sided log-likelihood-ratio tests (LRT) 
were performed. In this respect, the fit of the original model in which variance at level 2 and 
level 3 were both freely estimated was compared to the fit of a model in which only variance 
at level 2 (or variance at level 3) was freely estimated whilst the variance at level 3 (or 
variance at level 2) was manually fixed to zero (Assink & Wibbelink, 2016). In other words, 
these tests examine whether the three-level model significantly improves the fit over that of 
the two-level model in which within-study or between-study variance is no longer accounted 
for.  
 
Third, to test the proposed hypotheses, we used Restricted Maximum Likelihood estimation 
method (REML) to estimate the moderating influence of proposed institutional and 
                                                           
4 Before using the rma.mv function of the metafor package, we performed r  to Fisher’s Z transformation and 
calculated the corresponding sample variances and standard error estimates. This is because the default setting of 
the rma.mv function prescribes that test statistics of individual coefficients and confidence intervals are based on 
the normal distribution (i.e. the Z distribution) (Assink  & Wibbelink, 2016).
<<<PAGE=25>>>
24 
 
organizational contextual variables in the meta-analytical model. However, such a method 
does not allow us to perform a log-likelihood-ratio test to investigate whether the fit of a 
model with proposed moderating variables improves compared with that without moderating 
variables (Hox, 2010). Instead, an omnibus test was adopted to determine whether the 
moderating effect of proposed study-level variables was significant.  
 
In the RMEL model, the dependent variable was the correlation between training and 
organizational performance. The moderators were treated as predictor variables. Model 1 
controlled for methodological variables only.  Model 2 added the moderator of training 
quality vs training quantity.  Model 3 added the timeline moderator.  Model 4 added country 
performance orientation. Model 5 added country labor cost. Models 6 to 8 added three 
different variables describing organizational context-related boundary conditions: industry 
sector, organizational size, intensity of technology.  Model 9 added types of training as the 
moderator. We examined the individual moderating effect of each institutional and 
organizational context variable instead of adding them cumulatively through different models 
(see Rosenbusch et al., 2019; Mueller, Rosenbusch & Bausch, 2013) because of the 
collinearity problem between two the institutional variables and a significant increase in 
missing values (and subsequently a sharp drop in the number of primary studies) as more 
contextual explanatory variables were added into the model. Rosenbusch et al. (2019) argued 
that the relatively small number of research objects (i.e., primary studies) in meta-analyses 
may result in a statistical power problem if the number of predictor variables in regression is 
too high.   
 
RESULTS 
Primary Results
<<<PAGE=26>>>
25 
 
Hypothesis 1a proposed a significant and direct positive relationship between training and 
organizational performance. Table 1 presents the estimation results of the overall relationship 
between training and organizational performance by fitting a three-level intercept only model. 
The results suggest that training is positively and statistically significantly associated with 
organizational performance (β=0.25, p<0.001), supporting hypothesis 1.  
Insert Table 1 about here 
Table 1 also reports the variance component distributed to the second level and third level. 
The variance between effect sizes due to within-study variation (τ2 (2)) was 0.008 and the 
between-study variance (τ2 (3)) was 0.039. The test for heterogeneity (Q=3,511.85, p<0.001) 
revealed significant variation between all effect sizes in our modelling. However, the results 
do not necessarily determine the significance of within and between-study variance. 
Therefore, we performed two one-sided LRTs to assess whether the variance component 
allocated at level 2 and level 3 was significant. The test results are presented in Table 2. The 
results reveal that within-study variance was statistically significant, as the fit of the three-
level model consisted of both within- and between-study variation was significantly better 
than that the fit of the two-level model that only tested between-study variation (LRT = 
158.84, p<0.001). Similarly, the fit of the three-level model improved significantly over that 
of the two level model in which only within-study variance was freely estimated (LRT = 
149.51, p<0.001), suggesting that between-study variance was significant. Hence, we 
concluded that the relationship between training and organizational performance varied 
significantly between sub-groups, signaling the presence of study-level moderator effects.  
Insert Table 2 about here 
The estimation results of the moderator or sub-group analysis are presented in Table 3. 
Hypothesis 1b compared the magnitude of the effects of training quality and quantity on
<<<PAGE=27>>>
26 
 
organizational performance. The results suggest that organizations that emphasized training 
quantity (β=-0.12, ns. for training time; β=0.05, ns. for percentage of employees trained; β=-
0.11, ns. for training expenditure) performed as well as those who emphasized training 
quality.  Hence, hypothesis 1b is not supported. Hypothesis 2 examined whether the strength 
of the association between training and organizational performance increased over time. Our 
results show that although the extent of the change is relatively small, the impact of training 
on firm performance has improved significantly with the passage of time (β=0.01, p<0.001). 
Hypothesis 2 is, therefore, supported.  
Insert Table 3 about here 
Hypotheses 3a and 3b investigated two institutional moderators (i.e., country performance 
orientation and country labor economy) that impact the relationship between training and 
organizational performance. Opposite to our prediction, the results show that organizations 
from low performance oriented cultures benefitted more from training than organizations in 
high performance oriented cultures (β=-0.10, p<0.001).  Hypothesis 3a, is therefore not 
supported.    Our sub-group analysis reports that the relationship between training and 
organizational performance is stronger in organizations in low country labor costs than in 
those with high labor costs (β=-0.13, p<0.001) thereby supporting Hypothesis 3b. 
 
Hypotheses 4a to 4c examined the moderating influence of industry sector, organizational 
size and technology intensity on the training-organizational performance, respectively. The 
multilevel modelling results revealed a non-significant difference between manufacturing and 
service industry (β=0.05, n.s.). Hypothesis 4a is therefore not supported.  For the remaining 
two internal organizational context variables, neither of them revealed any significant 
differences in our multilevel modelling estimation results (organizational size β=0.07, n.s., 
intensity technology: β=0.08, n.s.). Hence, Hypotheses 4b and 4c are not supported.
<<<PAGE=28>>>
27 
 
 
Hypothesis 5 proposed that the relationship between firm-specific training and organizational 
performance was invariant from that between general training and organizational 
performance. Our multilevel estimation results showed that organizational performance 
derived from firm-specific training was no different to that from general training (β=0.004, 
n.s.) thereby supporting Hypothesis 5. 
 
Publication Bias 
Due to the propensity that statistically non-significant findings go unpublished and/or that 
more positive findings than negative ones go published, meta-analyses could produce 
exaggerated evidence drawn on existing literature (Murad, Chu, Lin & Wang, 2018). To 
assess such publication bias in the current meta-analysis, we implemented Egger’s regression 
test (Egger, Smith, Schneider & Minder, 1997) by adding standard errors of the effect size 
estimates as a moderator variable to the RMEL estimation in the rma.mv function of metafor 
package (Viechtbauer, 2019). This approach tackles inter-effect size dependencies when 
testing publication bias from multilevel meta-analytical modelling. A significant coefficient 
on the standard error predictor would suggest the presence of publication bias and funnel plot 
asymmetry. Scholars suggest that ignoring between-study heterogeneity when detecting 
publication bias could result in misleading results in small meta-analyses (Peters et al., 2010). 
Hence, we ran Eggar’s regression by controlling methodological moderators as well as 
significant context-related moderators (i.e. timeline, performance orientation and labor cost 
economy) identified in our sub-group analysis. The results of these tests were presented in 
Appendix C. The coefficients on the standard error predictor was found to be insignificant in 
all models, indicating that substantial evidence of publication bias was not present in the 
current meta-analysis.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
28 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
In spite of a considerable amount of research investigating the training and organizational 
performance relationship, significant gaps remain regarding the boundary conditions 
impacting the relationship and changes in the relationship over time.  Driven by the desire to 
address these gaps, and informed by systems theory, our motivation for this paper was to: (i) 
examine the relationship between training and organizational performance over time; (ii) 
examine the relationship between training and organizational performance accounting for 
potential differences in training quality and training quantity; (iii) examine to what extent the 
relationship is influenced by two institutional context variables (country performance 
orientation and country labor costs) and three organizational contextual factors (industry 
sector, organizational size and technology intensity); and (iv) examine if type of training (i.e., 
firm-specific or general training) moderates the training and organizational performance 
relationship.   
 
Our results reveal that training was directly and positively related to organizational 
performance, which aligns with findings reported in previously meta-analyses (Combs et al., 
2006; Subramony, 2009; Tharenou et al., 2007).  We also found that there was no statistically 
significant difference in the relationship for measures of quality versus quantity of training.  
We found that the strength of the relationship between training and organizational 
performance has increased over time.  In terms of the overall relationship between training 
and organizational performance, we report a correlation of 0.25 between training and 
organizational performance. The effect size we report is significantly greater than other 
studies (e.g., Combs et al.’s (2006) effect size of 0.15, Subramony’s (2009) effect size of 
0.12, and Tharenou et al.’s (2007) effect sizes of 0.21 for training and operational
<<<PAGE=30>>>
29 
 
performance and 0.15 for training and financial performance). Our significant and important 
finding suggests that training is a valuable and important HR practice linked with 
organizational performance and provides further evidence to that reported in the literature 
(Riley at al., 2017; Wright & McMahon, 2011; Kim & Ployhart, 2014). The lack of 
significant difference between the quantity and quality of training and organizational 
performance is surprising.  The reason for this finding may be related to the research design 
used in studies. Many of the studies in this meta-analysis measured training and 
organizational performance using cross-sectional data.  In addition, the measurement of 
training quality relied on trainee reports rather than multiple data sources.  Therefore, future 
studies need to more accurately measure training quality and use longitudinal research 
designs to more accurately assess the impact on organizational performance.  
 
For the purposes of this study, we operationalized omnibus context using time (Johns, 2006) 
to capture changes in the external environment over time and to explore how time impacted 
the training organizational-performance relationship.  One of our significant and novel 
findings is that the strength of the relationship between training and organizational 
performance has increased year on year over the past three decades.  This important finding 
supports the idea that training has become increasingly important to organizational 
performance and competitive advantage.  Specifically, omnibus context over that period has 
created a situation that requires organizations to train employees to develop human capital to 
achieve organizational performance (Cascio & Graham, 2016).  This finding also lends 
support to the adaptation principle of systems theory (Von Bertalanffy, 1968) which indicates 
that training must adapt to changing environmental conditions (inputs) in order to achieve 
organizational performance (outputs).
<<<PAGE=31>>>
30 
 
Another important contribution of this study concerns the application of systems theory, and 
in particular, the congruence, adaptation and equifinality principles to explain the moderating 
effect of institutional and organizational contextual variables on the training and 
organizational performance relationship. Systems theory (Katz & Kahn, 1972; Nadler & 
Tushman. 1980) emphasizes the importance of interaction and integration of various 
components of a system to achieve desirable outcomes. The theory introduces the notion of 
congruence or fit between training and context. We investigated whether the strength of the 
relationship between training and organizational performance was moderated by two 
institutional variables, i.e. country performance orientation and country labor cost. To our 
knowledge, these two institutional-level moderators have not been explored and examined in 
the existing body of research of the HRM/training-organizational performance relationship to 
date and yet systems theory underlines their criticality to understanding our central research 
question.  
 
For our first institutional context variable, and counter to our hypothesis, we found that the 
relationship between training and organizational performance was significantly stronger in 
low performance oriented countries than in high performance oriented countries.  One 
possible explanation is that training is likely to be more commonly prevalent in high 
performance cultures that encourage and reward innovation, excellence and performance 
improvement (Grove, 2005).  Marginal returns from training may be smaller in high 
performance oriented cultures compared to those in low performance oriented cultures 
(Schneider, Hanges, Smith, & Salvaggio, 2003) because employees in high performance 
oriented cultures expect training opportunities as a matter of form to fulfil work 
responsibilities and meet target goals. Another possible explanation is that employees in high
<<<PAGE=32>>>
31 
 
performance oriented cultures may already be performing at high levels and hence the 
organization may attain limited performance gains from training.  
 
For our second institutional context variable, as expected, we found that the training and 
organizational performance relationship was stronger in organizations operating in low labor 
cost countries.  This finding suggests that that organizations in low labor cost countries 
benefit more from training investment than those in high labor cost economies. Training can 
directly help to optimize the level or type of employees’ KSAs that employees need to 
perform their work and tasks (Jiang et al., 2012) which is particularly important in low labor 
cost economy where education attainment and workface skill level are generally low. Budria 
and Pereira (2007) suggested that training can play a remedial role in closing the skill gaps 
caused by lower education attainment, and low-skilled employees are more likely to gain 
larger marginal returns from training compared with well-educated workers in high labor cost 
cultures.  
 
Taken together, our institutional context findings point to the benefit of taking a systems view 
of the training and organizational performance relationship.  All too often, researchers tend to 
take more myopic views focusing only on internal factors or factors related directly to 
training design, delivery and implementation when assigning organizational performance.  
Greenwood et al. (2010) argued that there has been a trend in organizational research to focus 
on discrete elements and discrete relationships at individual or group levels of analysis, 
resulting in the loss of insight about the complexity of organizational phenomena and a lack 
of focus on the breadth and variety of issues impacting overall organizational decision-
making and functioning.  King, Felin and Whetten (2009: 4) succinctly captured the issue 
stating, “The tendency has been to wipe away differences altogether and prioritize abstraction
<<<PAGE=33>>>
32 
 
over contextual specificity” which is required to understand organizational phenomena.  We 
strongly encourage scholars in the training field interested in questions relevant to our study 
to examine the potential benefits of employing broader theoretical perspectives such as 
systems theory.   
 
Our findings regarding three internal organizational context moderators (i.e., industry sector, 
organizational size and technology intensity) of the training-organizational performance 
relationship were interesting and, in some cases, departed from findings in prior meta-
analyses. In contrast to previous findings that report industry sector as a significant contextual 
moderator whereby a stronger training-organizational performance relationship exists for 
manufacturing rather than service organizations (Subramony, 2009; Combs et al., 2006), the 
current study found no significance difference across the industries.  However, it is important 
to note that the focal explanatory variable in Subramony’s (2009) and Combs et al.’s (2006) 
meta-analyses was HRM system (i.e. high performance work practices) and HR bundles (i.e. 
skill-, motivation- and empowerment- enhancing practices), respectively, of which training 
was one element. Relatedly, the discrepancy in prior meta-analytical reviews may be 
explained by the complementarity of various individual HRM practices (e.g., selection 
practices which ensure employees possess the necessary KSAs needed for the role whilst 
training provides the further firm-specific KSAs to perform task) or derived from the other 
HR practices other than training practice. This proposition can be supported by scholars that 
take a strategic or ‘bundling’ approach in HRM research (e.g., Applebaum, Bailey, Berg, & 
Kalleberg, 2000; Lepak & Shaw, 2008).  
 
Our results suggest that technology intensity did not act as a moderator of the training-
organizational performance relationship.  This finding is in line with Tzabbar et al. (2017) but
<<<PAGE=34>>>
33 
 
conflicts with Rauch and Hatak (2016). The fact that intensity of technology does not act as a 
moderator may be because training has both value-creating and cost-increasing effects 
(Cappelli & Neumark, 2001; Sels et al., 2006). That is, the costs associated with developing 
and delivering training may diminish or even neutralize the positive effects of training on 
organizational performance. This may be particularly so in high technology industries that 
rely on employees’ KSAs to stay competitive in a dynamic and volatile environment.  
 
Inconsistent with our prediction and previous findings (Tzabbar et al., 2017), our results 
found that organizational size was not a significant contextual moderator in the training-
organizational performance linkage.  One possible reason is that the effectiveness of training 
reflected in organizational performance is not about what (e.g., training content and quantity) 
has been implemented by the organizations but depends on how it has been adopted. Small 
organizations are reported to make more use of in-house and on-the-job training (OECD, 
2012 Nolan & Garavan, 2019).  Such in-house and on-the job training is very tailored to 
employee and organizational needs and is cost effective due to resource constraints faced by 
small organizations).  A possible explanation is that small organizations can achieve similar 
performance improvement as their larger counterparts through training policy and practice 
that suit their unique characteristics focused on more in-house and on-the-job training. 
However, we were only able to test the difference in organizational size in the training-
organizational performance relationship from the ‘what’ perspective but not ‘how’ 
perspective and further research would need to examine this question to provide more 
definite answers.   
 
In line with the equifinality principle of systems theory, and consistent with our hypothesis, 
our results reveal that firm-specific and general training benefit organizational performance
<<<PAGE=35>>>
34 
 
and that neither type of training conferred a distinct advantage over the other. The finding 
runs contrary to the proposition postulated by human capital theory and RBV (Becker, 1964; 
Barney, 1991) that superior organizational performance can only be derived from firm-
specific training and human capital in specific training.  However, our results are supported 
by a number of empirical studies that have shown the positive contribution of general training 
to enhanced organizational performance (Riley et al., 2017; Aragon & Sanz Valle, 2013; 
Beugelsdijk, 2008; Barrett & O’Connell, 2001).  As posited by the equifinality principle 
where organizations can achieve the same outcomes utilizing alternative organizational 
processes or mechanisms (Katz & Kahn, 1978), the results of this study suggest that general 
training can be as effective as specific training in terms of gaining performance advantage 
and vice-versa.  
 
Finally, we make a methodological contribution. In particular, we have significantly 
increased the number of studies in the meta-analysis compared to previous meta-analyses and 
we utilized a three-model meta-analytic approach.  Prior meta-analysis studies used Hunter 
and Schmidt’s (2004) meta-analytical approach that accounts for within- and between-study 
variance only but does not deal with inter-dependency of effect sizes. This issue may lead to 
either over-estimated or under-estimated standard errors of the fixed effects and 
heterogeneity of the random effect meta-analytical results (Cheung, 2014; Van den Noortgate 
et al., 2015).  Overall, our findings consolidate knowledge about the value of training in 
enhancing organizational performance. We hope this study will motivate theoretical and 
empirical work to more fully understand the relationship between training and organizational 
performance.     
 
Practical Implications
<<<PAGE=36>>>
35 
 
Our study offers a number of important implications for managerial practice. First, our 
findings indicate that investment in training was associated with increased organizational 
performance. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in training was associated with 
0.25 standard deviation increase in organizational performance. This result indicates that 
organizations can achieve significant performance gains through investing in training. 
Second, in terms of the type of training that an organization should invest in, our findings 
indicates that HR managers may use general and firm-specific training as HR mechanisms to 
enhance the quality of accumulated human capital, because they can produce similar 
desirable performance outcomes.  In addition, our findings shed light on the boundary 
conditions portrayed by institutional contexts that shape the strength of the relationship 
between training and organizational performance. The results indicate that organizations 
located in low performance oriented countries and low labor cost economies can potentially 
derive significantly greater benefits from training investment. Therefore, managers and HR 
practitioners in these organizations should devote more financial resources and expertise to 
the development and implementation of training. Finally, our findings reveal that the strength 
of the relationship between training and organizational performance has increased year on 
year over time suggesting that training has played an increasingly important role in an 
omnibus context characterized by globalization, increased scarcity of talent and changing 
generational expectations of work (Cascio, 2019).  HR practitioners will benefit from 
ensuring they take a broader, systems perspective when analyzing and planning their training 
needs and investment.  
 
Limitations and Future Research Avenues  
The results of our meta-analysis are inevitably subject to limitations and some of these point 
to avenues for further research.  First, we were constrained by the studies we could
<<<PAGE=37>>>
36 
 
incorporate in the meta-analysis database due to missing data and statistical information. 
While we found that the time period of 2010-2019 resulted in a strong relationship between 
training and organizational performance, future research should look at if this trend continues 
to increase over time.  Our findings point to the value of time-related effects, however, they 
cannot be generalized beyond the time periods included in the meta-analysis. Future studies 
could more explicitly investigate the temporal mechanisms that underlie the change over time 
that we report.  In particular, it would be useful to delve further into the specific global 
changes and economic developments and explore how these changes (e.g., recession, 
economic growth, technological change, and changing worker expectations) specifically 
impact training and organizational performance.  
 
Second, our meta-analytical review suggests two significant institutional moderators (i.e., 
country performance orientation and country labor economy) of the training-organizational 
performance relationship using the country (or countries) in which the primary study was 
conducted as a proxy. Future research should examine the moderation model by utilizing 
different institutional variables. Rosenbusch et al. (2019) suggest the use of inductive 
qualitative research in addition to fussy-set analysis to surface new institutional factors and 
investigate configurations of institutional factors that may influence the training-
organizational performance relationship.  
 
Third, we operationalized training in terms of five key measurements reported in the 
literature: spend, proportional measures such as number of staff trained, content of training 
such as type of training, emphasis given to training, and training effectiveness.  Most of these 
measures pertain to training quantity rather than training quality.  It would be useful for
<<<PAGE=38>>>
37 
 
future research to further understand how training effectiveness and quality impacts the 
training-organizational performance relationship.  
 
Fourth, our meta-analysis highlights major methodological limitations in individual studies 
that need to be addressed by researchers in future studies of the relationship. In many cases, 
investigating the moderating effect of organizational and environmental factors results in a 
small number of correlations for practice. Our moderation analyses of three internal 
organizational context forces were drawn from small datasets (i.e. N=59 for industry sector, 
N=24 for organizational size, N=41 for technology intensity). Researchers have argued that 
the quantity of primary studies matters when conducting random-effect meta-analysis and 
inference made from small number of studies may not guarantee reliable conclusions (Guolo 
& Varin, 2017).  Hence, moving forward, if a significant amount of empirical studies emerge 
in the future, it is worthwhile for training scholars to replicate the moderated meta-analytical 
analysis conducted here and perhaps include additional institutional variables informed by 
systems theory.   
 
References 
Ahmad, S., & Schroeder, R.G. (2003). The impact of human resource management practices 
on operational performance: Recognizing country and industry differences. Journal of 
Operations Management, 25(1), 19-43. 
Anand, N., Gardner, H.K., & Morris, T. (2007). Knowledge-based innovation: Emergence 
and embedding of new practice areas in management consulting firms. Academy of 
Management Journal, 50(2), 406-428. 
Appelbaum, E., Bailey, T., Berg, P., & Kalleberg, A. (2000). Manufacturing Advantage: Why 
High Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.  
Association for Talent Development (2017). State of the Industry Report . Available at: 
https://www.td.org/research-reports/2017-state-of-the-industry
. [Retrieved on 15th June 
2019].   
Aragon, I.B., & Sanz Valle, R. (2013). Does training managers pay off. International Journal 
of Human Resource Management, 24(8), 1671-1684. 
Arunprasad, P. (2017). Inevitable knowledge strategy: A paradigm shift in strategic HRM 
practices to augment firm’s performance. Employee Relations, 39(5), 753-774.
<<<PAGE=39>>>
38 
 
Assink, M., & Wibbelink, C.J.M. (2016). Fitting three-level meta-analytic model in R: A 
step-by-step tutorial. The Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 12(3), 154-174. 
ATD. (2018). New ATD Research: Investment in Talent Development on the Rise. Available 
online: https://www.td.org/press-release/new-atd-research-investment-in-talent-
development-on-the-rise [Retrieved on 16th June 2019] 
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of 
Management, 17, 99-120. 
Barney, J.B., & Wright, P.M. (1998). On becoming a strategic partner: The role of human 
resources in gaining competitive advantage. Human Resource Management, 37, 31-46. 
Barrett, A., & O’Connell, P.J. (2001). Does training generally work? The returns to in-
company training. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(3), 647-662. 
Bartel, A.P. (1994). Productivity gains from the implementation of employee training 
programs. Industrial Relations, 33(4), 411-425. 
Becker, G.S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Education. Chicago: University of Chicago. 
Bettis, R.A., & Hitt, M.A. (1995). The new competitive advantage. Strategic Management 
Journal, 10, 449–474. 
Beugelsdijk, S. (2008). Strategic human resource practices and product innovation. 
Organization Studies, 29(6), 821-847. 
Blom, R., Kruyen, P.M., Van der Heijden, B., & van Thiel, S. (2018). One HRM fits all? A 
meta-analysis of the effects of HRM practices in the public, semipublic, and private 
sector. Review of Public Personnel Administration, doi: 10.1177/0734371X18773492 
Bouncken, R.B., & Kraus, S. (2013). Innovation in knowledge-intensive industries: The 
double-edged sword of coopetition. Journal of Business Research, 66, 2060-2070. 
Budhwar, P., Pereira, V., Mellahi, K., & Singh, S. (2018). The state of HRM in the Middle 
East: Challenges and future research agenda. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, doi: 
10.1007/s10490-018-9587-7. 
Budria, S., & Pereira, P. (2007). The wage effects of training in Portugal: difference across 
skill groups, genders, sectors and training types. Applied Economics, 39(6), 787-807. 
Cappelli, P. & Neumar, D. (2001). Do ‘high-performance’ work practices improve 
establishment-level outcomes? Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 54, 737-775. 
Cascio, W.F. (2019). Training trends: Macro, micro, and policy issues. Human Resource 
Development Review, 29, 284-297. 
Cascio, W.F., & Graham, B.Z. (2016). New strategic role for HR: Leading the employer-
branding process. Organization Management Journal, 13(4), 182-192. 
Chadwick, C., & Dabu, A. (2009). Human resources, human resource management, and the 
competitive advantage of firms: Toward a more comprehensive model of causal 
linkage. Organization Science, 20(1), 253-272. 
Chadwick, C., Way, S.A., Kerr, G., & Thacker, J.W. (2013). Boundary conditions of the 
high-investment human resource systems-small-firm labor productivity relationship. 
Personnel Psychology, 66(2). 311-343.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
39 
 
Chatterjee, J. (2017). Strategy, human capital investments, business-domain capabilities, and 
performance: A study in the global software services industry. Strategic Management 
Journal, 38(3), 588-608. 
Cheung, M.W. (2014). Modeling dependent effect sizes within three-level meta-analyses: A 
structural equation modeling approach. Psychological Methods, 19(2), 211-229. 
Chi, N., Wu, C., & Lin, C.Y. (2008). Does training facilitate SME’s performance? 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 19(10), 1962-1975. 
Choi, M., & Yoon, H. (2015). Training investment and organizational outcomes: A 
moderated mediated model of employee outcomes and strategic orientation of the HR 
function. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 26(20), 2632-2651. 
Chuang, C., & Liao, H. (2010). Strategic human resource management in service context: 
taking care of business by taking care of employees and customers. Personnel 
Psychology, 63, 153-196. 
CIPD (2017). Employee Outlook: Spring 2017. Available online: 
https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/fundamentals/relations/engagement/employee-
outlook-reports [Retrieved 4th June 2019]. 
Coff, R., & Raffiee, J. (2015). Toward a theory of perceived firm-specific human capital. 
Academy of Management Executive, 3, 326-341. 
Coff, R.W. (1997). Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping with hazards on the 
road to resource-based theory. Academy of Management Review, 22, 374–402. 
Combs, J., Liu, Y., Hall, A., & Ketchen, D. (2006). How much do high-performance work 
practices matter? A meta-analysis of their effects on organizational performance. 
Personnel Psychology, 59, 501–528. 
Cooper, H. (2009). Research Synthesis and Meta-Analysis (4th ed). London: Sage.  
Crook, T. R., Todd, S. Y., Combs, J. G., Woehr, D. J., & Ketchen, D. J. (2011). Does human 
capital matter? A meta-analysis of the relationship between human capital and firm 
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 443–456. 
Darwish, T.K., Singh, S. and Mohamed, A.F. (2013). The role of strategic HR practices in 
organizational effectiveness: An empirical investigation in the country of Jordan. 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(17), 3343-3362. 
Delaney, J.T., & Huselid, M.A. (1996). The impact of human resource management practices 
on perceptions of organizational performance. Academy of Management Journal, 39(4), 
949-969. 
Egger, M., Smith, G.D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C.E. (1997) Bias in meta-analysis detected 
by a simple, graphical test. BMJ Clinical Research, 13(315), 629-634. 
Estebán-Lloret, N.N., Aragon-Sanchez, A., & Carrasco-Hernandez, A. (2016). Determinants 
of employee training: Impact on organizational legitimacy and organizational 
performance. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 29(6), 1208–
1229. 
European Commission (2003). What is an SME? Available online 
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/smes/business-friendly-environment/sme-definition_en 
[retrieved on 9 Sep 2019]
<<<PAGE=41>>>
40 
 
Farndale, E., & Paauwe, J. (2018). SHRM and context: why firms want to be different as 
legitimately possible. Journal of Organizational Effectiveness: People and 
Performance, 5(3), 202-210. 
Fernandez, S., & Moldogaziew, T. (2010). Empowering public sector employees to improve 
performance: Does it work? American Review of Public Administration, 41, 23-47. 
Fey, C., Bjorkman, I., & Pavlovskaya, A. (2000). The effect of human resource management 
practices on firm performance in Russia. International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 11(1), 1-18. 
Forth, J., & McNabb, R. (2008). Workplace performance: A comparison of subjective and 
objective measures in the 2004 Workplace Employment Relations Survey. Industrial 
Relations Journal, 39(2), 104-123. 
Friedman, T.L. (2016). Thank You for Being Late: An Optimist’s Guide to Thriving in the 
Age of Accelerations. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  
Garavan, T., Shanahan, V., Carbery, R., & Watson, S. (2016). Strategic human resource 
development: towards a conceptual framework to understand its contribution to 
dynamic capabilities. Human Resource Development International, 19(4), 289-306. 
Garavan, T., Watson, S., Carbery, R., & O’Brien, F. (2016). The antecedents of leadership 
development practices in SMEs: The influence of HRM strategy and practice. 
International Small Business Journal, 34(6), 870-890. 
Garavan, T.N. (2007). A strategic perspective on human resource development. Advances in 
Developing Human Resources, 9, 11-30. 
Georgiadis, A., & Pitelis, C.N. (2012). Human resources and SME performance in services: 
Empirical evidence form the UK. International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 23(4), 808-825. 
Grant, R. M. (1996). Prospering in dynamically competitive environments: Organizational 
capability as knowledge integration. Organization Science, 7, 375–387. 
Greenwood, R., Díaz, A. M., Li, S. X., & Lorente, J. C. (2010). The Multiplicity of 
Institutional Logics and the Heterogeneity of Organizational Responses. Organization 
Science. doi: 10.1287/orsc.1090.0453. 
Grove, C.N. (2005). Introduction to the GLOBE Research Project on Leadership Worldwide. 
Available online: https://www.grovewell.com/wp-content/uploads/pub-GLOBE-
intro.pdf.[Retrieved on 16
th May, 2019] 
Guerrazzi, M. (2016). The effect of training on Italian firms’ productivity: microeconomic 
and macroeconomic perspectives. International Journal of Training and Development, 
21(1), 38-57. 
Guolo, A.. & Varin, C. (2017). Random-effects meta-analysis: The number of studies 
matters. Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 26(3) 1500-1518. 
Hatzichronoglou, T. (1997). Revision of the high-technology sector and product 
classification. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, 1997/2002. 
Publishing OECD.  
Hirsch-Kreinsen, H. (2016). Digitization of industrial work: Development paths and 
prospects. Journal for Labour Market Research, 49(1), 1-14.
<<<PAGE=42>>>
41 
 
House, R., Hanges, P., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P., & Gupta, V. (2004). Culture, leadership, 
and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
Hox, J.J. (2010). Multilevel Analysis: Techniques and Applications. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Hughes, A., Zajac, S., Woods, A., & Salas, E. (2019). The role of work environment in 
training sustainment: A meta-analysis. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, doi: 10.1177/00187208198988. 
Hunter, J.E., & Schmidt, F.L. (2004). Methods of Meta-Analysis: Correcting Error and Bias 
in Research Findings (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
International Labour Organization. (2016). Global Wage Report 2016/17: Wage Inequality in 
the Workplace. Geneva: International Labour Office.  
Jackson, S.E., Schuler, R.S., & Jiang, K. (2014). An aspirational framework for strategic 
human resource management. Academy of Management Annals, 8(1), 1-56. 
Javidan, M., House, R.J., Dorfman, P.W., Hanges, P.J., & Sully de Luque, M. (2006). 
Conceptualizing and measuring cultures and their consequences: A comparative review 
of GLOBE’s and Hofstede’s approaches. Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 
897-914. 
Jiang, K., Lepak, D.P., Hu, J. and Baer, J.C. (2012). How does human resource management 
influence organizational outcomes? A meta-analytical investigation of mediating 
mechanisms. Academy of Management Journal, 55(6), 1264-1294. 
Johns, G. (2006). The essential impact of context on organizational behaviour. Academy of 
Management Review, 31(2), 386-408. 
Johnson, J.W. (1996). Linking employee perceptions of service climate to customer 
satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 49, 831-851. 
Kast, F.E., & Rosenzweig, J.E. (1972). General systems theory: Applications for organization 
and management. Academy of Management Journal, 447-466. 
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. (1978). The Social Psychology of Organization. New York: Wiley.   
Khandwalla, P.N. (2006). Tools for enhancing innovativeness in enterprises. Journal of 
Decision Making, 31(1), 1-16. 
Khatri, N. (2000). Managing human resource for competitive advantage: A study of 
companies in Singapore. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 
11(2), 336-365. 
Kim, H., Hawley, J.D., Cho, D., Hyun, Y., & Kim, J. (2016). The influence of learning 
activitiy on low-skilled workers’ skill improvement in the South Korean manufacturing 
industry. Human Resource Development International, 19(3), 209-228. 
Kim, Y., &  Ployhart, R.E. (2014). The effects of staffing and training on firm productivity 
and profit growth before, during and after the Great Recession. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 99(3), 361-389. 
King, B. G., Felin, T., & Whetten, D. A. (2009). Research in the sociology of organizations, 
vol. 26. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
<<<PAGE=43>>>
42 
 
Kortekaas, F. (2007). HRM, Organisational Performance and the Role of Firm Size. Master 
thesis submitted to Erasmus School of Economics, Department of Entrepreneurship, 
Governance, Organisation & Strategy, Erasmus University of Rotterdam.  
Kraiger, K. (2014). Looking Back and Looking Forward: Trends in Training and 
Development Research. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 25(4), 401–408.  
Kraiger, K., Passmore, J., dos Santos, N., & Malvezzi, S. (2014). The Wiley Blackwell 
Handbook of The Psychology of Training, Development and Performance Improvement 
(eds). Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.  
Kwon, K., & Rupp, D.E. (2013). High-performer turnover and firm performance: The 
moderating role of human capital investment and firm reputation. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 34, 129-150. 
Lee, G.J. (2012). Firm size and the effectiveness of training for customer service. 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 23(12), 2597-2613. 
Lepak, D.P., & Shaw, J.D. (2008). Strategic HRM in North America: Looking to the future. 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 19(8), 1486-1499. 
Lipsey, M., & Wilson, D. (2001). Practical Meta-Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
McHugh, M.L. (2012). Interrater reliability: the Kappa statistic. Biochemistry Medicine, 
22(3), 276-282. 
Meyer, K.E., & Peng, M.W. (2016). Theoretical foundations of emerging economy business 
research. Journal of International Business Studies, 47(1), 3-22.  
Montealegre, R., & Cascio, W.F. (2017). Technology-driven changes in work and 
employment. Communications of the ACM, 60(12), 60-67. 
Mueller, V., Rosenbusch, N., & Bausch, A. (2013). Success patterns of exploratory and 
exploitative in innovation: A meta-analysis of the influence of institutional factors. 
Journal of Management, 39, 1606-1636. 
Murad, M.H., Chu, H., Lin, L, & Wang, Z. (2018). The effect of publication bias magnitude 
and direction on the certainty in evidence. BMJ Evidence Based Medicine, 23(3), 84-
86. 
Nadler, D., & Tushman, M. (1980). A model for diagnosing organizational behaviour. 
Organizational Dynamics, 9(2), 35-51. 
Nieves, J., & Quintana, A. (201). Human resource practices and innovation in the hotel 
industry: The mediating role of human capital. Tourism and Hospitality Research, DOI: 
100.1177/1467358415624137.  
Noe, R. (2017). Employee Training and Development. New York, NY: McGraw Hill 
Education. 
Nolan, C.T., & Garavan, T. N. (2019). External and internal networks and access to HRD 
resources in small professional service firms. Human Resource Development 
International, doi: 10.1080/13678868.2019.1625853 
North, D. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
OECD. (2012). Innovation in Skills Development in SMEs. Available online: 
https://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/TSME%20Highlights%20FINAL%20formatted.pdf 
[Retrieved on 12
th June 2019].
<<<PAGE=44>>>
43 
 
Peters, J.L., Sutton, A., Jones, D.R., Abrams, K.R., Rushton, L., & Moreno, S.G. (2010). 
Assessing publication bias in meta-analyses in the presence of between-study 
heterogeneity. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Statistics in Society Series A, 
173(3). 575-591. 
Ployhart, R.E., & Moliterno, T.P. (2011). Emergence of the human capital resource: A 
multilevel model. Academy of Management R-eview, 36(1), 127-150. 
Ployhart, R.E., & Vandenberg, R.J. (2010). Longitudinal research: theory, design, and 
analysis of change. Journal of Management, 36, 94-120. 
Prince, D. (2008). Tracking low-skill adult students longitudinally: Using research to guide 
policy and practice. New Directions for Community Colleges, 59-69. 
Purcell, J., & Boxall, P. (2015). Strategy and Human Resource Management (4th ed). 
London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Quinn, J.B., Anderson, P., & Finkelstein, S. (1996). Managing professional intellect: Making 
the most of the best. Harvard Business Review, 74(2), 71–80. 
Rabi, T., Jayasingh, M., Gerhart, B., & Kuhlmann, T.A. (2014). Meta-analysis of country 
differences in the high performance work systems-business performance relationship: 
The roles of national culture and managerial discretion. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
99, 1011–1041. 
Rauch, A., & Hatak, I. (2016). A meta-analysis of different HR-enhancing practices and 
performance of small and medium-sized firms. Journal of Business Venturing, 31, 485-
504. 
Riley, S.M., Michael, S.C., & Mahoney, J.T. (2017). Human capital matters: Market value of 
firm investment in training and the role of complementary assets. Strategic 
Management Journal, 38(9), 1895–1914. 
Rodwell, J.J., & Teo, S.T.T. (2008). The influence of strategic HRM and sector on perceived 
performance in health services organizations. International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 19(10), 1825-1841. 
Rosenbusch, N., Gusenbauer, M., Hatak, I., Fink, M., & Meyer, K.E. (2019). Innovation 
offshoring, institutional context and innovation performance: A meta-analysis. Journal 
of Management Studies, 56(1), 203-232. 
Rosenthal, P., Hill, S., & Peccei, R. (1997). Checking out service: Evaluating excellence, 
HRM and TQM in retailing. Work, Employment & Society, 11(3), 481–503. 
Ruona, W.E. (2016). Evolving Human Resource Development. Advances in Developing 
Human Resources, 18(4), 551–565. 
Russell, J.S., Terborg, J.R., & Powers, M.L. (1985). Organizational performance and 
organizational level training and support. Personnel Psychology, 38, 849-863. 
Schleicher, D., Baumann, H.M., Sullivan, D.W., Levy, P.E., Hargrove, D.C., & Barros-
Rivera, B.A. (2018). Putting the system into performance management systems: A 
review and agenda for performance management research. Journal of Management, 
44(6), 2209-2245. 
Schneider, B., Hanges, P.J., Smith, D.B., and Salvaggio, A.N. (2003). Which comes first: 
Employee attitudes or organizational financial and market performance. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 88, 836–851.
<<<PAGE=45>>>
44 
 
Schommer, M., Richter, A., & Karna, A. (2019). Does the diversification-firm performance 
relationship change over time? A meta-analytical review. Journal of Management 
Studies, 56(1), 270-298. 
Sels, L., DeWinne, S., Maes, J., Delmotte, J., Faems, D., & Forrier, A. (2006). Unravelling 
the HRM-performance link: Value-creating and cost-increasing effects of small 
business HRM. Journal of Management Studies, 43, 319-342. 
Shin, D., & Konrad, A.M. (2017). Causality between high-performance work systems and 
organizational performance. Journal of Management, 43(4), 973-997. 
Singh, S., Darwish, T., Wood, G., & Mohamed, A. (2017). Institutions, complementarity, 
human resource management and performance in a South-East Asian pestrostate: The 
case of Brunei. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 28(18), 2538-
2569. 
Sitzmann, T., & Weinhardt, J. (2018). Training engagement theory: A multilevel perspective 
on the effectiveness of work-related training. Journal of Management, 44(2), 732-756. 
Somaya, D., Williamson, I.O, & Lorinkova, N. (2008). Gone but not lost: The different 
performance impacts of employee mobility between co-operators versus competitors. 
Academy of Management Journal, 51(5), 936-953. 
Subramony, M. (2009). A meta-analytic investigation of the relationship between HRM 
bundles and firm performance. Human Resource Management, 48(5), 745–768. 
Sung, S., & Choi, J.N. (2014). Do organizations spend wisely on employees? Effects of 
training and development investments on learning and innovation in organizations. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 35(3), 393-412. 
Tharenou, P., Saks, A. M., & Moore, C. (2007). A review of critique of research on training 
and organizational-level outcomes. Human Resource Management Review, 17, 251–
273. 
Training Industry Report. (2018). 2018 Training Industry Report. Available online: 
https://trainingmag.com/sites/default/files/trn-2018-industry-report.pdf [Retrieved on 
16th June 2019] 
Tzabbar, D., Tzafrir, S., & Baruch, Y. (2017). A bridge over troubled water: Replication, 
integration and extension of the relationship between HRM practices and organizational 
performance using moderating meta-analysis. Human Resource Management Review, 
27, 134–148. 
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017). Employment cost index. Available online: 
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/eci.toc.htm.[Retrieved from 4
th May 2019] 
Utterback, J. (1996). Mastering the dynamics of innovation: How companies can seize 
opportunities in the face of technological change. Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press.  
Van den Noortgate, W., Lopez-Lopez, J.A., Marin-Martinez, F., & Sanchez-Meca, J. (2015). 
Meta-analysis of multiple outcomes: A multilevel approach. Behavior Research 
Methods, 47(4), 1274-1294. 
Van den Noortgate, W., Lopez-Lopez, J.A., Marin-Martinez, F., & Sancez-Meca, J. (2013). 
Three-level meta-analysis of dependent effect sizes. Behavior Research Methods, 
45(2), 576-594.
<<<PAGE=46>>>
45 
 
Van Esch, E., Wei, L., & Chiang, F. (2018). High-performance human resource practices and 
firm performance: The mediating role of employees’ competencies and the moderating 
role of climate for creativity. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 
29(10), 1683-1708. 
Viechtbauer, W. (2019). Package ‘metafor’. Available online: http://www.metafor-
project.org https://github.com/wviechtb/metafor. [retrieved on 26th May 2019] 
Vlachos, I. (2008). The effect of human resource practices on organizational performance: 
evidence from Greece. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 19(1), 
74-97. 
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General System Theory Foundations, Development, Applications. 
New York: Braziller.  
Wall, T.D., Michie, J., Patterson, M., Wood, S.J., Sheehan, M., Clegg, C.W., & West, M. 
(2004). On the validity of subjective measures of company performance. Personnel 
Psychology, 57, 95-118.  
Washington State Board for Community and Technical College. (2005). Report on Building 
Pathways to Success for Low-Skill Adult Students: Lessons for Community College 
Policy and Practice from a Longitudinal Student Tracking Study. Available online: 
http://ccrc.tc.columbia.edu/publications/low-skilladults-policy.html. [Retrieved on 13th 
May 2019] 
Wegman, L., Hoffman, B., Carter, N., Twenge, M., & Guenole, N. (2018). Placing job 
characteristics in context: Cross-temporal meta-analysis of changes in job 
characteristics since 1975. Journal of Management, 44(1), 352-386. 
White, R.E., & Hamermesh, R.G. (1981). Toward a model of business unit performance: An 
integrative approach. Academy of Management Review, 6, 213-223. 
Wood, S., Holman, D., &  Stride, C. (2006). Human resource management and performance 
in UK call centres. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 44(1), 99-124. 
Wright, P., Nyberg, A., & Ployhart, R. (2018). A research revolution in SHRM: New 
challenges and new research directions, In Buckley, R., Wheeler, A., Halbesleben, J. 
(eds). Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management, pp.141-161. Bingley:  
Emerald Publishing Ltd. 
Wright, P.M., & McMahan, G.C. (2011). Exploring human capital: Putting ‘human’ back into 
strategic human resource management. Human Resource Management Journal, 21(2), 
93-104. 
Wu, N., Bacon, N., & Hoque, J. (2013). The adoption of high-performance work practices in 
small businesses: The influence of markets, business characteristics and HR expertise. 
International Small Business Journal, 25(8), 1149-1169. 
Zhou, K.Z., & Wu, F. (2010). Technological capability, strategic flexibility, and product 
innovation. Strategic Management Journal, 31(5), 547-561.