<<<PAGE=1>>>
1 
 
  
GEI GUIDANCE ON  
Country Partnerships
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  3 
2 Country programs ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 3 
2.1 Financing country programs ............................................................................................. 3 
2.2 Determining country program portfolio composition ......................................................... 4 
2.3 Country selection .............................................................................................................. 4 
2.4 GEI’s country program implementation model ................................................................... 5 
2.5 Country program conclusion ............................................................................................ 14 
3 Ad hoc support ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  15 
4 Knowledge sharing and translation ................................ ................................ ............................  15 
4.1 Country pages ................................................................................................................. 16 
4.2 M&E Systems resources .................................................................................................... 16
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3 
 
1 Introduction  
This GEI Guidance on Country Partnerships is a supplement to the GEI Program Operations Manual 
section on country engagements, intended for GEI implementing partners, especially the CLEAR 
Centers. It describes how GEI and its implementing partners work at country level to achieve GEI’s 
intended outcomes, summarized as “an increase in the number of governments using M&E systems 
to generate and use evaluative evidence to plan, design, and manage implementation of better 
policies and programs that support achievement of national and international development goals.”1  
The GEI and its partners can support countries in one of three main ways: 
1. Through long-term partnerships called “country programs”2, or  
2. Through ad hoc support in response to requests that align strategically with the GEI’s 
overall objectives and principles, or  
3. Through its knowledge platform, where GEI makes available multiple resources that can be 
used by countries themselves to strengthen their own systems.  
The GEI also supports countries through its global and regional training and professional 
development programs (including IPDET, PIFED, TAQYEEM, and GEI’s hands-on learning program) 
as well as through other knowledge building, sharing and learning activities, but these are not 
covered in this note.  
2 Country programs  
Country programs are implemented in a select and diverse set of countries or sub-national entities. 
GEI implementing partners form systematic and long-term partnerships with national stakeholders, 
as well as with the World Bank, UNDP and other partners, to establish effective monitoring and 
evaluation systems able to generate and use evaluations and evaluative evidence to inform decision 
making. Country programs follow, in principle, an implementation model (Section 2.4), which 
usually includes doing a diagnostic (Monitoring and Evaluation Systems Analysis or MESA) study 
and preparing and supporting the implementation of a capacity development or systems 
strengthening strategy.  
2.1 Financing country programs 
Implementation of a country program can be GEI-funded but is best co-funded with other partners, 
especially the concerned government.   
GEI funds can be used to ﬁnance initial advocacy and engagement activities, the completion of a 
MESA study; the preparation of a capacity development or system strengthening strategy and 
implementation of certain important elements of the strategy.  If there are not enough funds 
available (either from the GEI or other partners) to undertake these core activities, a new country 
program should not be initiated.  
 
1 GEI Implementation Committee, November 2022, presentation slide 20 
2 Also called “systems strengthening programs”, as GEI works with not only national (“country”) systems, but also with sub -
national systems, such as state or municipal level systems in Brazil. It is also noted that these partnerships are not necessarily 
labeled “country programs” by the partner country. For simplicity’s sake, this note will refer to “country programs”.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4 
 
2.2 Determining country program portfolio composition  
Each CLEAR center has a portfolio of country/systems strengthening programs where it can utilize 
GEI resources. The portfolio will change over time as a country reaches a level of maturity and 
ability to sustain and further strengthen its own systems, thus leading to country program 
conclusion, or becomes dormant (see Section 2.5).  
CLEARs can implement additional country programs and other activities using funding from other 
sources.  
The status of the portfolio of country programs is reviewed annually by the GEI team and the 
relevant CLEAR.  Countries ready to sustain on their own (or with punctual support) or where there 
appears to be weakened commitment and little progress towards results (“dormant”) should be 
taken off the list and substituted with a new country.  
The selection of countries to be included in each CLEAR’s portfolio is presented to the Partnership 
Council each year at its annual November meeting, clearly articulating the rationale for selection. 
The Partnership Council does not need to approve the list but may suggest adjustments.  
2.3 Country selection  
The GEI prioritizes the development of country programs in3:  
• Countries with government demand for a comprehensive approach to strengthening their 
(sub- national M&E system and that show potential for demonstrable results. (Note that 
government demand is an essential criterion for support. Government demand may come 
from national center-of-government entities such as a Ministry of Planning or of Finance, 
from sub-national center-of-government entities, e.g. in large federal states such as Brazil 
or India, or from, less commonly, line ministries.) 
• Low and lower middle-income countries, countries affected by fragility, conﬂict or violence, 
and/or small states, especially Small Island Developing States which are at particular risk to 
climate change. 
• Countries presenting strategic opportunities to demonstrate how the Turin Agenda can be 
taken forward (e.g. opportunities to integrate climate and ecosystems elements or gender 
and social inclusion considerations into a national evaluation system). 
• Countries where there are opportunities for GEI implementing partners to collaborate with 
GEI network partners and their country offices/programs, with the associated potential for 
strengthened advocacy, co-funding, integration with other programming, and greater 
sustainability.  
 
3 The current countries were selected using the following criteria:  
• legacy work under the CLEAR initiative;  
• criteria set by CLEAR Centers during the preparation of grant agreements under the GEI;  
• GEI’s stated priorities: low and lower middle-income countries, countries affected by fragility, conﬂict or violence, and/or 
small states, and more speciﬁcally Small Island Developing States which are at particular risk to climate change 
• the opportunity to partner with another GEI network member or other ECD actor where combined resources offer greater 
potential for results.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5 
 
2.4 GEI’s country program implementation model  
The GEI’s implementing partners follow, in principle, a model with several distinct steps illustrated in 
Figure 2 below. This is only a model -- as reality is complex and capacity development is not a 
mechanistic, linear process – but one that provides a solid foundation for a systematic approach to 
country engagements.  
 
Figure 1: GEI's country program implementation model 
This chapter describes these steps and provides indicators of success for each step. Throughout 
this process, partnerships – with government and other country stakeholders, development 
partners and other evaluation capacity development actors – are key. Similarly, building and 
sharing knowledge are central to the GEI and are emphasized in each step. Each country and 
partnership arrangement will have its own context to which the model will need to be adapted.  
2.4.1 STEP 1: CREATING A PARTNERSHIP  
2.4.1.1 Government  
The ﬁrst step in developing a country program is creating partnerships, ﬁrst and foremost with the 
partner government, and laying foundations for future work. This step may look very different in 
different contexts, but generally involves connecting and convening (sub-)national M&E 
stakeholders to build trust and establish a partnership. This step may include advocacy activities, 
initial technical advisory services, substantive support to training and advocacy, and/or bringing 
people together to share experiences and discuss potential synergies. This step may take more or 
less time depending on the country context and the state of development of the national M&E 
system.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6 
 
2.4.1.2 World Bank (required step) 
When initiating a country program, the GEI implementing partners need to connect with the World 
Bank Country Office to introduce the GEI/CLEAR work in the country and explore potential 
synergies with World Bank programs.   
 
Prior to initiating an activity in a given country, CLEARs should contact the World Bank country 
office. The TTL for the speciﬁc grant can help in making an introduction, ensure that World Bank 
policies and procedures are respected, and offer support in organizing any in-country work to be 
conducted.  
As a rule of thumb, all in-country missions should be announced to the World Bank local office and 
clearance should be obtained prior to ﬁelding missions. It is advisable to inform World Bank country 
offices of any upcoming missions at least 3 weeks in advance. This is important to ensure that all 
safety measures are put in place to protect CLEAR staff while on mission, especially in cases of 
emergencies (political unrest, natural disaster, etc.). 
 
2.4.1.3 UNDP (required step) 
Similarly, the GEI implementing partner needs to connect with the UNDP Country Office and 
explore synergies with UNDP’s country program. To connect with the UNDP country team, contact 
the UNDP member of the GEI Global Team or the head of the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office 
(IEO) Capacity Development Team (Richard.jones@undp.org). In the future (early 2024), the UNDP 
IEO will have Regional Evaluation Advisors based in Panama, Dakar, Addis Ababa, Jordan, Istanbul 
and Bangkok, who will be able to connect GEI partners to UNDP country offices.  
HOW THE WORLD BANK WORKS AT COUNTRY LEVEL 
The World Bank has offices in all client countries. Size and staffing largely depends on the 
size of the World Bank portfolio of activities in a given country, as does the level of 
representation in country. Countries with larger portfolios will have a Country Director, while 
smaller portfolios usually are handled by Country Managers or Country Representatives. 
Directors, Managers or Representatives are the front face of the institution in country and 
should be the ﬁrst point of contact for GEI implementing partners. 
The World Bank usually negotiates a Country Partnership Framework (CPF) with host 
governments. This is a four-year exercise conducted jointly by the World Bank with client 
governments and it sets out the key development objectives, the priority sectors of 
intervention and the key results expected to be achieved with the ﬁnancing package being 
considered. 
The CPF may also include activities related to M&E of programs and projects and, as such, 
may offer an opportunity to link strategic GEI objective to strengthen national M&E systems 
with broader programs ﬁnanced by the World Bank.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7 
 
 
Note also that it may be useful to connect with the UN Resident Coordinator’s (RC) office as the 
UNRC brings together the different UN agencies to improve efficiency and effectiveness of 
operational activities at country level.  
2.4.1.4 Other GEI partners  
GEI’s funding and associate partners are important potential collaborators and country 
representatives should be systematically invited to participate in GEI and its implementing 
partners’ activities.  
CORE (FUNDING) PARTNERS:  
• Canada, Global Affairs Canada 
Denmark, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
• Finland, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
• Germany, Federal Ministry for 
Economic Cooperation and 
Development 
• International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD)  
• Interamerican Development Bank 
(IDB)  
• Netherlands, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
• Portugal, Camões Instituto da 
Cooperação e da Língua 
• Switzerland, Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation (SDC)
 
 
HOW DOES UNDP WORK AT COUNTRY LEVEL?  
UNDP works in about 170 countries and territories, helping to eradicate poverty, reduce 
inequalities and exclusion, and build resilience so countries can sustain progress. As the UN’s 
development agency, UNDP plays a critical role in helping countries achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals. UNDP’s Strategic Plan 2022-2025 pursues three “directions of change” 
(structural transformation, leaving no one behind, and building resilience) through support to six 
“signature solutions” (poverty and inequality, governance, resilience, environment, energy and 
gender equality).  
At the country level, the United Nations Country Team develops in partnership with the 
Government the “United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework” (UNSDCF), 
following which UNDP develops a “Country Programme Document”, which outlines how UNDP 
will support achievement of the outcomes in the UNSDCF. UNDP in partnership with the 
government then develop “projects” to pursue these objectives. Information on all UNDP projects 
is available in the UNDP Transparency Portal.  
UNDP often supports governments in developing, monitoring and evaluating their national 
development plans or strategies, which is a potential area of collaboration with the GEI. UNDP 
also often supports integration of the SDGs into government plans and programmes, monitoring 
of the SDGs and preparation of Voluntary National Review reports, which may offer other entry 
points for collaboration.  
UNDP Country Offices are headed by Resident Representatives, who are supported by Deputy 
Resident Representatives and program teams.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8 
 
ASSOCIATE PARTNERS:  
• 3IE (International Initiative for Impact 
Evaluation) 
• Asian Development Bank  
• African Development Bank  
• ALNAP  
• Ecole nationale d’administration 
publique (ENAP)  
• EvalPartners 
• EvalYouth 
• Global Environment Facility (GEF)  
• Islamic Development Bank  
• UNFPA 
• UNICEF  
• UN Women 
• World Food Programme  
 
Creating a partnership – Indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Establish a relationship of trust with 
government counterparts  
Government ready to do a diagnostic (or if a diagnostic is not 
necessary, ready to engage in preparing a capacity development 
strategy or  other) (evidence may include a letter of engagement 
from government or an MOU) 
 
Conduct advocacy and/or initial 
activities that increase awareness of 
the important role M&E plays in 
decision making  
Activities undertaken to increase awareness of M&E amongst country 
counterparts (evidence may include event agendas, presentations, 
feedback from participants, support to participation of government 
officials in key events and/or conferences (such as the NEC 
Conference)) 
 
Inform and seek to engage 
collaboration of World Bank and 
UNDP in the GEI/implementing 
partners’ activities  
Participation by relevant partners (in this and subsequent steps) is a 
key indicator of success.  Evidence at this stage can include a record 
of meetings held with World Bank, UNDP and/or other GEI partner 
country offices that indicate their knowledge of the process and 
possible future support.  
 
 
2.4.2 Step 2: Undertaking a MESA  
A key step in the GEI country programme implementation model is a diagnostic, essential to 
understand existing elements of the M&E system and to identify entry points and opportunities for 
improvement.  The GEI Monitoring and Evaluation Systems Analysis (MESA) tool provides 
comprehensive guidance for such a diagnostic, which should be adapted to context. In Latin 
America, the National Evaluation Capacity Index (or INCE, from its Spanish acronym) Homepage | 
INCE (inceval.org) is another widely used tool. The GEI may also rely on an existing diagnostic or 
collaborate in existing processes.  
As part of the diagnostic process, World Bank, UNDP and other GEI partner country offices should 
be consulted and included in relevant workshops.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9 
 
To contribute to GEI’s learning and knowledge functions, GEI implementing partners should 
develop, in consultation with the GEI KM and Communications team, a communications and/or 
knowledge product based on the MESA. In addition, the GEI implementing partner should prepare a 
short lessons learned paper and/or organize a BBL type meeting with the GEI/CLEAR network.  
 
Undertaking a MESA – Indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Prepare a diagnostic study (MESA 
or other) in collaboration with the 
government   
A high-quality report on the diagnostic study is available. It should 
provide more than a formal or technical description of the existing 
system: it should offer a compelling analysis of why the current 
situation prevails and identify the opportunities for improvement.   
The time taken to produce the report should not exceed 4 months. 
Consult/involve key partners, 
especially World Bank, UNDP and 
other relevant GEI partner country 
offices  
The report should reﬂect participation by the relevant important 
players.  
COMMUNICATIONS AND KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS  
At each step of the implementation model, the GEI implementing partner should prepare at 
least one communications product, such as a news item (in addition to social media posts), 
which should be disseminated through the Center’s networks and shared with the GEI Global 
Team for dissemination through the GEI network and/or website.  
Similarly, at each step, the GEI implementing partner should prepare a knowledge product – 
an output that offers new insights or analysis which advances understanding about elements 
of M&E systems or M&E systems strengthening. These may take different forms. Some may 
be stand-alone, country-speciﬁc pieces, for example on “developing a national evaluation 
policy in country X: lessons learned” which can be disseminated through the Center’s 
website and networks, as well as shared with the GEI Global KM and Communications team, 
which will disseminate them through the GEI Knowledge Platform (see Section 4). Others 
knowledge products may be short pieces (like blogs) which will feed into composite GEI 
knowledge products, such as lessons learned on conducting MESAs. These should be shared 
with the GEI KM and Communications team.  
The GEI KM and Communications team provides guidance and support as needed in the 
preparation of these documents.  
Examples of knowledge products:  
1. CLEAR-AA: Lessons Learned on Our Journey to a Systems-Based Approach for 
Strengthening M&E 
2. Avoiding the Wrong Prescription: Why Country M&E Diagnostics Are Just What the 
Doctor Ordered 
3. Lessons for Strengthening a National Evaluation System (this is not a GEI product) 
Box 1: Communications and Knowledge Products
<<<PAGE=10>>>
10 
 
The report should be discussed and validated by and disseminated to 
participating stakeholders (notably government but also including 
World Bank, UNDP, and other relevant GEI partner country offices)  
Produce communications 
showcasing the country, the MESA 
and the GEI/implementing partner   
Communication product disseminated through the implementing 
partner and the GEI networks (see Box 1) 
Produce a “lessons learned” paper 
and/or present a BBL on the MESA 
experience for the GEI network  
The “lessons learned” document disseminated through the GEI 
knowledge platform (see Box 1) 
 
 
2.4.3 Step 3: Preparing a Capacity or Systems Strengthening Strategy / Plan  
The third step in the model is the development of a systems strengthening strategy and/or plan. An 
evaluation capacity development plan or strategy will look very different depending on the context, 
but should provide a direct and demonstrable response to the issues raised in the diagnostic. It 
should provide a coherent framework for a systemic approach to capacity development, as well as 
list speciﬁc activities to be undertaken, by whom and when. It should be accompanied by a costing. 
The establishment of a body (e.g. a committee or council) to oversee implementation of the 
strategy/plan should be encouraged, as this may strengthen chances of success.    
As mentioned, each strategy will be different but should address:  
〉 How to foster an enabling environment, e.g., by:   
 Raising awareness on the importance of better evidence and the need for M&E systems 
(advocacy activities) 
 Strengthening the demand for evaluative evidence 
 Formulating any policy, legislation, or regulations required  
〉 How to develop the necessary institutional capacities, e.g., by:  
 Deﬁning speciﬁc institutions’ roles and responsibilities for M&E across the national 
system and their inter-linkages (e.g. linking evaluation to planning, budgetary and 
decision-making processes) 
 Assigning roles and responsibilities for M&E within institutions  
 Institutionalizing monitoring and/or evaluation unit(s) 
 Identifying what tools, processes, evaluation plans, guidelines, standards etc. need to 
be developed.  
〉 How to develop capacities of individuals working in the system (including decision makers), e.g., 
by:  
 Deﬁning what basic competencies M&E practitioners and users of M&E need to have in 
place to perform their job functions  
 Identifying training and professional development needs and how these needs can be 
met, potentially through the delivery of speciﬁc training products and other professional 
development activities or participation in GEI global or regional training and 
professional development programs  
〉 How to develop capacity to address cross-cutting issues, e.g. by:  
 Guiding/mentoring pilot evaluations 
 Integrating critical issues like gender, climate change, youth and fragility/crisis into 
tools, guidelines, processes, training, etc.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
11 
 
〉 How partnerships will be strengthened to support implementation of the strategy, e.g. by  
 Fostering synergies with and informing other initiatives to strengthen good governance, 
strategic planning, budgeting, climate change mitigation and adaptation as well as 
climate ﬁnance and reporting, or other.  
World Bank, UNDP and other GEI network partner country offices should be engaged in or at least 
informed of the strategy development.  
At the end of this phase, a communications piece should be prepared and disseminated, and a 
knowledge product developed for GEI’s Knowledge Platform.  
 
Systems Strengthening Strategy / Plan – Indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Based on the diagnostic, develop in 
consultation with partners, a 
systems strengthening strategy 
and/or plan    
A costed, government-led systems-strengthening strategy or plan 
aligned with the suggested GEI format* is ready for implementation.  
(* to be developed) 
 
An entity (committee, council or other) is in place to oversee 
implementation of the strategy/plan 
 
Consult/involve World Bank, UNDP 
and other relevant GEI partner 
country offices  
Real success from the GEI partnership perspective is achieved when 
the country’s development partners commit to some or all of the 
activities contained in the plan and to implement them as part of their 
collaboration. 
 
Develop a communications product   Information about the new strategy/plan that includes testimony from 
the country’s government is disseminated through country and GEI 
channels.  
 
Develop a knowledge product   Knowledge products disseminated (see Box 1) 
 
 
2.4.4 Step 4: Undertaking systems strengthening activities  
This step is at the heart of the GEI’s country program work, where the GEI implementing partner 
supports government to implement the strategy/plan over the medium term through, for example, 
tailored technical assistance and training and professional development interventions.  
This step will typically take months or years, and during this time, the GEI implementing partner 
should continue to assess the level of government engagement and demand, as well as progress in 
strengthening systems and their use (see next step).  
Simultaneously, the GEI implementing partner should continue to engage with the World Bank, 
UNDP and other partners to encourage synergies with and/or integration of components into other 
development partner programs.   
The GEI implementing partner should prepare communications pieces (emphasizing changes 
brought about by GEI’s support), knowledge products and/or short lessons-learned papers.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
12 
 
 
Systems Strengthening – indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Support implementation of key 
elements of the systems-strengthen 
strategy     
In the short term, evidence should prove that the interventions 
proposed in the plan are being actively implemented. 
In the medium term, evidence should suggest demonstrable, positive 
change in the enabling environment, institutional capacities and 
individual capacities for M&E and its use in decision-making.   
While success may differ across contexts, here are some examples of 
important indications of success:  
• M&E policy and/legislation, that integrate gender, climate 
and environmental considerations 
• An operational central coordinating entity for evaluation, 
with staff with the necessary capacities  
• Budget allocated for the evaluation function  
• Evaluation plan (e.g. multi-year national evaluation plan)  
• National (or system) guidelines for evaluation, which 
integrate gender, climate and environmental considerations 
• Planning and budgeting process guidelines include use of 
M&E evidence  
• National (or sub-national) institutions providing training in 
M&E  
• Publicly accessible repository of evaluations 
Continue engagement with the 
World Bank, UNDP and other 
relevant GEI partner country offices 
with a view to integrating M&E 
systems-strengthening work into 
development partner programs 
Other development partners (especially World Bank and UNDP) 
support scaling up of M&E systems strengthening 
Communications products on results 
prepared and disseminated  
At least once a year, a communications product (news item) sharing 
progress and GEI implementing partner contributions thereto is 
disseminated 
Lessons learned paper(s) or other 
knowledge products  
At least once a year, a knowledge product is disseminated (see Box 1) 
2.4.5 Step 5: Better evidence 
Support provided to strengthen monitoring and/or evaluation systems should lead to realization of 
the GEI vision, better evidence, better policies, and better lives. GEI partners should assess the 
extent to which this is happening (or not) and why. The lessons should feed back into operational 
practice.  
Step 5 represents the ﬁrst level outcome of this vision, better evidence being generated, for example 
through the conduct or commissioning of (better quality, more inﬂuential) evaluations. The GEI may 
support pilot evaluations as part of the systems strengthening strategy, thus bridging steps 4 and 
5.   
The GEI Implementing partner, in collaboration with the Communications Global Team, should 
develop a Story of Change, summarizing the work that has happened at country level and the 
changes that can be seen in building and strengthening national M&E Systems as well as some key 
lessons learned.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
13 
 
2.4.6 Step 6: Better policies  
Step 6 is the desired higher-level outcome of GEI’s support, where evidence generated through 
evaluations is being used to inform policy making and programme management. While GEI 
implementing partners will probably not be directly involved in these processes, they should look for 
evidence that this is happening in countries where they have been providing support. For example, 
GEI implementing partners should track what happens following a pilot evaluation or other 
evidence generation activities it supports.  
The GEI Implementing partner, in collaboration with the Communications Global Team, should 
develop a new Story of Change, that emphasizes how the work of the previous year (and therefore 
the investment in the country) has paid out. 
2.4.7 Step 7: Better lives 
The ultimate element of GEI’s vision, better lives, represented as step 7, is beyond the scope of the 
GEI country program implementation model, and likely difficult to connect back to a GEI 
contribution.  Nevertheless, it is an important reminder of why the GEI does what it does, echoing 
the Turin Agenda, in which the GEI and many other partners agreed to “Ensure that our work 
improves people’s lives…” Furthermore, GEI implementing partners may over time be able to identify 
examples of evaluations that have in fact led to policy changes that have in turn led to changes in 
people’s lives. These examples can and should be highlighted as part of ongoing advocacy on the 
importance of M&E for decision making and the role of the GEI .  
GEI implementing partners should emphasize in all communications pieces but especially in these 
latter stages: What was the situation when the GEI/CLEAR engagement began? What has 
changed? What was the GEI/CLEAR contribution?”  
 
Better evidence, better policies, better lives– Indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Support evidence generation (e.g. rapid evaluations, 
country-led evaluations) as part of the systems-
strengthening strategy and use 
Government has generated/is generating evaluative 
evidence (that integrates gender, climate change 
and environmental considerations) and using it in 
policy and other decision making (evidence may 
include documentation showing that evaluation 
management response systems have been set up 
and used, that parliamentary committees review 
evaluative evidence, reports or articles citing policy 
changes based on evaluation ﬁndings, etc. 
 
Ideally, there should be evidence that these policy 
changes have had a positive impact on people’s lives 
and the planet.  
 
Track/document the use of evidence (e.g. track how 
an evaluation conducted with GEI support is 
disseminated, if an evaluation management 
response is prepared and its implementation 
monitored, or track how an evaluation management 
response system developed with GEI support is 
being implemented)   
Develop and disseminate communications products  News items and Stories of change highlight 
evaluations and/or their use  
Develop and disseminate knowledge products (e.g. 
lessons on supporting a country-led evaluation, 
paper on how an evaluation was used highlighting 
elements of the system that foster this use)  
Knowledge product(s) disseminated
<<<PAGE=14>>>
14 
 
2.5 Country program conclusion  
GEI’s systematic and long-term support is not indeﬁnite. The GEI’s comparative advantage lies in 
putting basic foundations for M&E systems and capacities in place. Once signiﬁcant progress has 
been made and a country has reached a level of maturity where it can continue strengthening its 
systems on its own, the GEI will prepare to “exit” from the country.  This does not preclude 
additional punctual or specialized support from the GEI, but it will allow the GEI to shift its limited 
resources to focus on new countries with strong demand and need for foundational support to 
strengthen their M&E systems.  
Indications of maturity include having the following in place:  
• M&E policy and/legislation  
• M&E capacity development strategy  
• Central coordinating entity for evaluation, with staff with the necessary capacities  
• Budget allocated for the evaluation function  
• Evaluation plan (e.g. multi-year national evaluation plan)  
• National (or system) guidelines for evaluation  
• Government-led evaluations being conducted  
• Processes whereby evaluations inform planning and budgeting processes 
• National (or sub-national) institutions providing training in M&E  
• Publicly accessible repository of evaluations  
As implementation of the systems strengthening strategy progresses, and essential elements of the 
national system are put into place, the GEI implementing partner should prepare an exit or 
sustainability strategy in collaboration with its government counterparts. The strategy should 
include agreement on the ﬁnal areas of support from the GEI implementing partner and should 
identify what the systems’ maintenance needs are, and how these will be met. A formal 
communication should mark the conclusion of the in-depth collaboration through the country 
program and could be accompanied by a ﬁnal report or other ﬁnal deliverable.  
A possible exit strategy for the GEI may arise when another development partner (such as the 
World Bank) incorporates signiﬁcant support to M&E systems strengthening into its regular 
development cooperation program, allowing the GEI to shift resources to another country. The 
steps to be taken in this case will depend on the speciﬁc context, but should include some formal 
communication concluding the collaboration. 
It is also possible that country circumstances change, limiting progress towards results, or where 
priority is no longer given to strengthening M&E systems. If more than six months passes with no 
activity (“dormancy”), the GEI implementing partner should review the situation with the Global 
Team and determine an appropriate course of action. This could include waiting an additional six 
months while following up with the partner government, or deciding to remove the country from the 
portfolio. In the latter case, an appropriate communication should be sent to the partner. 
As the collaboration wraps up, the GEI implementing partner should identify opportunities to 
highlight the successes achieved and showcase the country’s M&E system, for example through a 
dedicated event, a webinar, or a presentation at a NEC conference, as well as through 
communications products. The GEI implementing partner should also prepare ﬁnal knowledge 
products based on the experience and learnings from the work with the country.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
15 
 
Country program conclusion – Indicators of success 
What needs to be done? What does success look like?  
Prepare and implement in collaboration with the 
government a sustainability strategy  
In the shorter term, a sustainability strategy is 
available.  
In the longer term, the government continues to 
maintain and strengthen its system (evidence could 
include reports or articles that show for example new 
country-led evaluations) 
Support organization of an event, webinar, 
conference session or other to showcase the 
successes achieved by the country  
Well-attended event organized (evidence can include 
a recording, attendance lists, presentations etc.) 
Prepare related communications products Social media highlights the event and country 
results; news item disseminated through Center and 
GEI networks  
Send a ﬁnal communication to the government 
marking the end of the country program 
collaboration  
Evidence of a ﬁnal communication (copy of letter or 
other)  
Prepare knowledge product(s) on the experience and 
learning from the work in country  
Knowledge product(s) disseminated  
 
3 Ad hoc support  
GEI implementing partners can provide ad hoc support in response to speciﬁc requests for which 
there is government or development partner funding. Each center will develop a typical menu of 
support offerings with an indicative cost range. Sample menu items could be:  
• MESA plus Capacity Development Strategy 
• Evaluation Policy development support (e.g. technical advice, animation of 2 rounds of in-
person stakeholder workshops) 
• Development of national evaluation guidelines (e.g. technical advice, animation of 2 rounds 
of in-person stakeholder workshops) 
• Executive training workshop on national evaluation systems  
• 5-day basic training on M&E for mid-level government staff 
• 10-day intensive training on M&E for government staff  
• Evaluation: training and mentoring an evaluation team to carry out an evaluation  
4 Knowledge sharing and translation   
Note: this section discusses the GEI’s knowledge platform and links to the GEI’s M&E systems 
strengthening work. It does not cover the full range of GEI and implementing partner knowledge 
generation and sharing activities.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
16 
 
The GEI’s knowledge platform is BetterEvaluation. It hosts a broad range of M&E systems resources 
which can be used by governments (and their development partners) to guide the strengthening of 
their M&E systems.  
GEI’s implementing partners support countries using the platform in two ways:   
• They may support countries to translate resources on the knowledge platform into action 
and results with light-touch expertise, for example, by doing an expert review of a draft 
policy or strategy developed by a government based on guidance on the knowledge 
platform.  
• They provide knowledge products and lessons learned papers based on experience with the 
country programs, which enrich the knowledge platform.  
4.1 Country pages 
The Knowledge Platform includes “country pages”, one for each GEI program country, which 
include basic information on each country’s M&E system and on the GEI/Implementing partner 
collaboration with the country. GEI implementing partners should make available copies of key 
products produced through the country program (such as the capacity development strategy, 
national evaluation policy, national evaluation guidelines) to add to the country pages.  
4.2 M&E Systems resources  
The M&E systems resources include a wide range of documents that can be used by governments 
and other stakeholders to inspire the development of their M&E systems. This includes “how to” 
documents (such as the MESA guidance), discussion papers (e.g. on elements of a national 
evaluation policy or on different conﬁgurations of a central evaluation function), and sample 
documents (e.g. MESA reports, national evaluation policies, etc.)  
As described in Box 1 above, GEI implementing partners regularly develop knowledge products that 
will aliment the M&E resources section.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
