<<<PAGE=1>>>
Using a theory of change to evaluate the impact
of a conservation training programme:
a practitioner's perspective
R ACHAEL M. G ERRIE ,L IANNE C ONCANNON ,J AMIESON A. C OPSEY
T IM W RIGHT and RICHARD P. Y OUNG
Abstract Training plays a central role in the pursuit of con-
servation goals, and it is vital to know if it is having the de-
sired effect. However, evaluating the difference it makes is
notoriously challenging. Here, we present a practitioner’s
perspective on overcoming these challenges and developing
a framework for ongoing evaluation of a conservation train-
ing programme. To do this, we first created a theory of
change, describing the pathway of change we expect from
training delivery to conservation impact. This provided
the clarity and structure needed to identify indicators of
change in the short, medium and long term. For data
collection, we utilized both quantitative and qualitative
methods to provide a more complete understanding of the
change expected and capture any that might be unexpected.
However, the more time that passes since a training event,
the more difficult it becomes to attribute results; in response,
we shifted predominantly to the use of qualitative methods
to understand the long-term results achieved. After years
of implementation, this framework has enabled us to mea-
sure the difference our training makes to individuals and
their work, and to provide evidence for the contribution it
makes to achieving conservation impact. We believe that
the lessons learnt can be used to improve the evaluation of
training activities across the conservation sector and maxi-
mize the impact they achieve.
Keywords Capacity building, evaluation, impact, mixed-
methods, qualitative, theory of change, training
Supplementary material for this article is available at
doi.org/./S
Introduction
T
here is a continuous need for training within the con-
servation sector. It equips conservation practitioners
with the skills, knowledge and personal qualities they need
to overcome new challenges and achieve positive results.
To ensure training is having this effect, it requires system-
atic monitoring and evaluation. This process creates vital
opportunities for learning and adaptation, ensures resources
are used to greatest effect, and provides the evidence needed
for reporting to donors, supporters and other stakeholders
(Stem et al.,; Jones et al.,). However, evaluating the
impact of training is also notoriously challenging and, in
reality, there is a need to balance the ideal monitoring and
evaluation framework (i.e. one that provides robust evidence
of the results achieved), with what it is practically possible
to measure, especially given limited conservation resources
(Jones et al.,).
Training providers face a number of challenges when it
comes to evaluating their efforts. Firstly, the results they
achieve are dependent on the circumstances of each indi-
vidual who takes a training course, making it practically
impossible to predict what success might look like in every
eventuality (Roche, ; Ortiz & Taylor,). In some
cases, the most important results can also be difficult to
quantify, such as potentially pivotal changes in an individ-
ual’s self-confidence or motivation (James, ; Vallejo
& When, ). Furthermore, the desired conservation
impact of training could take decades to achieve, and in
this time results will inevitably be shaped by a combination
of factors (Roche,; James,, ; Ortiz & Taylor,
; Simister & Smith,). This makes the attribution
of results to a single training event a significant challenge,
especially given that experimental evaluation approaches,
commonly used to determine causality, are typically not
feasible because of the ethical implications of randomly as-
signing control groups and the practicalities of constructing
a credible counterfactual (Roche,; James,).
In many cases, the evaluation of conservation training
is limited to the quantity and quality of delivery (Bruyere
et al., ), and although success stories are commonly
used for communication purposes (Conservation Leadership
Programme, ; Tropical Biology Association,), the
methods used by training providers to evaluate the effective-
ness of their efforts are not readily available. In the wider
education sector, one of the most well-known methods
for training evaluation is Kirkpatrick’s four-level model
(Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick,). This offers a structured
approach to evaluation by guiding practitioners through
four-levels of criteria: reaction (i.e. were trainees satisfied
RACHAEL M. GERRIE (Corresponding author, orcid.org/0000-0002-8197-9753,
rachael.gerrie@durrell.org), LIANNE CONCANNON,T IM WRIGHT and RICHARD
P. Y OUNG Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust, Les Augres Manor, La
Profonde Rue, Trinity, Jersey, JE3 5BP, Channel Islands
JAMIESON A. COPSEY IUCN Species Survival Commission, Conservation Planning
Specialist Group, Apple Valley, USA
Received  March . Revision requested May .
Accepted  October . First published online April .
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (https:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted re-use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=2>>>
with a training event?), learning (i.e. did they learn any-
thing?), behaviour (i.e. did they do anything differently?)
and results (i.e. did training affect the wider system in
which they operate?). Similarly, the use of a theory of change
is also widely recommended for providing a systematic ap-
proach to evaluation in a range of contexts, including train-
ing (James,; Stem et al.,; Kapos et al.,; Kapos
et al.,; Ortiz & Taylor,; Simister & Smith,).
This approach requires training providers to articulate how
they expect their intervention to achieve the desired impact
through explicit causal pathways and, in doing so, makes it
easier to identify measures of success in the short, medium
and long term.
However, an evaluation framework that relies solely on
measuring pre-defined indicators of success can result in
missed opportunities to learn from any unexpected results
(Roche, ; Watson,; Vallejo & When,), particu-
larly in the context of training, where results can be difficult
to predict. To provide a more complete understanding of
the results achieved, it is widely recommended to utilize
both qualitative and quantitative data collection methods
(James, , ; Stem et al., ; Ortiz & Taylor,
; Simister & Smith, ; Watson, ; Vallejo &
When, ). A mixed-methods approach can help in un-
derstanding the extent to which an intervention is achieving
pre-defined indicators of success as well as capture any dif-
ficult to define or unexpected results. The use of qualitative
methods is also useful for capturing the long-term results of
training, where direct measurement and attribution is not
possible (James,, ; Simister & Smith,).
Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust (Durrell) is a non-
profit wildlife conservation organization, whose mission is
saving species from extinction. For over years, a core
part of achieving this mission has been to provide training
for conservation practitioners, typically from the organiza-
tion’s priority regions, and for aspiring conservationists,
including university graduates and early-career individuals.
Until recently, attempts to evaluate the difference this train-
ing makes have been opportunistic and focused predom-
inantly on the collection of case studies. However, in an
increasingly evidence-led sector (Sutherland et al.,),
we wanted to develop a more systematic approach that
would enable us to evaluate and maximize our impact. To
do this, we decided to use a theory of change and mixed-
methods approach as this gave us an opportunity to clarify
the assumed links between training and our conservation
mission, better understand the complexities of training
outcomes, and develop a framework that we could review
and adapt over time.
Given Durrell’s long history in conservation training, we
believe this is a useful case study for exploring the practi-
calities of using a theory of change and mixed-methods
approach for the evaluation of training impact. Here, we de-
scribe the approach taken by Durrell to develop a simple
theory of change and associated monitoring plan for its
conservation training programme. In addition, we present
a subset of preliminary quantitative and qualitative results
to share the key lessons learnt in the first
 years of
implementation.
Methods
Developing the evaluation framework
In November , we began the development process by
reviewing findings from three retrospective evaluations of
Durrell’s training programme: an internal evaluation of
Durrell’s flagship-week Endangered Species Management
course (Payne, ), followed by two Imperial College
London MSc projects evaluating–  week courses across
Durrell’s training programme (Ruzowitzky, ; Sawrey,
). Collectively, these captured the experiences of
individuals who attended a course during – .
Payne () used a mixed-methods approach to identify
the outcomes perceived by past participants and the
external factors that helped or hindered their progress.
Ruzowitzky () developed an evaluation framework
based on Kirkpatrick’s four-level model (Kirkpatrick &
Kirkpatrick, ) to measure the extent to which training
influenced their professional development and conservation
actions, and Sawrey () developed a theory of change
from the perspective of trainers and validated it against
the outcomes perceived by trainees. The key results from
each (Table ), provided us with an information base from
which to develop a theory of change.
To do this, we began by explicitly describing the desired
conservation impact of training (to achieve our organiza-
tional mission of saving species from extinction) and the
key change we expect training to affect for this to be realized
(more effective conservation action). From here, we used
if– then statements to determine the results required in the
short and medium term for these long-term goals to be
achieved, and the potential causal links that existed between
them. In particular, an increase in self-confidence, motiva-
tion and self-efficacy, collectively described as perception
of control, proved to be one of the greatest outcomes of
training (Payne,; Sawrey,) and an important pre-
cursor for increased effectiveness at work (Sawrey,).
However, in some cases, unsupportive organizations and
a lack of opportunities prevented past participants from
applying new skills and progressing in their careers. We
knew therefore that an enabling work environment would
be an important condition for success. To ensure we consid-
ered different perspectives in the development process, we
shared a preliminary draft of the theory of change with col-
leagues across Durrell, including training and non-training
staff working in a range of countries, and therefore socio-
Evaluating impact of conservation training 721
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=3>>>
cultural contexts, before inviting three external experts from
the conservation training field to challenge our logic and
comprehension of results. During this review process, the
role of the support network in achieving impact was
repeatedly called into question, with the general consensus
being that it can sometimes be influential in the success
an individual achieves but is not always required. This de-
bate was also echoed in results from the retrospective eva-
luations (Payne, ; Ruzowitzky, ; Sawrey, ). In
response, we decided to explicitly represent this as a non-
essential link in the theory of change.
We used the resulting theory of change (Fig. ) to guide
the development of the monitoring plan by defining at what
point in time we expected each result to be achieved and
what we needed to know to verify if this had happened or
not. To streamline data collection and minimize the risk
of survey fatigue, we grouped these information needs
into four key intervals: those requiring verification immedi-
ately post-training, followed by those requiring verification
at -, - and-years post-training. Based on our organiza-
tional experience, we considered  years to be the
minimum amount of time in which we could reasonably ex-
pect training to improve the effectiveness of conservation
action and therefore benefit species recovery. However,
when evaluated retrospectively, response rates dropped
significantly among participants who had completed a
course . years ago (Ruzowitzky, ), making it the
most suitable time frame for evaluation. Because of this
long time frame, we opted for a pre-test post-test non-
experimental evaluation design and used online ques-
tionnaires, designed using Smart Survey (), to collect
the information required at each interval and to establish
a pre-training baseline. Online questionnaires proved to
be a valuable tool for capturing useful information in all
three retrospective evaluation projects (Payne, ;
Ruzowitzky, ; Sawrey,) and in comparison to alter-
native and complementary tools, such as interviews and
focus groups, require minimal resources to implement and
analyse, making them the most feasible choice for the scale
required.
For results requiring verification immediately post-
training, we developed multi-item Likert scales. For percep-
tion of control, this included a series of three multi-item
Likert scales, one each for motivation, self-confidence and
self-efficacy. To measure change in skills and knowledge,
we created a list of seven competencies tailored to the learn-
ing objectives of each course written as short‘How to... ’
statements. This number gave us sufficient scope to evaluate
the main learning objectives of each course without over-
loading participants with a long list of questions and risking
so-called straight lining, in which respondents lose interest
and select the same response for each question. To avoid
misinterpretation and improve the accuracy of responses,
we also kept the wording of statements as clear and concise
as possible, for example‘How to write a grant proposal’. For
each, we developed two Likert scales, one to measure level of
knowledge and one to measure level of confidence to apply
knowledge. We also expected participants to gain a support
network immediately post-training, but because of its non-
essential role in the theory of change, and in the interest of
minimizing the number of questions, we decided it was not
a priority for evaluation at this stage in the development
process and did not design an associated indicator.
For results requiring verification at
-, -a n d-years post-
training, we increasingly combined quantitative and quali-
tative methods. For example, to measure personal effective-
ness at-year post-training we transformed the same list of
competencies used to measure skills and knowledge into a
multiple response, multiple choice question, asking partici-
pants to select which, if any, they had applied in their work
and to provide an example if relevant. Similarly, to monitor
conservation actions, at-, - and-years post-training we
used a multiple response, multiple choice question based on
the Conservation Action Classification . (Conservation
TABLE 1 A summary of key results from three retrospective evaluations of Durrell’s conservation training programme.
Result Description Reference
Skills & knowledge Individuals gained new & improved subject knowledge, & practical,
interpersonal & professional skills
Payne (2015), Sawrey (2015), Sawrey
et al. (2019)
Perception of
control
Individuals felt more confident in their abilities, more motivated to
succeed & more capable of achieving their goals
Payne (2015), Sawrey (2015), Sawrey
et al. (2019)
Support network Individuals benefitted from the network gained, using it to seek advice,
create partnerships & co-develop conservation projects
Payne (2015), Ruzowitzky (2015), Sawrey
(2015), Sawrey et al. (2019)
Personal
effectiveness
Individuals used the skills & knowledge gained to improve their job
performance
Payne (2015), Ruzowitzky (2015), Sawrey
(2015), Sawrey et al. (2019)
Professional
development
Individuals progressed within their conservation careers Payne ( 2015), Ruzowitzky (2015), Sawrey
(2015), Sawrey et al. (2019)
Conservation
action
Individuals implemented more effective conservation action Payne ( 2015), Ruzowitzky (2015)
Work environment An individual ’s work environment can significantly affect their ability
to apply new skills & progress in their careers
Payne (2015), Sawrey (2015), Sawrey
et al. (2019)
722 R. M. Gerrie et al.
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Measures Partnership,), to understand the types of ac-
tions participants had taken in the previous months fol-
lowed by an open-ended request for an example. To further
verify results against the theory of change as well as capture
unexpected and long-term results, we used a simplified ver-
sion of the most significant change method (Davies & Dart,
; Steadman, ), asking the open-ended question
‘What is the most significant change you experienced as a
result of this course?’ in the immediate post-training ques-
tionnaire and ‘What is the most significant change you
experienced in the past  months?’ in subsequent post-
training questionnaires. To better understand the relation-
ship between qualitative results and training, we included
a rating scale for participants to report the extent to which
training with Durrell influenced the result described, as
per the approach used by Payne (), Sawrey ()a n d
Ruzowitzky (). At -, -a n d-years post-training, we
also wanted to understand the extent to which participants
experienced an enabling work environment. To do this,
we transformed a list of the seven most common barriers
to the effective implementation of species recovery plans
(Richardson, ) into a multi-item Likert scale, asking
participants to rate the extent to which each affected their
work, followed again by a request for a qualitative example if
applicable. Finally, before implementing a full-scale trial, we
pre-tested pre- and post-training questionnaires in person
with a cohort of international course participants to ensure
the language was accessible and completion time reasonable.
Preliminary implementation
During – , we trialled pre-, post- and-year post-
training questionnaires (Supplementary Materials,  & )
across five face-to-face Durrell courses ( Table ).
We e-mailed pre- and post-training questionnaires to all
 course participants before and after their course and
-year post-training questionnaires to the same individ-
uals  months later. For survey completion, we assigned
each course participant a unique identification code, saved
alongside their personal details in a secure database, to be
entered at the start of each questionnaire. This allowed ques-
tionnaires to be completed and managed anonymously but
still matched for analysis. To maximize response rate, we
personalized e-mail correspondence, included a clear state-
ment of purpose and sent a reminder one week after the
initial request. We received completed pre- and post-train-
ing questionnaires (% response rate) and completed
-year post-training questionnaires (% response rate). We
summarized results from each training event on an on-
going basis before combining results from all five courses
into one dataset to produce an appropriate sample size for
statistical analysis and to draw general conclusions about the
effectiveness of the training programme as a whole. We used
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test inR .. (R Core Team,
) to test for differences in indicators measured pre-
and post-training, assuming statistical significance at
P ,.. For the analysis of qualitative data collected
FIG. 1 The theory of change for Durrell’s
training programme: after completing a
training course, an individual gains new
and improved skills and knowledge,
increased perception of control and access
to ongoing support from Durrell’s
conservation network. An individual then
returns to work and uses the skills and
knowledge gained to improve their
personal effectiveness. A more effective
individual then progresses within their
career and/or implements more effective
conservation action. To achieve these
results, we make the assumption that an
individual returns to an enabling work
environment; i.e. one that provides them
with the opportunities and support
needed to succeed (indicated by the grey
box surrounding these results). The more
effective conservation action taken
benefits the recovery of species and/or
habitats and ultimately achieves Durrell’s
conservation mission, to save species from
extinction.
Evaluating impact of conservation training 723
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=5>>>
using the adapted most significant change method (Davies
& Dart,), we used a thematic coding approach to iden-
tify key words and phrases from each response and group
them into distinct themes. We then reapplied these themes
to determine the number of responses related to each.
Results
The evaluation framework
The evaluation framework for Durrell’s training programme
is underpinned by a theory of change describing the
pathway of change we expect an individual to take from
completing a training course to achieving conservation im-
pact (Fig. ). To measure progress against this theory of
change, and capture any unexpected results, we use a com-
bination of quantitative and qualitative indicators (Table ).
Preliminary results
Immediate post-training Results showed that trainees did
gain new and improved skills and knowledge immediately
after a completing a course, with participants reporting
higher levels of knowledge post-training (P,.) and
higher levels of confidence to apply knowledge (P,.).
When results from each course were summarized indepen-
dently, we were able to identify which competencies partici-
pants were the most and least knowledgeable and confident
about (Fig. ). However, preliminary results did not show
the expected increase in all three elements of perception of
control, with participants reporting an increase in their level
of self-confidence (P,.) and self-efficacy (P,.),
but not in their level of motivation (P =.). Instead, over
% of participants reported feeling highly or extremely mo-
tivated both before and after the course (Fig. ). Similarly,
when asked to describe the most significant change experi-
enced as a result of the course,% of responses described
an increase in self-confidence, whereas only% described
an increase in motivation. Unexpectedly,% of the re-
sponses recorded immediately post-training described gain-
ing inspiration and/or a new perspective to be the most
significant change experienced. For example, as one partici-
pant described,‘it has allowed me to understand that many
are working for the betterment of the environment and that
although I come from a small country facing many threats,
we are not alone, our conservation action is not in vain’, and
another, ‘it has helped me to see the world differently and
that there is hope in conservation’.
TABLE 2 An overview of the five Durrell training courses included
in preliminary implementation of the evaluation framework.
Training course Description
Endangered Species
Management
A 12-week course for conservation
practitioners to develop a broad
range of skills including facilitation,
leadership, animal husbandry,
field research, project planning
& management
Facilitation &
Communication Skills
A 1-week course for practising &
aspiring conservationists to develop
the skills needed to facilitate
multi-stakeholder meetings
An Introduction to GIS
using QGIS
A 1-week course for practising &
aspiring conservationists to develop
basic mapping & analytical skills
Endangered Species
Recovery
A 2-week course for practising &
aspiring conservationists to learn
the principles & practice of
species conservation
Avian Egg Incubation A 1-week course for conservation
practitioners to develop practical
skills in avian egg management
TABLE 3 The monitoring plan for Durrell’s training programme.
Result/Assumption Indicator(s) Data collection
Skills & knowledge % of trainees reporting a good/high level of knowledge; % of trainees
reporting a good/high level of confidence to apply knowledge
Pre- & immediate post-training
questionnaire
Perception of control % of trainees feeling highly/extremely motivated; % of trainees feeling
highly/extremely confident; % of trainees feeling highly/extremely capable
Pre- & immediate post-training
questionnaire
Personal effectiveness % of trainees applying each course-specific competency; qualitative
example of competency applied
1-year post-training
questionnaire
Professional
development
% of aspiring conservationists vs conservation practitioners;
% of conservation practitioners in each career level
Pre-, 1-, 5- & 10-years post-
training questionnaire
Conservation action % of trainees implementing each IUCN conservation action type;
% of conservation actions influenced by training at Durrell;
qualitative example of conservation action taken
1-, 5- & 10-years post-training
questionnaire
Species recovery/
habitat recovery
Qualitative stories of change; % of stories influenced by training
at Durrell
1-, 5- & 10-years post-training
questionnaire
Enabling environment % of trainees facing major/complete barriers in their work;
qualitative example of major/complete barrier faced
1-, 5- & 10-years post-training
questionnaire
724 R. M. Gerrie et al.
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=6>>>
One-year post-training One-year after completing a
course, results showed that participants were using the
competencies gained to improve their personal effectiveness
and, following each course, we were able to identify which
competencies were being applied by the greatest number
of participants and which were being applied by the fewest
(Fig. ). Qualitative examples provided further verification
and illustrated the ways in which competencies had been
applied, for example, in the months since completing
the Durrell Endangered Species Management course, one
participant described using the population monitoring
skills they gained as‘I set up the monitoring of a threat-
ened EDGE species ’, and another described using the
grant writing skills gained as‘I wrote a proposal for a live-
lihoods group and they were successful in getting the
funding’. Results also showed that training influenced the
conservation actions taken by participants. For example,
in the  months since completing the Facilitation and
Communication Skills course, one participant described
taking an action somewhat influenced by the training
received as‘I brought together an electric company, NGOs
and a governmental institution to agree on the correction of
a power line which is dangerous to raptors’, and following
the Endangered Species Recovery course, one participant
described an action significantly influenced by the training
received as ‘I recently led my first offshore island invasive
species eradication project’. In total, % of participants
reported that their ability to take a given conservation action
was significantly influenced by the training received,%
reported it was somewhat influenced and% reported it
was not at all influenced.
Discussion
Despite the challenges faced, we have shown that it is pos-
sible to develop a useful and practical framework for on-
going evaluation of a conservation training programme.
Using a theory of change approach has helped us to clarify
our assumptions about how training contributes to our
conservation mission and identify appropriate measures of
success in the short, medium and long term. The use of
qualitative and quantitative methods to measure progress
against the theory of change has provided us with a richer
understanding of what training can achieve and enabled
us to capture outcomes that were unexpected and difficult
to define. The information gained throughout this process
FIG. 2 Per cent of participants who reported each level of
knowledge pre-training compared to post-training for each
of the competencies assessed during the Endangered
Species Recovery course in.
FIG. 3 Per cent of participants who reported each level of
motivation pre-training compared to post-training across
all of the courses included in this study.
FIG. 4 Per cent of participants applying each competency in the
 months after completing the Durrell Endangered Species
Management course in.
Evaluating impact of conservation training 725
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=7>>>
will be used to refine the theory of change, improve the
evaluation framework, and increase the effectiveness of
Durrell’s conservation training programme.
In line with the theory of change, preliminary results
show that training is having the desired effect on the skills
and knowledge of course participants and enabling them to
be more effective at work. Immediately after completing a
course, participants had more knowledge of the competencies
taught and felt more confident to apply them in their work.
Within  months, they were then using these competencies
to improve their personal effectiveness; e.g. to write suc-
cessful grant proposals and establish monitoring protocols.
Within  months of completing a course, participants also
reported that their ability to take specific conservation ac-
tion was influenced by the training they received, including
actions to remove threats and recover populations of threa-
tened species. Although more difficult to assess, research has
shown that measures of key outcomes such as these serve as
powerful predictors of conservation success (Kapos et al.,
) and have provided us with a reliable indication that
training can achieve its goal of saving species from extinc-
tion. Quantifying the application of skills and knowledge
has also enabled us to identify which competencies are the
most useful to participants. For example, competencies re-
lating to facilitation, leadership and project management
were frequently reported to be the most applied in the
months after completing a course and we have begun ex-
panding our training programme to meet these needs
more fully. These findings support those of Barlow et al.
() and Englefield et al. (), who found project man-
agement and leadership skills to be in critical need across the
conservation sector. In the future, we plan to broaden our
definition and assessment of skills and knowledge to include
more of the personal competencies we expect an individual to
gain from training (Maggs et al.,), in particular for longer,
more intensive courses such as the -week Durrell
Endangered Species Management course.
In contradiction to the theory of change, preliminary re-
sults did not show a consistent improvement in all three
perception of control elements. Participants reported higher
levels of self-confidence and self-efficacy following training
(i.e. they felt more confident in themselves and more cap-
able of achieving their goals), but reported similar high
levels of motivation both before and after training. In
hindsight, this is perhaps not surprising, as we can expect
individuals who seek out training to be highly motivated al-
ready. However, a combination of these perception of con-
trol elements previously proved to be an integral outcome of
training (Sawrey,; Sawrey et al.,) and warrant fur-
ther investigation. We will continue to review the role they
play within the theory of change and aim to improve the way
they are defined and measured. In addition, we intend to ex-
plore in more detail the role inspiration plays in the theory
of change as preliminary results suggest that feeling more
inspired and/or gaining a new perspective is one of the most
significant outcomes of training and, as suggested in the wider
education literature, this can increase the likelihood of an
individual achieving their goals (Milyavskaya et al.,).
As with any evaluation, we needed to balance what we
ideally wanted to know with what was practically possible
to measure, and as a result we recognize a number of limi-
tations with the method used. First is the reliance on self-
reporting and its associated response biases, which can
lead to inaccurate or false results. In particular, participants
might report they feel more confident or more knowledge-
able than they actually are because they think it is the
correct answer. Second is the increasing risk of selection
bias over time, where results become skewed because they
only represent a subset of individuals who complete a
questionnaire. In particular, participants who have had a
negative experience or who did not continue to work in con-
servation might be less likely to complete a questionnaire
and therefore be underrepresented in results. Although
these biases cannot be fully overcome, their effect can be
mitigated by following good survey design and we therefore
consider questionnaires to be capable of generating useful
information with minimal resources. Finally, the evaluation
framework lacks a control group (i.e. a similar cohort of
individuals in the conservation sector that do not receive
the same training as course participants) against which we
can compare rates of progress over time and truly under-
stand the difference training at Durrell makes. This limits
our ability to attribute long-term results and conservation
impact to the training an individual receives. However, we
have found a pre-test post-test non-experimental design to
yield meaningful results and the use of qualitative data
collection methods has enabled us to capture illustrative
examples of success and determine the extent to which
they are influenced by training. In addition, we found that
these qualitative stories and the theory of change diagram
itself to be valuable in communicating training impact to
donors, supporters and prospective course participants.
We hope this work encourages others to adopt a systematic
approach to evaluating the impact of training in conservation
and we believe that the lessons learnt and the simple theory of
change presented here can be used and adapted to facilitate
this process. Finally, we hope this work will stimulate further
discussion on the topic of impact evaluation in conservation
training and encourage others to share their experiences.
Acknowledgements We thank The Balcombe Charitable Trust
for funding the development of this work, Catherine Payne, Lucas
Ruzowitzky and Brittany Sawrey for their preliminary research,
Marianne Carter, Mark O’Connell and Rosie Trevelyan for providing feed-
back on the theory of change, and the two anonymous reviewers and
Martin Fisher for their comments and support in preparing this article.
Author contributions Study design: all authors; data collection and
analysis: RG; writing: all authors.
726 R. M. Gerrie et al.
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Conflicts of interestNone.
Ethical standards This research abided by theOryx guidelines on
ethical standards, received ethical approval from Durrell Wildlife
Conservation Trust and conforms to standards set out by the British
Sociological Association. All participants provided informed consent
prior to taking part and confidentiality and anonymity of research
participants was maintained throughout.
References
BARLOW , A., BARLOW , C.G., BODDAM -W HETHAM ,L .&
ROBINSON ,B .() A rapid assessment of the current status of
project management skills in the conservation sector.Journal of
Nature Conservation, , – .
BRUYERE , B., BYNUM , N., COPSEY , J., PORZECANSKI ,A .&
STERLING ,E .() Conservation Leadership Capacity Building:
A Landscape Study. American Museum of Natural History,
New York, USA.
CONSERVATION LEADERSHIP PROGRAMME () conservationleader
shipprogramme.org/our-impact [accessed  September ].
CONSERVATION MEASURES PARTNERSHIP () ccnetglobal.com/
resource/i [accessed  September ].
DAVIES ,R .&D ART , J.J. () The ‘Most Significant Change’ (MSC)
Technique: A Guide to Its Use. mande.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/
//MSCGuide.pdf [accessed  February ].
ENGLEFIELD , E., BLACK , S.A., COPSEY , J.A. & KNIGHT , A.T. ()
Interpersonal competencies define effective conservation
leadership. Biological Conservation, , – .
JAMES ,R .() Practical Guidelines for the Monitoring and
Evaluation of Capacity-Building: Experiences from Africa. INTRAC,
International NGO Training and Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
JAMES ,R .() Just Do It: Dealing with the Dilemmas in Monitoring
and Evaluating Capacity Building. International NGO Training
and Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
JONES , J.P.G., ASNER , G.P., BUTCHART , S.H.M. & KARANTH , K.U.
() The‘why’, ‘what’ and ‘how’ of monitoring for conservation.
In Key Topics in Conservation Biology (eds D.W. Macdonald &
K.J. Willis), pp.– . John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, USA.
KAPOS , V., BALMFORD , A., AVELING , R., BUBB , P., CAREY ,P . ,
ENTWISTLE ,A .e ta l .() Calibrating conservation: new tools for
measuring success.Conservation Letters, , – .
KAPOS , V., BALMFORD , A., AVELING , R., BUBB , P., CAREY ,P . ,
ENTWISTLE , A. et al. () Outcomes, not implementation,
predict conservation success.Oryx, , – .
KIRKPATRICK , D.L. & KIRKPATRICK , J.D. () Evaluating Training
Programmes: The Four Levels. rd edition. Berrett-Koehler
Publication, Oakland, USA.
MAGGS , G., APPLETON , M.R., LONG ,B .&Y OUNG , R.P. (eds) ()
A Global Register of Competences for Threatened Species Recovery
Practitioners: A Comprehensive List of Skills, Knowledge and
Personal Attributes Required by Practitioners Working within
Threatened Species Recovery. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
M
ILYAVSKAYA , M., IANAKIEVE ,I . ,FOXEN -C RAFT ,E . ,COLANTUONI ,A .
&K OESTNER ,R .() Inspired to get there: the effects of trait and
goal inspiration on goal progress.Personality and Individual
Differences, , – .
ORTIZ ,A .&T AYLOR ,P .() Learning Purposefully in Capacity
Development: Why, What and When to Measure?International
Institute for Educational Planning, Paris, France.
PAYNE ,C .() DESMAN Capacity Building Survey Report.
Unpublished report. Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust,
Jersey, Channel Islands.
RC
ORE TEAM () The R Project for Statistical Computing.
r-project.org [accessed  February ].
RICHARDSON ,H .() The global need for threatened species
management programmes and the barriers that prevent effective
implementation of recovery plans. MSc thesis. Imperial College
London, London, UK.
R
OCHE , C.J.R. () Impact Assessment for Development Agencies:
Learning to Value Change. Oxfam, Oxford, UK.
RUZOWITZKY ,L .() The conservation impact of training: the
Durrell Conservation Academy as a case study. MSc thesis. Imperial
College London, London, UK.
SAWREY ,B .() Evaluating training impacts in conservation: a case
study in Mauritius. MSc thesis. Imperial College London,
London, UK.
SAWREY , B., COPSEY ,J .&M ILNER -G ULLAND , E.J. () Evaluating
impacts of training in conservation: a case study in Mauritius.
Oryx, , – .
S
IMISTER ,N .&S MITH ,R .() Praxis Paper: Monitoring
and Evaluating Capacity Building: Is it Really that Difficult?
International NGO Training and Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
SMART SURVEY () smartsurvey.co.uk [accessed  February ].
STEADMAN ,D .() Towards ecological and social impact through
collaborative governance of a seascape of marine protected areas in
Honduras. Oryx, , – .
S
TEM , C., MARGOLUIS , R., SALAFSKY ,N .&B ROWN ,M .()
Monitoring and evaluation in conservation: a review of trends and
approaches. Conservation Biology, , – .
S
UTHERLAND , W.J., PULLIN , A.S., DOLMAN , P.M. & KNIGHT , T.M.
() The need for evidence-based conservation.Trends in Ecology
& Evolution, , – .
TROPICAL BIOLOGY ASSOCIATION () tropical-biology.org/impact
[accessed  September ].
VALLEJO ,B .&W EHN ,U .() Capacity development evaluation:
the challenge of the results agenda and measuring return on
investment in the global south.World Development, , – .
WATSON ,D .() Measuring capacity development: Combining
the “best of two worlds” in monitoring and evaluation of
capacity development. InCapacity Development in Practice
(eds J. Ubels, N. Acquaye-Baddoo & A. Fowler), pp.– .
Earthscan, London, UK.
Evaluating impact of conservation training 727
Oryx, 2022, 56(5), 720–727 © The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Fauna & Flora International doi:10.1017/S0030605321001551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605321001551 Published online by Cambridge University Press