<<<PAGE=1>>>

<<<PAGE=2>>>
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punjab Education Sector Plan 
2019/20 – 2023/24
<<<PAGE=3>>>
2
<<<PAGE=4>>>
3 
Table of Contents 
Acronyms ........................................................................................................................... 5 
Executive Summary .......................................................................................................... 6 
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................. 11 
1.1. Socio-economic overview ................................ ................................ ..........................  11 
1.2. Structure and provision of education in Punjab ................................ ...................... 13 
1.3 Achievements and lessons through the Punjab School Education Sector Plan 
(PSESP) 2013-2017 ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 18 
1.4 International, national and provincial policy frameworks guiding the PESP 
2019/20 – 2023/24 ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 20 
1.5 PESP 2019/20 - 2023/24 Goals and Objectives ................................ .........................  21 
2 Strategic Areas and Priority Programmes ........................................................... 21 
2.1 Strategic Area 1: Quality and Learning Outcomes ................................ .................. 23 
2.1.1 Priority programmes 1 – Objective: Improve teaching and learning practices for better 
learning outcomes ........................................................................................................................................ 24 
2.2 Strategic Area 2 – Access, Retention and Equity ................................ ..........................  37 
Priority programmes 2 – Objective: Provide adequate and sufficient access to education for 
children from pre-primary to secondary, including marginalized and children with special 
needs ................................................................................................................................................................ 38 
Priority programmes 3 – Objective: Promote quality education in a safe, inclusive and 
conducive learning environment for children ....................................................................................... 49 
2.3 Strategic Area 3 – Governance and Management ................................ ................... 53 
Priority programmes 4 –Objective: Strengthen good governance of the education sector for 
equitable access and high-quality education ........................................................................................ 55 
Priority programmes 5 –Objective: Promote effective leadership and management of the 
education sector for better service delivery .......................................................................................... 59 
3 Assumptions and dependencies ........................................................................... 65 
4. Costing and Financing ............................................................................................... 66 
5. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework ................................................................. 69 
5.1 Monitoring Structure ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 70 
5.1.1. M&E activities ..................................................................................................................................... 70 
5.1.2. Management Information System .................................................................................................. 71 
5.2 Key Performance Indicators and Programme indicators ................................ ............. 71 
Annexes ............................................................................................................................ 81 
I. Summary Education Sector Analysis................................ ................................ ............ 82 
II. Projections and costing of the scalable components of the PESP 2019/20-
2023/24 ............................................................................................................................ 105
<<<PAGE=5>>>
4
<<<PAGE=6>>>
5 
Acronyms 
 
ADU  Academic Development Unit 
CWD  Children with Disabilities 
DEA  District Education Authorities 
DRR  Disaster Risk Reduction 
ECE  Early Childhood Education 
ESA  Education Sector Analysis 
GER  Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GIR  Gross Intake Ratio 
GoP  Government of Pakistan 
GoPb  Government of the Punjab 
GPE  Global Partnership for Education 
HEC  Higher Education Commission 
L&NFBED Literacy and Non-Formal Basic Education Department 
NER  Net Enrolment Ratio 
NFE  Non-formal Education  
OOSC  Out of school children  
PEF  Punjab Education Foundation 
PEMIS  Punjab Education Management Information System 
PESP  Punjab Education Sector Plan 2019/20 - 2023/24 
PLGA  Punjab Local Government Act 
PLNFEP Punjab Literacy & Non-Formal Education Policy 2018-2030 
PPP  Public-Private Partnership 
PSDF  Punjag Skills Development Fund 
PSESP  Punjab School Education Sector Plan 2013 - 2017 
QAED  Quaid-e-Azam Academy for Educational Development 
QAT  Quality Assurance Test 
SDG  Sustainable Development Goals 
SED  School Education Department 
SEN  Special Education Needs 
SpED  Special Education Department 
STEAM Science Technology Engineering Arts and Mathematic 
TEVTA  Technical Education and Vocational Training Authority 
TLM  Teaching and Learning Materials 
TVET  Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
UIS  UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
<<<PAGE=7>>>
6 
Executive Summary 
The goal for a well -functioning education system is quality education for all children, in an inclusive 
and conducive learning environment. Such a system provides  children with convenient access to 
school so that they are able to enrol , continue their schooling, and learn well enough to gain 
meaningful employment and to contribute to society. Ideally, it means getting children into school at 
the right age, establis hing a strong foundation for future learning, and building upon that foundation 
with age and context appropriate material, taught by competent and responsive teachers , in well-
resourced classrooms. It means regularly collecting data on schooling and learni ng outcomes and 
using this data to inform  continuous improvement. It also means providing targeted support to 
enable all students to stay in school, and to learn well, regardless of their personal limitations.  
In Punjab, successive governments have undertaken a series of reforms to enable the public 
education sector to improve its performance. These reforms have enabled the Government of the 
Punjab ( GoPb)‘s S chool Education Department (SED) to improve school supply so that, to date, 
12.4 million boy s and girls are enrolled in 52,470 public schools 1 across the province. A series of 
successive household surveys2 have reported improvements in the province‘s primary level (ages 5-
9) participation rate from 84.8% in 2011 to 90.4% in 2017. This improvement has been driven by 
campaigns and incentives  to increase enrolment in government schools and government funded 
private schools, especially in under -served parts of the province . Basic infrastructure has also 
improved, so that 95% of  government schools have toilets, boundary walls, electricity and running 
water.  
Student literacy and numeracy levels have also exhibited a steady increase. In a standardized, 
sample-based early grade literacy and numeracy assessment (English, Urdu and Math) 
administered to Grade 3 students in March 2015, students only responded correctly to 56% of 
questions on Grade 1 and 2 literacy and numeracy student learning outcomes  (SLOs). In March 
2017, students responded correctly to 77% of questions against the same SLOs. Punjab als o 
outperforms other provinces in the Annual State of Education Report (ASER) assessments.  
Despite these improvements, Punjab still has approximately five million out of school children 
(OOSC), out of which over three million are of secondary school age. Regional disparities also 
persist, with children in the southern part of the province having  relatively limited access to 
schooling. The southern districts of Rahim Yar Khan, D.G. Khan and Rajanpur have the highest 
number of OOSC in the province. Girls are less likely to enrol into school, and more likely to drop out 
earlier, than boys.  For ever y 100 students enrolled in Katchi grade, only 28 students remain until 
Grade 10 (31% for boys and 25% for girls)3.  
Disability and economic deprivation still prevent children from accessing schooling. Even when 
children are in school, a large number study in classrooms that are overcrowded and multi -grade. 
Learning levels are still unsatisfactory even in single teacher classrooms, and formal assessments to 
measure learning are still not routine or standardized. Between 2015 and 2017, student performance 
remained stagnant in Punjab Examination Commission‘s (PEC) Grade 5 exams.  
                                                 
1 Source: PMIU 2018/19. These do not include Punjab Education Foundation (PEF) of Punjab School Support Programme 
(PSSP) schools 
2 Nielsen Household Survey – November 2011 to November 2015; Bureau of Statistics – February 2017 
3 PMIU 2018-19
<<<PAGE=8>>>
7 
Underpinning these trends are governance and management challenges: while data is collected in 
routine, it is not quality assured nor regularly used for decision making, the D istrict Education 
Authority (DEA) model has not been fully realized, and capacity of local managers continues to be 
low when it comes to planning, managing or tracking reform.  
The Punjab Education Sector Plan (PESP) 2019/20 – 2023/24 has been developed to address 
enduring education challenges in Punjab. The Education Sector Analysis  (ESA) for the PESP 
pointed at three persistent challenges in Punjab that pre vent the public-school system from 
achieving its vision: 
i. Education equity and inclusion: Access is still limited to certain groups of children in the 
province, including girls, children from poorer households, children with disabilities, and 
those living in southern districts. While the GoPb has recently started ramping up its 
special education and literacy and non-formal education departments, these services are 
grossly under-provided and are not prioritized in routine planning processes. The equity 
challenge has been attributed to both demand and supply side constraints.  
ii. Quality: The ESA quotes student performance in the 2016 ASER survey and PEC‘s 
annual Grade 5 and 8 exams to demonstrate shortcomings in student performance, even 
in basic literacy and numeracy. It also reinforces that children from the poorest households 
continue to show weak performance.  Even though teacher presence in classrooms has 
risen substantially in recent years, the quality challenge persists because of limited supply 
of competent teachers , especially in math, science and English , a culture of learning for 
recall, and a lack of a coherent assessment regime that can help determine strengths and 
weaknesses in student performance. 
iii. Governance and management: The governance challenge results from inefficiencies 
arising from limited capacity of the recently introd uced DEAs and of education officials. 
While data from schools is collected in routine, its accuracy is uncertain and its use in 
decision making and performance management is limited. Accountability processes are 
weak and financial inefficiency is common.  
The interventions proposed in the PESP address these problems and challenges, and will be 
implemented with the following objectives:  
1. Promote quality education in a safe, inclusive and conducive learning environment for 
children  
2. Improve teaching and learning practices for better learning outcomes  
3. Provide adequate and sufficient access to education for children from pre -primary to 
secondary (including marginalized and children with special needs) and youth/adults  
4. Strengthen gover nance of the education sector for equitable access and high -quality 
education  
To address these challenges, PESP proposes three overarching strategic areas: 
- Quality and learning outcomes 
- Access, retention and equity 
- Governance and management  
Within these areas, the government has introduced five priority programmes:
<<<PAGE=9>>>
8 
 
 
Table 1. PESP 2019/20-2023/24 programmes 
 
 
These five priority programmes have been designed to support and reinforce each other. Sound 
governance and management provide the scaffolding needed to introduce, sustain , and quality 
assure improvements to quality and learning outcomes, and to access and equity. As the quality of 
government schools improves, so will the motivation of parents to enrol and retain their children in 
school, and an inclusive, enabling learning environment will, in turn, support further improvements to 
student performance.  
 
The five priority areas in the PESP  also respond to, and build upon, the GoPb‘s national and global 
commitments, including those through the Sustainable De velopment Goals (SDGs), Article 25A of 
the Constitution of  the Islamic Republic of  Pakistan, and the Punjab School Education New Deal  
2018-2023.  
 
 
 
Strategic 
area 
Priority 
programmes 
Focus of the programmes 
1. Quality and 
learning 
outcomes 
1. Improve teaching and 
learning practices for better 
learning outcomes 
Teacher training, quality teaching and learning 
materials, learning assessments, critical thinking, 
elements of sustainable development, wholesome 
personality development, technical, vocational and 
technology-oriented education 
2. Access, 
retention 
and equity 
2. Provide adequate and 
sufficient access to 
education for children from 
pre-primary to secondary, 
including marginalized and  
children with special needs 
Increase access and retention from ECE to post-
secondary education, increase provision of functional 
and adequate basic school facilities including 
disability-friendly infrastructure in all schools, non-
formal education, access for marginalized children, 
including children with special needs.  
3. Promote quality education in 
a safe, inclusive and conducive 
learning environment for 
children 
Promotion of safe, clean, green, healthy and hygienic 
physical environment, safe and protective behavioural 
practices, and an enabling environment in 
mainstream schools and institutions for children with 
special needs  
3. Governance 
and 
management 
4. Strengthen good 
governance of the 
education sector for 
equitable access and high-
quality education 
Strengthened governance and coordination 
frameworks within the public education system, other 
line departments and with private providers, Enhance 
planning, monitoring and evaluation across all levels 
for evidence-based decision-making, improved 
financial planning and management 
5. Promote effective 
leadership and 
management of the 
education sector for better 
service delivery 
Empowering and enabling local bodies, district 
officials and school communities to improve 
schooling inputs, outputs and outcomes
<<<PAGE=10>>>
9 
The figure below summarizes the theory of change for the PESP: 
 
Figure 1: Theory of Change for PESP 2019/20-2023/24
<<<PAGE=11>>>
10 
The strategies in the PESP are supported by a costed implementation plan. The interventions the 
plan are defined broadly, and will be described in detail in corresponding operational plans for each 
organization responsible for delivery. These operational plans will provide following details: 
- how the interventions will be delivered 
- how vertical and horizontal linkages will be established to support delivery 
- how performance will be tracked and course redressal initiated, if needed 
 
. The PESP has proposed an inter -department coordination committee to oversee delivery of 
planned interventions, and one of the first tasks of this committee would be to guide the 
development of these plans.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
11 
1. Introduction 
 
The PESP 2019/20 – 2023/24 embraces a  transformative reform agenda for Punjab . Aligned with 
the New Deal 2023, the PESP 2019/20 – 2023/24 reflects on the key achievements of previous  
reform efforts  and seeks to address remaining and emerging challenges.  The PESP 2 019/20-
2023/24 has been developed in a participatory  manner under the leadership of the GoPb, through 
inclusive dialogue with all key stakeholders.  
 
The PESP 2019/20-2023/24 was informed by an Education Sector Analysis (ESA), which assessed 
key achievemen ts and challenges in the education sector , and offered recommendations for the 
development of priority programmes. A summary of the  ESA is included as an annex to this 
document.   
 
The PESP 2019/20 -2023/24 reflects the proposals of stakeholders of the Punjab education sector, 
gathered through  consultative workshops and focus group discussions conducted at central and 
district levels between June and November 2018, as well as first quarter of  2019. The consultations 
included staff from School Education D epartment (SED) and attached departments, Special 
Education Department (SpED), Literacy and Non -Formal Basic Education Department (L&NFBED), 
other units of the GoPb, civil society and development partners . The objectives , strategies and  
priority programmes were proposed in these consultations. Further work was developed by the SED 
in early 2019 for the revision of PESP drafts, identification of indicators, setting of targets and 
development of an implementation plan for the PESP. 
 
The PESP 2019/20-2023/24 also reflects the latest reform initiatives in Punjab, specifically the New 
Deal 2023. The Plan acknowledges the ambitious reform agenda established  by the GoPb to 
improve the quality of teaching and learning outcomes for all children in The New Deal.  
 
This strategic document first introduces the socio -economic situation of Punjab , followed by an 
overview of  the global, national and provincial polic y frameworks that provide the vision for the 
education sector in Punjab . The second chapter introduces the strategies designed to achieve  the 
education objectives of the next five years. The subsequent  chapters outline the costs projected to 
reach the outcomes set by the strategic plan and the estimated financing available for  the 
implementation of the plan over the next five years. This is followed by processes for monitoring and 
evaluation of the plan.    
 
1.1. Socio-economic overview 
 
Punjab has a young population: more than one -fourth of the total provincial population is of school -
going age. Punjab‘s population growth rates show signs of deceleration. However , with an annual 
population growth rate of 2.13 , the number of children 5 -16 years old is furthermore expected to 
continue growing in the medium -term. The impact on education service delivery in the near term  is 
significant.  
 
There are two demographic characteristics that make education planning in Punjab complex . The 
first: most of the 110 million people living in this province  (63.3%) reside in rural areas. The second: 
internal migration is very significant. Employing a multidimensional measure of poverty, which takes 
into account not only income levels  but also indicators related to health, education and standards of 
living, it emerges that rural areas of the province are more deprived compared to the urban  areas.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
12 
While 6.3% of the population in urban areas of Punjab can be considered poor under this 
multidimensional index, the incidence soars to 43.7% of the population in rural areas. Southern 
districts of the province are more deprived than the central and  northern districts. A breakdown of 
multi-dimensional poverty highlights that deprivation in education (43%) and living standards (30.5%) 
are the major contributors to multidimensional poverty index in the province. 4  
 
In recent years, much has been done to improve literacy levels throughout the province. As noted in 
the PLNFEP 2019, ―literacy is an important measure of education because its improvement is likely 
to have an impact in the longer run on other important indicators of welfa re‖.5 Notwithstanding those 
efforts, female literacy rates lag behind those of their male counterparts : 54% of females are literate 
compared to 66% of men.  The situation is more acute in rural areas  – 44% of females are literate 
compared to 73% of females in urban areas. It is estimated that there are over 57 million illiterate  
persons of age 10 and above in the Punjab.  
 
While these low literacy levels can be attributed to the limited demand and supply of schools, other 
factors also contribute. Children‘s health and nutrition, for example, are important aspects of school 
preparedness. However, indicators for the overall country , and for Punjab in particular , suggest that 
by the time children enter school, their health and nutrition are already compromised, to the point of 
affecting their chances of learning or remaining in school. Firstly, child mortality rates are above 
other countries in the subcontinent. The infant mortality rate in the province is 75 children per 1000 
live births, while the mortality rat e of children under age five is 95 per 1000 live births, compared to 
average rates for South Asia of 40.7 and 50.8 respectively. Secondly, a high percentage of children 
are underweight, stunted or wasted, with great disparities between districts. Almost 30 % of children 
in Punjab are stunted and 10% are severely so, reflecting the accumulative effect of chronic 
malnutrition. A total of 14% of children are underweight, and 4% severely underweight. Dera Ghazi 
Khan and Bahawalpur register the highest rates of c hildren underweight and stunted, followed by 
Multan, Sahiwal and Sargodha.6 
 
Poor literacy is also a function of the returns to education in Punjab. The labour market is 
characterized by a high level of informality, low participation of women in the labour  force, and high 
levels of youth unemployment and disenfranchising. Investing in women‘s education would produce 
the highest returns. At 54%, the proportion of the working-age population of Punjab that is employed 
is quite low. However, the disaggregation of this average by gender reveals that less than 30% of 
the women of working age actually are employed compared to 80% of men.  Youth unemployment 
rate doubles the overall unemployment rate. Moreover, a large proportion of young people -29%- are 
neither in school nor working. For women the proportion rises to 47%. 7 
 
Studies of the rate of return to educational investment show that each year of schooling raises salary 
by approximately 5.4 percent in Punjab. The private rate of return in the urban labour market is much 
higher than the prevailing in the rural market, and overall returns are quite high in the service sector 
compared to agriculture or industry. Workers with tertiary technical education have witnessed the 
highest increases in weekly wages in the p eriod 1991 -2013. Various studies have found that 
                                                 
4 Planning Commission of Pakistan, Government of Pakistan (GOP). 2016. Multidimensional Poverty in Pakistan. UNDP, OPHI 
and GOP, Islamabad. 
5 Literacy & Non-formal Basic Education Department, Government of Punjab. 2018. Punjab Literacy & Non-formal Education 
Policy 2018 (draft) 
6 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2017; UNICEF MICS 2014. 
7 All labour market figures are from: ILO (2017). Decent Work Country Profile Pakistan.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
13 
investing in women‘s‘ education would contribute significantly to improve economic conditions for 
women and the overall economy.8 
 
1.2. Structure and provision of education in Punjab 
 
The SED is responsible for public education from pre-primary to higher secondary. School education 
starts with Katchi class. These are children of pre -primary age (3 -4 years). The primary level 
includes Grades 1-5 and enrols children ages 5-9 years. Annual examination of Grade 5 stud ents is 
conducted by the Punjab Examination Commission (PEC), which is mandatory for students of public 
schools. After passing the PEC Grade 5 examination, students are promoted to middle school, which 
consists of Grades 6 -8 (official age group 10 -12 years).  After completing middle school , students 
must take the  mandatory PEC Grade 8 examination. After passing Grade 8 examination, students 
are promoted to secondary level , which caters for student s between the ages 13 -14 years and 
includes Grades 9-10. At the secondary level, students can choose between studying either science 
or arts. The terminal examinations at the end of both secondary grades (Grade 9 and Grade 10) are 
conducted externally by t he concerned Boards of Intermediate and Secondary Education (BISEs). 
The final level in Punjab‘s public school system is the higher secondary level which consists of 
Grades 11 -12; officially catering for ages 15 and 16 years. These grades are part of highe r 
secondary schools as well as colleges with the latter falling under the jurisdiction of the Higher 
Education Department. 
 
Adult9 literacy and Non-formal Education10 is administered by the Literacy and Non -Formal Basic 
Education Department (L&NFBED). It is mandated to improve adult literacy and provide non -formal 
basic education to out -of-school and the socially disadvantaged children of the province. Programs 
target out of school children  as well as illiterate youth and adults. The department complements the 
SED in providing educational opportunities to students who have either dropped out for long periods 
or have never enrolled in formal schooling. The Punjab Literacy & Non-formal Education Policy 2019 
has been notified and provides strategies for expanding access, improving quality and strengthening 
governance of L&NFBED. 
 
The SpED currently runs special education institutes/centres/colleges and vocational institutes 
catering for the educational needs to children of different age groups and ed ucational levels 
(primary, middle, secondary and higher secondary). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 Jamal (2015). “Private returns to Education in Pakistan – A statistical Investigation”, Center for Business and Economic 
Research Working paper: 15(2) 
9 PLNFEP 2018-2030 defines an adult as someone 15years and older 
10 NFE as defined by the PLNFEP 2018 -2030: “Non-formal education is one such pathway characterized by a high degree of 
flexibility and openness to change and innovation in its organization, pedagogy and delivery modes, non-formal education caters 
to diverse and context -specific learning needs of children, young people and adults worldwide.” “The defining characteristic of 
non-formal education is that it is an addition, alternative and/or complement to formal education (F E) within the process of the 
lifelong learning of individuals. It is often provided to guarantee the right of access to education for all.”
<<<PAGE=15>>>
14 
Figure 2: Punjab Education System 
 
 
The Punjab School Education Department (SED), responsible for delivering mainstream education 
through its public schools, has the following structure:
<<<PAGE=16>>>
15 
Figure 3: Structure of Punjab School Education Department11 
 
 
 
The Secretary‘s office is responsible for policy setting and oversight. A designated position has been 
introduced to oversee reform—the Special Secretary, Education Reform—and this position provides 
dedicated focus to inputs and interventions to improve enrolment, retention, quality and governance  
of the education sector. The Secretary‘s office also oversees 36 district offices (through Directors) 
and these offices are staffed with male and female district education officials that manage schools. 
District Offices are headed by District Education Authorities, which comprise of a cross section of 
members: education specialists, community leaders and technical experts from other fields. A critical 
role at the district level is that of the Area Education Officer (AEO), who has been charged with 
ensuring that all  primary school inputs are being provided on time, as per requirement, a nd also 
providing academic supervision and mentoring to teachers.  
 
Pre-district review committee (Pre -DRC) meetings led by the C hief Executive Officer (CEO) of the 
DEA and District Review Committee (DRC) meetings led by the Deputy Commissioner  (DC) enable 
routine performance management at the district level.   
 
All schools have functional School Councils that are parent bodies responsible for supporting school 
performance and improvement. School Councils  are allocated a Non -Salary Budget (NSB) that 
provides flexibility to meet critical school needs or to contribute to school improvement.  
 
 
The Special Education Department (SpED) is responsible for delivering education to children with 
disabilities, and it has the following set up: 
                                                 
11 PMIU: Programme Monitoring and Implementation Unit, PCTB: Punjab Curriculum and Textbook Board, 
QAED: Quaid-e-Azam Academy for International Development, PEC: Punjab Examination Commission, PEF: 
Punjab Education Foundation, PSSP: Punjab School Support Programme; CMMF: Chief Minister’s Monitoring 
Force; CLC: Children’s Library Complex; NMST: National Museum for Science and Technology; PDS&CEA: 
Punjab Daanish Schools and Centers of Excellence Authority; CPP: Community Participation Project
<<<PAGE=17>>>
16 
 
Figure 4: Structure of the Special Education Department 
 
 
The SpED runs 259 schools for children with special needs, and provides its students with the 
following facilities: 
- free education, textbooks and braille books 
- provision of uniforms three times a year 
- free pick-up and drop-off facility  
- provision of hearing aids, wheelchairs, and any other required supportive device (on a needs 
basis)  
- a stipend of PKR 800/child/month 
- skills development/ training courses through partnership with Punjab Vocational and Technical 
Training Council and TEVTA 
While both departments d o not collaborate often, they co -managed the Punjab inclusive Education 
Programme (PIEP) through which select mainstream government schools in two southern districts 
and PEF schools in seven districts were supported to enrol children with mild disabilities . In 
participating schools, school infrastructure was enhanced to make it disability friendly, teachers were 
trained, and support was provided by project staff to identify, screen and enrol children.  The PIEP 
was originally managed by the SpED, but this led to a lack of ownership among government schools 
and their staff of the initiative.  The government has recently transferred ownership of inclusive 
education to the SED, which means that in the future, education officials at the provincial and district 
levels will be accountable for ensuring that schools are inclusive for children for children with mild 
disabilities: in terms of staff competencies and attitudes, student sensitization, infrastructure and 
accessibility and teaching and learning content.  
 
The Literacy & Non-Formal Basic Education (L&NFBE) Department has the following structure:
<<<PAGE=18>>>
17 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Structure of the L&NFBE Department 
 
 
The Department has three kinds of literacy interventions: 
- Kachi, Grade 1 - 3 
- Kachi, Grade 1 to 5 
- Adult Literacy Centers   
 
These schools are all cohort-based, run by single teachers, often in rooms and courtyards in their own 
houses. The schools have 55% girls and 45% boys, and 90% of  their teachers are female. Once 
students complete Grade 5, they take the PEC Grade 5 exam, required for students in formal schools  
to transition from primary to middle. Upon passing the exam, these children are eligible to enrol into 
middle school. Last year, over 12,000 non-formal students participated in these exams, with a 96% 
pass rate. However, girls find it difficult to join middle and secondary schools because of distance 
constraints. The Department is therefore upgrading  primary NFBE schools to provide continued 
access to girls, and providing the m the option of taking the Grade 10 exam through the Allama Iqbal 
Open University. The Department recently carried out a needs-assessment of all its teachers to inform 
teacher support and  trainings, which are delivered through a cluster -based training model . The 
Department deploys learning managers and programme managers to support and oversee the 
operation of the centers.  
 
A key challenge facing the L&NFBED is the project-based financing mode through which its schools 
are funded. Therefore, if a certain number of schools is approved for financing, the Department does 
not have the flexibility to set up additional schools, even if there is a critical need.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
18 
 
 
 
The Technical Education and Vocational Training Authority has the following structure: 
 
 
Figure 6: Structure of TEVTA 
 
1.3 Achievements and lessons through the Punjab School Education Sector Plan (PSESP) 
2013-2017 
 
The PSESP 2013 -2017 envisioned improvements to access, quality, relevance, equity, and 
management of education.  Key achievements through that PSESP included: 
 
Quality 
- Preparation of a comprehensive curriculum implementation framework 
- Standards development for textbooks and capacity development of PCTB 
- Merit-based teacher recruitment 
- Introduction of the Punjab Strategy for Teachers Education (PSTE) for improved quality of 
teacher education  
- Standards for teacher education, and revision of the c urriculum and training material of in -
service teachers reviewed as per National Curriculum  
- Improved standards for the development, conduct and marking of PEC exams 
 
Access and equity 
- ECE introduced in 5000 primary schools 
- PEF schools expanded in underserved districts, offering free education through vouchers 
and subsidies 
- Stipends distributed to middle school girls  
- Improved community engagement and role of School Councils; head teachers trained in 
community mobilization 
 
Governance and management 
- Districts performance evaluation criteria reviewed and strengthened  
- Use of enhanced school monitoring indicators
<<<PAGE=20>>>
19 
It was during this time that Punjab introduced innovations such as the PSSP, which facilitated 
partnerships with the private sector to improve the performance of low performing public schools, 
established monthly literacy and numeracy tests, and redirected school oversight to quality.  
 
An analysis of the outcomes, however, rev eals that while participation and survival rates increased 
substantially, NER at the primary level remained stagnant at 70%.  
 
Figure 7: Improvements in NER, survival and transition rates between 2012 and 2018
<<<PAGE=21>>>
20 
 
1.4      International, national and provincial policy frameworks guiding the PESP 2019/20 – 
2023/24 
 
The PESP 2019/20 - 2023/24 has been developed to build upon previous reform efforts, with a view 
of fulfilling the mandate of Article 25A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The 
PESP 2019/20  - 2023/24 also responds to various international, national and provincial 
commitments.  
 
At the national level, Article 25A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan requires the 
State to provide access to twelve years of free and compulsory education to all children between 5 -
16 years old.  In addition, A rticle 37B requires the State to address illiteracy and provide free 
compulsory Secondary Education. The 18th Constitutional Amendment decentralized education to 
the provincial level. Provincial governments are responsible for providing education from pre -school 
to higher secondary level, formulate education policy, curriculum, planning and standards setting. 
 
At the provincial level,  there have been a series of legislat ion and policies, strategies and plans 
developed to strengthen and reform the delivery of education in the province of Punjab.  The Punjab 
Free and Compulsory Education Act of 2014, while not yet ratified, is the draft legislation elaborating 
the provision of free education as mandated by Article  25A of the Constitution. The Special 
Education Department Institutional Plan  laying out six core sector plan priorities and institutional 
capacity required to strengthen the delivery of educational services to Children with Disabilities 
(CWD) and special education needs (SENs). The draft Punjab Non-formal Education Policy, 2018 -
2030, is the first NFE policy for the province and seeks to provide structure and organization to the 
delivery of non -formal education, including a dedicated budget for NFE programming. In the late 
2018, the New Deal 2023 was dev eloped and charts a transformative path towards improving the 
quality of teaching and learning, to ensure that all children benefit form a quality education. 
 
At the global level,  Pakistan has committed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, 
particularly Goal 4 . Given the size of the education system and the number of children it seeks to 
reach with quality education, the success of Punjab in achieving its education goals is instrumental 
to the overall progress of Pakistan.  
 
Table 2. PESP 2019/20 – 2023/24 Global, National and Provincial Commitments 
Global · UN 2030 Sustainable Development Goals 
· Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 26 (1) 
  
National 
· Article 25-A and Article 37-B of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 
· 18th Constitutional Amendment 
  
Provincial 
· Punjab Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2014 (not yet ratified) 
· The Punjab School Education New Deal 2023 
· Institutional Plan for Special Education Department, 2017-2020 
· Punjab Literacy and Non-formal Education Policy (PLNFEP), 2019 
approved and notified
<<<PAGE=22>>>
21 
 
1.5 PESP 2019/20 - 2023/24 Goals and Objectives 
 
The PESP 2019/20 - 2023/24 sets an ambitious agenda that seeks to deepen transformations in the 
education system in Punjab. As a  guide for improving the quality of teaching and learning, has 
established the following goals and objectives for the next five years. It focus es on three key areas: 
improving quality, increasing access, and ensuring effective leadership and management. 
 
Table 3. PESP 2019/20 – 2023/24 Goals and Objectives 
Goals 
 
The overarching goals that have been proposed to guide long -term priorities in education in 
Punjab are to: 
 
1. Ensure free and compulsory, universal, equitable and inclusive education for all children; 
at all educational levels including NFE, TVET and lifelong learning; with particular 
attention to children with special needs, marginalized groups  and out of school children; 
creating safe, protective and enabling learning environments. 
 
2. Ensure quality teaching and improved learning for all. 
 
3. Promote effective leadership, management, governance and education service delivery, 
and availability of enhanced resources and their efficient use at all levels. 
 
 
Objectives 
 
In order to contribute to the achievement of the overarching goals, the PESP  2019-2023 has the 
following general objectives:  
 
1. Promote quality education in a safe, inclusive and conducive learning environment for 
children  
2. Improve teaching and learning practices for better learning outcomes  
3. Provide adequate and sufficient access to education for children from pre-primary to 
secondary (including marginalized and children with special needs) and youth/adults  
4. Strengthen governance of the education sector for equitable access and high-quality 
education  
 
 
2 Strategic Areas and Priority Programmes 
 
The strategic areas and priority programmes for the PESP  were identified through a collaborative, 
participatory process and extensive sector -wide consultations at different levels of service delivery  
(provincial, district and sub-district). A Punjab Education Development Partners Group (PEDGP) and 
Steering Committee, headed by the Secretary, SED, were set up to guide the process. In the light of 
the challenges that the education system in Punjab still  faces at the basic education level and the 
mandate of Article 25A of the Constitution of the Islamic republic of Pakistan, the  PESP focuses on 
the needs of children ages 5 to 16.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
22 
This chapter presents the three strategic areas of the PESP 2019/20 – 2023/24. The strategic areas 
respond to the challenges presented in the  Education Sector Analysis, a summary of which has 
been included as an annex to this document. 
 
1) Quality and Learning Outcomes  
2) Access, Retention and Equity 
3) Governance and Management 
 
For each strategic area, the p lan outlines prior ity programmes and the objective for these 
programmes. Each strategic area also responds to the vision set forth by Article 25-A and Article 37-
B of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the international commitment subscribed by 
the country in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular SDG 4, and 
strategies outlined in the New Deal 2018 - 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The New Deal, 2018-2023 
 
The New Deal embodies the following principles: 
 
Developing skills and knowledge: Ensure every child, irrespective of gender, location or socio -economic class 
should learn appropriate skills and knowledge to help him or her prepare for a better future.  
 
Promoting equity: Provide every child access to a public -school programme that meets basic standards, 
irrespective of gender, location or socio -economic background. This is critical to the creation of a fair and just 
education system that bridges existing differences between public, low-cost private, and elite private schools.   
Developing Pakistanis: Embedded in our national ideology and culture, nurturing children into productive citizens 
who are equipped with the knowledge and understanding to engage and contribute as act ive citizens in all walks 
of life. 
 
Clean and Green Pakistan (CGP): Every student, teacher and the school will be aware of their responsibility and 
the role towards environment through conservation and plantation. Every school will play its role not only i n tree-
plantation campaigns, but also in raising a generation of children who value  and strive for protection and 
preservation of our environment. 
 
It‘s vision for education reform prioritizes learning, access and retention, and governance. Areas of focus are: 
 
LEARNING 
 
1. Transform teacher effectiveness through quality teacher education and continuous professional development  
2. Strengthen basic competencies at the primary level  
3. Reform post -primary education through restructured curriculum and asses sment that prepare students for 
further learning while nurturing a strong sense of identity and citizenship  
ACCESS AND RETENTION 
1. Improve access, retention and equity through innovative and contextualized marginalized communities for 
provision of education.  
 
2. Improve and scale high -quality pre -primary education by setting up child -friendly classrooms , taught by 
trained teachers and equipped with extensive learning material  
 
GOVERNANCE 
1. Strengthen SED capabilities by developing technical and managerial leadership through a strong data 
management regime. 
 
2. Empower school leaders and administrators  to inculcate a sense of  responsibility and ownership of  
systemic improvements.  
 
3. Streamline public private engagement to regulate private education and align the efforts of private actors 
with the department for optimal results.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
23 
The New Deal on Learning 
 
Every student in Punjab should be 
able to read and engage with basic 
concepts of mathematics by the end 
of primary school and develop 
increased higher-order thinking in 
secondary school. 
In addition to their contribution  to government commitments, these three strategic areas also 
mutually reinforce and build upon each other.  
 
There are four major reasons for low enrolment and high dropout levels in Punjab. Two are supply -
side: distance from school and quality of education. Two are demand -led, but linked to supply side 
constraints: financial constraints and low value placed o n education. For example, t he quality of 
schooling is associated with demand for schooling. Often, l ow and late enrolments and high 
dropouts in public schools are associated with the perception of low quality  of public schooling in 
Punjab. Even if parents are able to enrol their children into school, the low to negligible returns to 
schooling do not create an impetus for them to ensure that their children start at the right age, attend 
regularly, perform well, and stay on. They invest low effort into their children‘s schooling because of 
the low returns to this investment. Improved schooling outcomes will prompt greater demand  for 
schooling, which in turn will contribute to improvements enrolment, retention and equity. As greater 
numbers of children enrol into school, over time, the government can  gradually shift gears from 
access and equity towards quality and learning outcomes. A larger 
proportion of resources can be targeted to improving teaching and 
learning resources and processes  for continued improvement. 
Improvements in both these areas , in turn, cannot be possible 
without efficient and responsive govern ance and management at 
all levels : this ensures that requisite resources are available on 
time and that they are used transparently and effectively to deliver 
results as per expected standards.  
 
2.1 Strategic Area 1: Quality and Learning Outcomes  
 
By placing Quality and Learning Outcomes as the first strategic 
area, Punjab is making a  clear statement about its focus on  
student performance. A decade of focus on access has enabled 
the government to enrol 90.4%12 of children into school , with 
the participation rate in Punjab is at its highest  in the history of 
the province. With such a large number of children in school, 
the government is simultaneously faced with an opportunity and 
a challenge : the opportunity of an educated youth able to 
contribute to society and the economy , and the challenge 
of educating them well, so that their contribution is 
meaningful.  
 
This challenge is complex : the province‘s public education 
sector is the size of a country, w ith 52,470 schools, up to 
200,000 non-teaching staff and 385,000 teaching staff. To 
enable all its children to learn well, Punjab needs to guarantee 
quality schooling in all its schools, and to address the disparities 
caused by overcrowding and multi -grading, variations in school 
infrastructure and teacher capability, and delays in the provision 
of textbooks. 
 
                                                 
12 Bureau of Statistics, 2017 
Transform teacher effectiveness 
 
Teacher education: Pre-service teacher 
training; Punjab Education Professional 
Standards Council; Revise Continuous 
Professional Development; ECE teacher 
training 
 
Teacher support through accessible 
material from primary to secondary 
 
Formal routines for teacher participation 
into curriculum, textbook and assessment 
revisions and reform 
 
Strengthen basic competencies 
 
Revise instructional language to Urdu 
at the primary level, and teach English as 
a subject 
 
Develop strong basic competencies in 
Grades 1-3 (including literacy and 
numeracy), and strengthen independent 
reading by Grades 1 – 5 
 
Introduce formative assessments at key 
stages, starting with Grade 2 
 
Reform post-primary education 
 
Assessments: phase in formative 
assessments at all post-primary levels; 
reorganize assessment bodes 
 
Quality education facilities: enable a 
conducive learning environment; 
introduce the concept of Science, 
Technology, Engineering, Arts and 
Mathematics
<<<PAGE=25>>>
24 
Quality education is a function of several, closely linked inputs: a curriculum that meets prevalent 
learning and development needs, textbooks that enable children to understand and apply lessons, 
teachers who come to school regularly and know their content well, and are able to respond to the 
learning needs of all the children in their classroom s, schools that are safe and adequately 
resourced, and assessments that credibly measure student performance  and are used to inform 
improvements.    
 
2.1.1 Priority programmes 1 – Objective: Improve teaching and learning practices for better 
learning outcomes 
 
Learning achievement 
 
The ASER survey in 2016 drew attention to literacy and numeracy levels among students in Punjab. 
The box below highlights key findings from the ASER survey.  
 
       
 
The National Achievement Test (NAT) conducted by the National Education Assessment System 
(NEAS) in 2016 assessed learning achievement for Maths and Urdu language among a sample of 
students enrolled in Grade  4, and Science and English language among a sample of students 
enrolled in Grade. 8, across the country. On average, girls performed better than boys, and students 
in urban schools score d higher than those in rural schools, in both grades 4 and 8. Assessment of 
English is also relevant, since it has been one of the  mediums of instruction in s chools in Punjab. 
There has been a consisten t drop in students‘ achievement in English language since 2013. This 
puts into question the adequacy of the  current language policy in the province. This sector plan  
recommends Urdu as medium of instruction at the primary level and English as the medium of  
instruction at higher levels, a proposal that is aligned with the current government‘s vision. While this 
may improve lear ning outcomes in the early grades, it will be also important that students become 
proficient in English to ensure successful transition as they progress through education.  Currently, 
many students do not have access to all requisite textbooks. While the government has a mandate 
to provide all students with textbooks, seemingly the textbooks are either not available or they reach 
the children late in the school year. 
 
Relevance of Curriculum  
The situational analysis of the quality components of  the school education sector argues that the 
current curriculum does not focus sufficiently on meaningful learning and that too much emphasis is 
placed on rote memorization. Moreover, there are significant reservations concerning the  external 
relevance of the curriculum. It is posited that t he curriculum needs to add a focus on life skills and  
ensure its relevance for developing a skilled workforce in Punjab. 
Box 1: 2016 ASER survey highlights 
 
- 35% of Class 5 children could not read a Class 2 story in Urdu and 44% of Class 3 children could not 
read even a simple sentence in Urdu.  
- Reading levels for Class 5 children have deteriorated with respect to 2015. Basic reading skills are 
essential for further comprehension and are the foundation over which other competencies build.  
- Arithmetic learning levels show that 40% of Class 5 children could not perform a two-digit division and 
42% of Class 3 children could not do a simple subtraction.1  
- 43% of Class 5 children could not read English sentences and 49.4% of Class 3 children could not 
recognize words in English, at Class 2 level. 
- Most of the children who are out of school are unable to read in Urdu (81%) or to recognize the first nine 
digits (82%).
<<<PAGE=26>>>
25 
 
Studies conducted in 2017 under the scope of the curriculum implementation framework, a broad 
policy guideline regarding development of learn ing materials, professional development of 
teachers/instructional delivery systems, and assessment of students‘ achievement, identified a 
number of key areas to be reflected in the revised curriculum . This included the need to produce 
creative, constructive, communicative and critical thinking youth, and ensure that students acquired 
in-depth knowledge and are prepared to participate in the highly competitive globalized knowledge -
based economy. Values or citizenship education and what are sometimes referred to as the 21 st 
century skills of communication, collaboration, critical thinking and creativity , are now deemed to 
form necessary components of what may be described as quality education. 
 
Medium of Instruction 
Research indicates that  students taught in their mother tongue  show superior overall academic 
achievement to those who study in monolingual second -language systems. Students who learn in 
their mother tongue also show superior achieve ment in mathematics, and their achievement in the 
second language is at least as high as that of  students in the monolingual second-language system. 
Students who learn in their mother tongue acquire additional linguistic competencies in their mother 
tongue, which con tribute to a sound foundation for further learning, participate more actively in the 
learning process and feel more confident about their learning13.  
 
As discussed earlier, English is currently a language of instruction in Punjab. Recently how ever, the 
government carried out a survey with key stakeholders (teachers, parents and students) in 22 
districts, and over 95% opinion in every category favoured Urdu instead of English as the medium of 
instruction. The government has therefore decided to re-introduce Urdu as the medium of instruction 
at the primary school level, with English being taught as a subject.  
 
Teachers’ qualifications, competencies and professional development 
Compounding the concerns over low levels of student achievement is the qualificati ons and 
competencies of the teaching workforce. A major and sustained effort must be made to recruit, train 
and deploy teachers effectively. The education sector analysis notes that inadequate pedagogical 
skills, lack of proficiency in English language and  low levels of teacher motivation plague the 
teaching workforce in Punjab, and must be urgently addressed. Additionally, training should include 
the teaching of multi-grade classes since this is a common practice in many public schools. The low 
levels of t eacher motivation may have been engendered by public perception of the status of the 
profession, and unconducive school and classroom environments. Additionally, teachers attached to 
special education centres need thorough training to meet the diverse need s of the children  enrolled 
in these centres. 
 
There have been considerable additions to the teacher workforce over the years 2013-2017, with the 
number of primary school teachers rising by 47%, and overall volume of public -school teachers 
increasing by 25%  resulting in improved Student Teacher Ratios  (STR). Currently, the SED has 
448,448 sanctioned positions, out of which 384,619 are filled (196,901 in girls‘ schools and 187,718 
in boys‘ schools)14. The split between schools is provided in the table below: 
 
                                                 
13 UNESCO, Mother Tongue Matters: Local Language as a Key to Effective Learning, 2008.  
14 PMIU
<<<PAGE=27>>>
26 
Table 4. Breakdown of teacher by school level 
School Level Teachers 
H.Sec. 25,508 
High 135,254 
Middle 88,336 
NULL 7 
Primary 134,804 
Mosque 710 
Total 384,619 
 
 
As some studies in Punjab have found, teachers‘ basic subject knowledge and their ability to transfer 
knowledge to students are limited. There are difficulties with the supply of competent teachers with 
adequate subject knowledge, particularly with respect to Science, Math and English.  On assessing 
teachers in three di stricts in Punjab, the T EACh project found that teachers scored on average 
82.7% and 87.5% on literacy and numeracy tests based on the curriculum they are meant to be 
teaching. The gap between their own scores and those of their students reveals that teachers also 
have difficulty transferring their own level of knowledge to the students.15  
 
Teacher recruitment policies have evolved but require adjustment to ensure that qualified and 
dedicated teachers are recruited. The 2017 policy, put in place a more robust and transparent 
recruitment procedure , introducing merit -based recruitment through the National Testing Service 
(NTS). However, it is not implemented across the province consistently. The teachers would also 
need to have, among other things, the minimum in terms of qualifications and competence.  
 
Successive reforms raised the professional qualifications for primary school teachers and 
elementary school teachers. As a result, one in four of these teachers have a primary teaching 
certificate or certificate of teaching, and there are many more teachers in the system with a master‘s 
degree. However, there is considerable variance in quality at the level of academic institutions —the 
value of a degree awarded by one institution being vastl y different from the same degree awarded 
by another. At present, the only quality assurance mechanism is endorsement of the degree -
granting institution by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and a system of ranking presided 
over by the Commission. Howeve r, this still leaves a very wide gap in terms of ascertaining what a 
degree represents in terms of knowledge and higher order skills. The NTS can only be regarded as 
a partial measure in terms of addressing the issue of teachers‘ competence. 
 
Teacher train ing and professional development have undergone reforms over the last decade, 
including focus on content and pedagogy, but the quality, duration and organization is insufficient. 
Teachers have limited pre -service training on important issues relating to cl assroom management 
and quality of teaching and learning. Information from the Teaching Effectively All Children (TEACh): 
project16, delivered by The Faculty of Education at University of Cambridge,  reports that surveyed 
teachers did not receive pre -service training for: multi -lingual settings, diverse classrooms, working 
                                                 
15 REAL Centre and IDEAS (Mimeo), University of Cambridge and IDEAS
<<<PAGE=28>>>
27 
with poor children , or children with special needs  – critical areas for teacher development in the 
Punjab.  
 
The Continuous Professional Development (CPD) model, delivered by the SED,  aims at monitoring 
teacher performance and providing support in a decentralized framework. With the establishment of 
the Quaid -e-Azam Academy for Educational Development (QAED), training was furth er 
decentralized by setting up Academic Development Units (ADUs) at the provincial, district, tehsil and 
cluster levels. QAED has established partnerships with other institutions to provide high quality 
training, has developed training modules for professi onal development, provided induction training, 
etc. However, the model cannot be fully implemented due to budgetary constraints. 
 
An adequate number of teachers would only be the starting point. Teachers need to be in schools on 
a continuous basis. Given that 89% of schools are in rural areas, female teachers can be inducted in 
these schools  (including boys‘ schools) if they can be recruited on merit.  Teacher presence has  
already risen steadily across primary, elementary and secondary grade levels since 201 2. These 
improvements are largely attributed to improved management and frequent administrators visits from 
a monitoring and performance evaluation perspective.  
 
Learning assessment system 
 
Reliable and routine assessment data can provide valuable insight  on the performance of different 
student groups, and the underlying factors that influence performance. For example, geographical 
disparities could potentially be caused by disparities in teacher performance, and poor province-wide 
performance on certain t opics could potentially be attributed to textbook content.  Assessment data 
can also be triangulated with school inputs and other data to help determine correlates of student 
data.  
 
The lack of a coherent learning assessment policy in Punjab has created a  challenging environment 
to effectively collect and  utilize data and then translate findings into policies, plans and activities 
across the three main education authorities at the provincial level and at decentralized levels. 
Assessments are conducted by d ifferent agencies, are administered at different intervals of time, 
have varying sample sizes and levels of representativeness, carry varying stakes for different 
stakeholders, and do not include enough information to be able to correlates of student 
achievement. It remains unclear how assessment data is used to inform improvements in teaching 
and learning and how these two aspects relate to one another. In Punjab, assessments have been 
used for many years to measure student learning. However, there is  little evidence to suggest a 
heavy focus on assessments or other monitoring mechanisms have resulted in improved learning 
outcomes in the province. Furthermore, the results of the assessments have little bearing on student 
promotion as the province‘s automatic promotion policy generally means that even low achievers are 
promoted. Thus, there is a need for a more coherent students‘ assessment system to be effectively 
used to improve teaching and learning in the classroom, and for the promotion of students t o be 
based on the attainment or mastery of learning outcomes.  
 
Punjab is introducing an assessment policy framework, which proposes school -based formative 
assessments, with PCTB responsible for providing improved, enabling content and QAED 
responsible for training teachers. The framework also recommends that PCTB and QAED ‘s service 
delivery respond to the results of PEC  and other exams . A Technical Committee has been
<<<PAGE=29>>>
28 
constituted, consisting of representatives from the government and experts from developmen t 
partners to oversee the development of the framework through a consultative process.  
Inequality in learning outcomes 
The socio-economic factors that shape inequality of opportunities in access to schooling are echoed 
in inequality of learning outcomes. Children from poorer households present lower levels of learning 
than those from wealthier households in all the basic literacy and numeracy areas assessed. 
Children from wealthy families , for instance, are more likely to  achieve the highest order skills, 
whereas poorest children tend to be unable to read or to identify digits up to nine. Moreover, this gap 
has persisted without major change since 2012.17 Poor children are also less likely to attend school , 
as written earlier. The ASER report shows that most of the children who are out of school are unable 
to read in Urdu (81%) or to recognize the first nine digits (82%).  
 
 
TVET System 
Significant strides have been made within the TVET system in Punjab out of recognition of its 
importance to overall econom ic development. Technical institutes have been set up in almost all 
tehsils across Punjab  and can provide an alternative conduit for children who drop out of school 
because of demand side constraints.  
 
However, TVET pathways or links with in the general education system have not been developed ; 
students from formal schools cannot therefore  seamlessly transition from the formal school system 
to TVET. Currently, about 30,000 students are enrolled in government TVET programmes.  
 
Assessments of the TVET sector in Punjab emphasize that the quality and relevance of the training 
delivered is not according to the demands of the job market. The capacity of the TVET system in 
terms of developing linkages with industry is limited, there is a shortage of qualified trainers, and the 
curricula is not in line with the changing requirements of the markets.  Some restructuring of the 
system is necessary. Critical challenges include accessibility, mismatch with labour market needs, 
weak policy sup port, and inadequate and underqualified instructors. The restructuring of TVET in 
schools in particular, could focus on refurbishing and upgrading workshops in schools, development 
of competency-based curricula and certification and training of instructors.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
17 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft. 
 
The NEAS NAT from 2016 provides some valuable insights on correlates of student performance: 
- Content-based training, provision of teacher guides and teaching kits to all schools can 
improve teaching and learning processes (at fourth and eighth grades) 
- Transfer of teachers during the academic year is detrimental for schools 
- Parent engagement helps reduce student absenteeism, which in turn improves learning 
outcomes 
- Lack of audio-visual aids impacts quality teaching
<<<PAGE=30>>>
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synergies are needed between TVET and the SED through which technical and vocational options 
can be accessed by dropouts or children who are at risk of dropping out, either in collaboration with 
local TEVTAs on in formal schools, with technical support thr ough TEVTAs. The SED can leverage 
assessments to determine relevant technical tracks for children who may not be able to continue in 
mainstream schools, and to direct them in those tracks. Demand for TVET can be encouraged 
through communication programmes that help improve public perception of technical and vocational 
education.  
 
Priority Programmes 1 
 
These priority programme s aim to transform the learning environment from one that focuses on 
transferring knowledge to students to cultivating critical thinkers. Ensuring that qualified teachers are 
recruited, trained and supported throughout their career is essential to realize this tran sformation. 
Teaching and learning materials will be revised and made available in all classrooms in Punjab. The 
system of assessments will be rationalized and focus on measuring student progress across the 
province, in supporting teachers in the classroom, and providing feedback for system improvement. 
 
Programme 1.1 – Efficient supply of quality human resource  
Specific objective: Introduce standardized recruitment and deployment of educational practitioners 
and managers at all levels 
To e nsure that qualified ed ucators and managers are recruited and deployed , the PESP will 
improve: 
- The recruitment system for selecting personnel , based on competency and standards. 
Deployment will also be based on need s and ensure that personnel are qualified to 
perform their duties.  SED will introduce standardized deployment of educational 
practitioners and managers at all levels.  Standardized recruitment and transfer policies 
will be introduced. 
- In line with the New D eal, an authority to regulate teacher licensing and certification will 
be established in the first year to ensure that reforms can proceed throughout the 
remaining years of the PESP implementation . A teacher licensing bill has been 
developed, and is under review by the GoPb‘s Law Department.  This bill, called the 
Punjab Education Standards Development Authority (PESDA) Bill, will notify an authority 
that will be responsible for the following: 
- formulating and implementing policies for teacher development 
- ensuring merit-based appointment of staff in public sector schools 
- monitoring compliance to the standards proposed by PESDA 
- prescribing regulations, procedures and making arrangements for licensing, 
mandatory certification and accreditation of staff; 
TVET opportunities for girls, women and minority groups 
 
Punjab has 23 district level Technical Education and Vocational Training Authorities (TEVTA s) and runs 
169 vocational and nine technical  institutes for just women. The institutes are located in all districts, at the 
town level, and provide qualifications from middle to matric levels, with a few also providing qualifications at 
the primary level. Trades taught in these institutions include embroidery, cooking  and food technology, hair 
and beauty therapy, hospitality, dress design and making, arts and craft, information technology, 
architecture, electricity and electronics, textiles, and communications (Chinese and English). Th e duration 
of programmes ranges from months to six years. The government is in the process of launching a 
Hunarmand Nauj awan programme targeting 60,000 boys and girls, in collaboration with the federal 
government.  
 
TEVTA does not have any ongoing collaboration with the SED or the L&NFBED, but is designing a 
programme for children who are visually impaired.  The Punjab Skills Development Fund (PSDF) has also 
delivered technical education to 500,000 students.
<<<PAGE=31>>>
30 
- monitoring quality assurance of education staff; 
- prescribe conditions and procedures for the withdrawal of a license, certification or 
recognition of the professional status, and to deal with professional  misconduct of 
the staff  
This bill is expected to be presented to the Cabinet and then the provincial Parliament 
for enactment. Following this enactment, PESDA will be responsible for m aintaining a 
teacher licensing and accountability regime in the province.  
- Continuous Professional Development (CPD) will be built into a Teacher Career 
Progression Track 
- Strengthening ECE is a priority of the PESP. The SED will be responsible for recruiting 
qualified ECE teachers, including creating a pool of qualified teachers that can be 
deployed as additional ECE spaces are established. QAED will support the SED with 
developing the ECE teacher training plan.   
- The SED will also focus on developing an education management cadre, wh ich will be 
trained on core management skills (including human resource and financial 
management) that they can use to oversee and monitor efficient delivery of education at 
sub-district and district levels.  
- The teacher transfer policy will also be revised s o that transfers are purely needs-driven 
and are not disruptive to the academic calendar.  The SED has already planned 
improvements to its online teacher transfer and posting portal  and envisions all teacher 
transfer and posting orders to go through this portal.  
 
Programme 1.2 – Teacher training 
Specific objective: Provide quality pre -service, induction and in -service training to education 
professionals 
Having a qualified and motivated teacher in a classroom is essential for children to learn and 
progress, and is a key driver for improved learning outcomes.  
- Strong pre -service programmes ensure that teachers gain theoretical and practical 
experience, both  skills and content, before entering the  classroom. While pre -service 
teacher training is not within the mandate of the SED, the SED can support improvement 
of pre-service training by liaising with the HED and helping inform the curriculum, design 
and cont ent for pre -service teacher education programme , so that the education that 
teachers receive is relevant to teaching and learning requirements in Punjab‘s public 
schools. Induction programmes will also be strengthened with the introduction of new 
material and techniques that focus on developing basic pedagogy and content 
knowledge. Action re search will be explored, encouragin g and supporting teachers in 
pre-service and induction programmes to implement their learning in real classrooms and 
then return to training to reflect on their experiences.  
- Once in the service, teachers will continue their learning and professional development. 
Research suggests that teachers with experience in the classroom benefit more from 
professional development opportunities because they have real experiences from which 
to draw and share with other teachers . The New Deal places emphasis on revising CPD  
and linking it to teacher career progression , including developing new approaches that 
will focus on development pedagogical skills, content knowledge and assessment skills, 
including formative assessment. Teachers will benefit from school -based CPD activities 
that will include mentor ing, classroom observation and  developing communities of 
practice. CPD will be implemented in phases. It will focus on training needs derived from 
the context in which teachers and other education personnel (principals, head teachers,
<<<PAGE=32>>>
31 
administrators) work . Localized CPD solutions and processes  can prove to be an  
effective strategy to reduce learning  disparities among student groups (by geography, 
gender, special needs etc ). The revamped CPD program will be started in six lagging 
districts in year 1; twelve districts in year 2 and so on. Similarly, to improve read ing 
habits in students and teachers, libraries are being provided in eleven priority districts. 
- CPD programmes will be informed by results of routine assessments, teacher feedback 
of the programmes and self -identified training needs, and by routine evaluations of 
training programmes for relevance and effectiveness.  
- An ECE training model will be developed. 
- AEOs will be empowered to provide on -going support to schools, head teachers and 
teachers, including observation and mentoring. QAED has initiated a programme to train 
all education managers at the district level; the programme will be complete in 2020. 
- For NFBE schools‘ teachers, literacy centres teachers, and managers that support them, 
the L&NFBE Department will develop a mechanism for continuous professional 
development.  The Department has a pool of programme and learning managers 
deployed in all districts, and already provides cluster-based trainings to teachers through 
these managers.  
- A recent training needs assessment of NFBE teachers revealed district-level disparities 
in teacher content knowledge. Teachers in Toba Tek Singh scored the highest while 
those in Nankana Sahib scored the lowest. This TNA will inform the design of a CPD that 
provides localized training to teachers.  
 
 
Programme 1.3 – Quality teaching and learning materials 
Specific objective: Make available quality textbooks, and other teaching and learning materials 
Not all schools in Punjab, particularly rural and hard to reach area s, are properly equipped and 
can be under-resourced, lacking basic teaching and learning materials.  
- The GoPb envisions the role of PCTB to be that of a regulator; to review and approve 
manuscripts developed by external individuals and agencies , in line with a revised 
curriculum from primary to higher secondary levels. 
- The PESP envisions that the PCTB and the PMIU will enable all  schools and classes 
(from pre-primary to higher secondary level)  to have quality textbooks as well as other 
teaching and learning materials, such as student workbooks , practical notebooks,  and 
teacher guides.  
- PCTB will coordinate with relevant partners to ensure timely delivery of textbooks and 
relevant material for both public and private sector schools.  
- Materials will be aligned with the standards and competencies planned for each grade. 
Special emphasis will be placed on ECE, ensuring alignment with the new ECE policy, 
and early grade  and grade  1-3 materials to ensure that children develop mas tery of 
foundation knowledge.  
- PCTB will be reinforced to have the required capacity to develop curriculum, assessment 
and instructional materials.  PCTB will undertake research and development to obtain 
feedback from relevant stakeholders into curriculum and material development and 
review. Capacity development can be supported by development partners  in Punjab.  
PCTB will work with relevant  academic institutions to develop content, ensuring that the 
classroom context is considered when developing materials . T eachers will have the 
opportunity to provide feedback, especially on curriculum and textbooks, and ensure that
<<<PAGE=33>>>
32 
curriculum and textbooks are inclusive, and that there is no direct or implied bias towards 
girls, minority groups and religions, marginalized children and those with disabilities.  
- A new accountability system will be utilized to ensure efficient procurement and delivery 
of textbooks.  
Curriculum Reform in Punjab 
 
PCTB has developed a new Scheme of Studies with a focus on  emerging trends, modern 
developments and scientific learning in various subjects at appropriate levels. In this Scheme of 
Studies, the subject General Science has been replaced with ‗Science & Technology‘. For grades 
9-10, two new groups , (i)  Technology / Technical and Vocational Education Group and (ii) 
General Science / Business Administration Group , have been introduced. For grades 11 and 12, 
four new groups namely Pre-Medical and Allied Health Technologies Group, Pre - Engineering 
Technologies Group / Technical & Vocational Education Group, Pre -Agriculture / Veterinary & 
Animal Sciences Group and Fine Arts Group have also been included. This Scheme of Studies 
also di scourages rote learning and promotes multiple textbook s. This will be supported with 
gradual changes to curriculum-based examination, rather than textbook-based exams.  
 
PCTB has also revised the curricula of all compulsory subjects for Grades 1 to 10, keeping in 
view special issues like environment education (including sanitation, safe drinking water and 
hygiene), prevention education against fatal and infectious diseases, population and development 
education, human rights education, disaster risk and crisis management, peace and value 
education, inter-faith harmony, life skills based education, gender awareness and women 
empowerment, child rights, child abuse and other emerging trends etc.  These revisions to the 
curriculum are in line with the aspirations of the PESP.  
 
 
 
Programme 1.4 – Learning assessment 
Specific objective: Develop a quality learning assessment system based on standards, with support 
mechanisms and feedback loops between the classroom, school and policy levels 
Currently, there are several regimes of exams, including high stakes exams that determine 
transition and promotion as well as other lower stakes school based and formative exams.  
- PEC has led the revision of the provincial Assessment Policy Framework, which 
recommends two kinds of assessments: system level assessments and school -based 
assessments. System level assessments will include literary and numeracy tests. School 
based assessments will consist of formative and summative assessments. These 
assessments will be supported by PESP. 
- The Framework recommends standardized universal exams only at the Grade 8 level, 
and delivery of the Grade 5 exam at the school level, with PEC initially providing exam 
papers until schools have the ability to so.  
- School-based assessments will be organized three times during the academic year.  
- Formative assessment will focus on improving classroom teaching practice with a focus 
on student learning, informed by student performance. Formative assessment will be a 
continuous process that can happen on an as needed basis or upon completion of a 
topic. 
- Previous reforms to PEC exams attempted to introduce questions anchored to student 
learning outcomes (SLOs), and to replace constructed response questions that tested 
recall with questions that tested understanding and application of knowledge. PESP will 
continue the emphasis on higher order thinking skills in PEC exams and will also help
<<<PAGE=34>>>
33 
revamp the Boards of Intermediate and Secondary Education (BISEs) to improve t heir 
exam papers as well. 
- In align ment with the New Deal, the PESP  will introduce a strong fo cus on  Science, 
Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM) in middle school by prioritizing 
reform efforts in curricula, teacher support, and assessments around STE AM subjects. 
The subject Science has already been replaced with Science and Technology. 
- Examinations and assessments generate a wealth of data that can be used to inform 
improvements in teaching and learning processes. The PESP therefore repeatedly 
emphasises feedback loops between the PEC, QAED and PCTB so for a synchronised 
effort to improve teaching and learning.  
- While PEC has relevant and highly qualified personnel, analysis of PEC scores is usually 
supported by development partners, including DFID‘s Punjab Education Sector 
Programme II and UNICEF. PEC will be supported to develop and codify  exam analysis 
and reporting procedures so that meaningful insights can be generated to inform PCTB 
and QAED.  
- An institutional strengthening plan will be developed for PEC, and thi s will include a staff 
capacity building plan 
-  
 
Teacher training, textbooks and supplementary material, will be designed keeping in mind the 
following government priority programmes to promote more holistic development of students.   
 
Programme 1.5 – Critical thinking  
Specific objective: Promote critical, scientific, and analytical thinking in all spheres of education 
In order to improve  learning outcomes of children and cultivat e life-long learners, it is critical to 
move from rote learning to learning for understanding and application, which helps develop skills 
that promote critical thinking. Students lea rn to analyse, interpret and apply creative thinking to 
solve problems and form conclusions. To realize this, there is a need to transform t eaching 
processes that currently focus on passive approaches and teaching for examinations. Over the 
next five years: 
- teacher training and professional development will support teachers to develop the 
competencies needed to promote critical thinking in the classroom.  
- textbooks will also be revised and introduced by 2020, as noted in the New Deal.  
- the examination system will be enhanced to allow for more formative assessment moving 
away from multiple -choice questions that promote memorization to assessments that 
allow learners to express their understanding.  
- students will also learn in Urdu through out primary education, to ensure that all children 
are able to develop the foundation needed to continue their education beyond this level.  
 
Programme 1.6 – Wholesome personality development 
Specific objective: Promote extra - and co -curricular activities and life -skills based education to 
ensure wholesome personality development 
Currently, rote memorization with little emphasis placed on applied learning is the standard 
practice in Punjab.  
- The PESP focuses on transforming the learning experience from a system whereby 
children are provided knowledge to children developing knowledge.  
- Enhancing the learning experience for children through extra - and co-curricular activities 
can reinforce concepts and allow children to practice and develop their knowledge ,
<<<PAGE=35>>>
34 
understanding and skills. They can also promote health and well -being and offer 
stimulating alternatives to traditional learning processes.  
- Educators will receive training and schools will be equipped to support learning 
opportunities, including the pro vision of recreational materials. Moreover, c areer 
counsellors will be assigned to elementary and secondary schools to provide academic 
support and guidance to children.  
- The government has committed to developing  a Punjab School Sports Strategy for its 
government schools. 
- The UKAid funded School Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Programme has committed 
to installing 1000 science and computer labs and rehabilitating 400 libraries in schools 
 
 
Programme 1.7 – Elements of sustainable development 
Specific objective: Promote inclusion of elements of sustainable development and sustainable 
lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, environment -friendly behaviour, culture of peace and non -
violence, tolerance, democratic values, social cohesion, global  citizenship, and appreciation of 
cultural diversity and of culture‘s contribution to sustainable development into teaching and learning 
activities 
The PESP envisions cultivating the student holistically : not only focusing on academic 
achievement and mastery of foundational and transitional skills , but also on a broader 
appreciation of the importance of sustainable development and cultural diversity in an 
increasingly globalized world.  
- This includes integ rating critical thinking on issues related to environmental changes, 
sustainability, and disaster risk reduction into the curriculum.  
- Teachers will also be trained to engage students in these topics, not only theoretical, but 
also practically in inter active, learner -cantered ways that encourage exploratory and 
action-oriented learning.  This objective is grounded in SDG 4.7. 
 
 
Programme 1.8 – Technical, vocational and technology-oriented education 
Specific objective: Introduce technical, vocational and technology-oriented educational streams 
Punjab has large young population that increases pressure on the education system to graduate 
students with employable skills. However, there is a mismatch between what children and youth 
learn and the skills required to find gainful employment.  
- PESP will support the development and provision of demand-driven technical courses 
instead of traditional supply -oriented approaches. An assessment of labour market 
needs at the local level will inform the development of specialized courses for trades in 
demand.  
- Courses will be gender responsive, and girls‘ participation will be promoted. 
- Courses will also include soft skills that promote critical thinking, problem solving as well 
as entrepreneurship and management. This will ensure that students have both technical 
and vocational as well as soft skills needed to adapt to changes in the labour market.  
- If st udents are required to transition to  PVDCs and  TEVTAs, the responsibility for a 
smooth transition will rest with Head Teachers and AEOs. TEVTAs provide short courses 
and diplomas in a variety of skills, and can provide a valuable re -route for children who 
drop out due to demand side constraints.  
- Students with special needs will be supported through inclusive policies and practice and 
through incentives.
<<<PAGE=36>>>
35 
 
Programme 1.9 – Equivalence mechanism 
Specific objective: Introduce a qualification equivalence mechanism for students 
While the education system encourages transition from NFE to formal schools, in practice the 
transition can be difficult, especially for the most vulnerable. Unclear pathways and lack of 
flexibility do not create an enabling environment for children that n eed additional support to 
engage with the education system.   
- PESP envisions an education system that responds to the education and learning needs 
of all children in Punjab.  
- For children that leave the system early and participate in Non -formal education 
programmes and children that require specialized learning assistance, a system of 
equivalences shall be developed to permit mainstreaming into the formal system.  
- A comprehensive system of equi valence for various levels of literacy and NFE will be 
introduced in consultation with PCTB. This will allow children to test at  grades 5, 8 and 
10 level s and be issued a certificate that can support future learning, training or 
employment opportunities.  
 
This promotes the right to education, recognizes learning that has been developed through 
non-formal education or informal learning experiences and provides children with a seco nd 
chance.  
 
Figure 8: Results flow chart for Strategic Area 1 
 
 
Strategic Area 1 – Quality and Learning Outcomes 
 
New Deal 2023 Strategies 
Transform teacher effectiveness
<<<PAGE=37>>>
36 
Strengthen basic competencies, including in literacy and numeracy 
Reform post-primary education 
 
Priority Programme s 1 Objective: Improve teaching and learning practices for better learning 
outcomes 
 
Specific Objectives Main Activities 
 
1.1 Introduce standardized 
recruitment and deployment of 
educational practitioners and 
managers at all levels 
 
· Establish an authority to regulate teacher licensing and 
certification 
· Revise current teacher transfer policy to revisit the criteria and 
rules 
· Establish an education management cadre/pool 
 
  
1.2 Provide quality pre-service, 
induction and in-service training to 
education professionals 
· Improve pre-service teacher education with support of Higher 
Education Department 
· Revamp induction trainings to develop teacher competencies in 
content and pedagogy 
· Revise roles and responsibilities of AEOs etc. to ensure 
mentoring support to teachers 
· Strengthen capacity building programmes for education 
professionals at all levels 
 
1.3 Make available quality 
textbooks, and other teaching and 
learning materials 
· Create capacity development programs for technical staff to 
develop relevant curriculum, assessment and instructional 
materials through collaboration with academic institutes 
· Develop teaching and learning materials for ECE and Grades 1-3 
aligned with the ECE policy 
 
1.4 Develop a quality learning 
assessment system based on 
standards, with support 
mechanisms and feedback loops 
between the classroom, school 
and policy levels 
· Revamp examination system and assessment bodies (PEC and 
BISEs) 
· Revise assessment tools, including SLO based assessments, 
with emphasis on higher order thinking skills 
· Strengthen formative assessments at all levels 
· Establish linkages between student learning assessment and: (a) 
teachers‘ capacity, (b) CPD, and (c) development of teaching 
and learning materials 
 
1.5 Promote critical, scientific, and 
analytical thinking in all spheres of 
education 
· Establish Urdu as the medium of instruction at the primary level 
· Review and improve teacher training modules to promote critical, 
scientific, and analytical thinking among students 
· Review of student assessment system to promote critical, 
scientific, and analytical thinking among students 
·  
1.6 Promote extra- and co-
curricular activities and life-skill 
based education to ensure 
wholesome personality 
development 
· Strengthen sports activities in schools 
· School clubs 
· Initiate career counselling for students at elementary and 
secondary levels
<<<PAGE=38>>>
37 
The New Deal on Access and 
Retention 
 
Every child of school age in Punjab 
should have access to adequate 
educational infrastructure 
regardless of gender, location or 
economic background 
 
1.7 Promote inclusion of elements 
of sustainable development and 
sustainable lifestyles, human 
rights, gender equality, 
environment-friendly behaviour, 
culture of peace and non-violence, 
tolerance, democratic values, 
social cohesion, global citizenship, 
and appreciation of cultural 
diversity and of culture‘s 
contribution to sustainable 
development into teaching and 
learning activities 
 
· Review and revise curriculum to include  elements of sustainable 
development and healthy lifestyles 
· Review and revise teacher training modules and teacher training 
to include concepts of sustainable development and healthy 
lifestyles 
 
1.8 Introduce technical, vocational 
and technology-oriented 
educational streams 
· Identification and designing of specialized trades/courses at all 
levels 
· Institutional linkage of all education departments with technical 
and vocational institutions 
· Incentivize trainers and students with special needs 
 
1.9 Introduce a qualification 
equivalence mechanism for 
students 
· Develop a mechanism for granting equivalence to students of 
L&NFBED and SpED graduating from Grades 5, 8 and 10 
 
2.2 Strategic Area 2 – Access, Retention and Equity 
 
Over the last five years, Punjab has shown progress in school 
participation, but disparities by gender, location and socio -
economic status persist, and children are less likely to 
continue beyond primary school . It is estimated that more 
than 25 percent of the population of Punjab is of school -
going age. Approximately 10.5 million children of school age 
(5 - 16 years) are out of school children (OOSC) in Punjab 
despite the expansion of public and private schools.  It is to 
be noted that 54% of the total OOSC aged 5 -9 years reside 
in the following eight districts: Rahim Yar Khan, Dera Ghazi 
Khan, Rajanpur, Muzaffargarh, Multan, Bahawalnagar, 
Faisalabad and Lahore. M any of the  OOSC are in hard to 
reach areas and spec ial effort s will be required to facilitate 
them with learning opportunities . Overall, a higher proportion 
of children ages 5 to 16 years were attending school in 2017 
regardless of grade compared to 2012, according to various 
surveys conducted during this period. However, it is those of 
primary school age who are more likely to be attending 
school, compared to older children. School access becomes 
increasingly limited as children grow older  and have to 
transition to higher education cycles. 
 
Improve access, retention and equity 
 
Use afternoon shifts to address supply 
side constraints at the primary, middle and 
secondary levels. 
 
Create additional schooling 
opportunities by incentivizing the private 
sector to set up schools in underserved 
parts of the province. 
 
Strengthen School Councils to provide 
school level solutions for enrolment, 
classroom construction and minor school 
repair.  
 
Reduce OOSC by obligating parents to 
send school-aged children to school 
 
Restructure subsidies by revisiting 
CCTs and partially redirecting funds 
towards localized access solutions
<<<PAGE=39>>>
38 
Priority programmes 2 – Objective: Provide adequate and 
sufficient access to education for children from pre-
primary to secondary, including marginalized and 
children with special needs 
 
Access and retention 
Punjab registers a high degree of entry to primary education. 
The Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) at pre -primary level has 
increased from 82% in 2014-15 to 87.5% in 2016-17, which is 
four points higher than the national average. Moreover, the 
Gross Intake Rate (GIR) to grade 1 has rem ained above 
100% since 2014.18  
 
The GER at primary level was 93.2% in 2015 -16, although it had decreased since 2013 -14. 
However, the GER drops considerably at secondary level, indicating lower transition and retention 
rates at post -primary levels. In 2015 -16, the GER in middle education reached 56%, and that of 
secondary and higher secondary combined was just over 51%.  
 
The issue of overage children is already apparent in primary school. According to the PSLM data, 
the NER at primary level in Punjab was 58.8% in 2015 -16 compared to a GER of 93.2%. Moreover, 
NERs drop considerably after this level of education. Just 23.8% of  children 10-12 years old are 
enrolled in middle education, and 27.4% of children aged 13 to 16 years are in secondary education. 
In all cases, the rates fell between 2013 -14 and 2015 -16. This shows a significant drop in student 
enrolment at the correct ages for their level as we move up the educational ladder.19 
 
Figure 9: Net Enrolment Rate 2012-201820 
 
 
The transition rate from primary to middle level has improved by 6% during these years. Survival 
rate at middle level has increased from 86% to 97%. It is important to note that one of the targets of 
the reform roadmap goals was to attain 100% retention ra te. To achieve this, a number of 
                                                 
18 Pre-primary GER and GIR as recorded in Pakistan Education Statistics 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17. 
19 GERs and NERs as recorded in PSLM 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. 
20 PSLMS for NER calculations20. PMIU data used for calculating survival and transition rates. For baseline figures, PSESP 
document has been used 
70% 
37% 
25% 
100% 100% 100% 
70% 
38% 
29% 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
NER Primary (6-10) NER Middle (11-13) NER Secondary (14-15)
Baseline (2012) Target (2017) Achieved (2018)
Improve pre-primary education 
 
Develop ECE-appropriate learning 
materials, and teacher training model 
 
Provide separate learning spaces or 
classrooms for ECE/Katchi to 
accommodate an anticipated increase in 
pre-primary enrolment 
 
Develop ECE teacher recruitment and 
training model.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
39 
interventions were undertaken by the government of Punjab including provision of stipends to girl 
students, stipends to brick kiln children and provision of better school facilities and learning 
environment. The district education authorities also implemented follow-up mechanisms for drop-out 
students. All these measures have contributed to the improved survival rates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Transition rates 2012-201821 
 
The above charts show a slight improvement in transition rates from Katchi to primary level. On 
average, an increase of around 1% has been noted each year. The NER at primary level has 
remained stagnant at 70% while the survival rate at primary level has i ncreased from 57% to 72% 
between 2012 and 2018 . This means that the enrolment has increased but mainly in favour of the 
under- or over-age children. The transition rate from middle to secondary level has not shown much 
improvement during these years. On the other hand, a substantial increase of 27% in survival rate at 
secondary level has been recorded as the survival rate has increased from 59 percent in 2011 -12 to 
86 percent in 2017-18. The NER at secondary level has also shown considerable improvement of 4 
percentage points during these years. 
 
However, for every 100 students enrolled in public Katchi grade, only 28 students  (25% of girls and 
31% of boys) remain until Grade 10 in public schools. The first loss is registered at the beginning of 
the education cycle, in the transition from Katchi to Grade 1 of primary education. At this point, 36% 
of children enrolled in public schools either drop out or transfer to private institutions. Of those who 
continue in public schools, just 61% will reach Grade 5.  
 
A cohort-wise analysis of Annual School Census data for various years shows that around 72% of 
the students enrolled in Grade 1 reach Grade 5.  Among others, the major reasons for low survival 
                                                 
21 For NER, the latest available data of PSLMS 2014-15 has been reported. PSLMS for NER calculations21. PMIU data used for 
calculating survival and transition rates. For baseline figures, PSESP document has been used. 
62% 
91% 
106% 
90% 95% 100% 
69% 
97% 107% 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Transition Rate Katchi to Primary Transition Rate Primary to Middle Transition Rate Middle to
Secondary
Baseline (2012) Target (2017) Achieved (2018)
<<<PAGE=41>>>
40 
rates at primary level include shortage of nearby schools, teac her shortage and absenteeism, poor 
teaching quality, poor school environment, family poverty, insecurity, and natural disasters22. 
 
Although the transition  from primary  to middle education is quite high (over 96%), by the time 
children reach Grade 8, 15% wo uld have left . And between Grade 6 and Grade 10, one in four 
children would have left public schools. Among others, the major reasons include shortage of nearby 
schools, teacher shortage and absenteeism, poor teaching quality, poor school environment, fami ly 
poverty, insecurity, and natural disasters.23 
 
Disparities in access to schooling 
A deeper look into the enrolment rates illustrates the various types of disparities that exist in access 
to school in Punjab. Punjab‘s Gender Parity Index currently stands at 0.94, i.e., 94 girls for every 100 
boys enrolled in public sector schools. Though Punjab fares better than other  provinces in terms of 
providing girls with opportunities to access education, gender differenc es in enrolment rates persist, 
especially after middle education. These differences increase along the education cycle.  
 
Gender parity is highest in urban districts and lowest in Punjab‘s southern, rural districts, Bhakkar 
and Rajanpur.  
 
Figure 11: Gender Parity in Enrolment in Punjab 
 
 
While access to primary education is high overall, just 84 children in rural areas are enrolled at this 
level per 100 children in urban areas (considering GERs). In middle education, the proportion falls to 
75, and in secondary education to just over 57 children in rural areas per 100 of their peers in urban 
areas.24 
 
Socio-economic status emerges as one of the clearest markers of disadvantage for access to 
school. A recent report has found that household wealth is largely correlated with school enrolment 
                                                 
22 AEPAM (2014). Pakistan Education for All Review Report 2015. 
23 AEPAM (2014). Pakistan Education for All Review Report 2015. 
24 Disparities as computed from latest PSLM survey.
<<<PAGE=42>>>
41 
in Punjab.25 The disparity surfaces already in primary school and becomes even more substantial in 
the next stages of the education cycle. The gap in enrolment between the poorest and the richest 
children is 22% in Primary GER and 97.5% in Sec ondary GER . Nevertheless, the report founds 
some improvements in education participation for the poorest quintile, albeit with relatively low levels 
of completion of the education cycles. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Relationship between District -wise Gender Disparity in Enrolment in Public Schools and 
Poverty Levels in Punjab26 
 
 
 
Children from poorer households are far less ready or equipped to gain from schooling compared to 
their better-off counterparts. They are, for instance, more likely to have one or both parents who are 
illiterate and therefore get little or no support at home in terms of their studies; and they also show 
higher incidence of malnourishment. The Punjab government has taken equity into consideration 
while designing several programmes to subsidize auxiliary expenditures on education incurred by 
parents. Some of these programmes include provision of student vouchers, scholarships, stipends, 
textbooks, lunch boxes and transportation . Government‘s intervention by way of school subsidies 
could be expanded while improving the targeting of children most in need. 
 
Early Childhood Education 
                                                 
25 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft 
26 Punjab ASC 2017 for GPI and Planning Commission of Pakistan, UNDP and OPHI (2016) for MPI
<<<PAGE=43>>>
42 
QAED has established nearly 12,500 ECE classrooms in Punjab.  ECE classrooms differ from the 
traditional Katchi class in three ways: (i) they have  child-friendly, theme-based, decorated 
classrooms with different activity corners; (ii) they involve play-based learning through the use of fun 
and interactive teaching-learning materials provided in an ECE kit; and (iii) they are managed by an 
ECE teacher who has received a four -day ECE training along w ith a part -time caregiver who has 
also received ECE training and supports the teacher in ECE activities.  The government intends to 
scale up ECE. However, the following challenges persist: 
- Lack of school capacity [not possible to allocate a specific classroom and teacher] 
- Access and Enrolment:  According to the SED,  almost 7.4 million children fall within the 
ECE age bracket (3 –5 years) in the Punjab but only 34.4 percent of these children attend 
preschool (MICS 2018). However, actual enrollment in pre school may be higher than 
estimates since about 43 percent of students in preschool are above the age of 5. ECE 
enrollment across the various districts of Punjab is also non -homogenous, the central region 
depicting a much higher rate than the southern or n orthern regions. The central divisions of 
Punjab constitute about half the enrolment in pre -primary or Katchi. Urban -rural differentials 
also exist – the percentage of ECE -age children attending an organized ECE program in 
urban areas is higher than in rural areas.  
- Low Parental Engagement: Head teachers and teachers at schools with ECE classrooms: 
identify lack of parental interest and engagement as a significant impediment to children‘s 
learning. For poorer households, ECE or katchi classes merely serve a s a free daycare 
where parents pick up and drop children at their own convenience, without conforming to 
official school timings. As a result, teachers in ECE classes have to repeat activities and 
lesson plans several times before children are able to learn the expected outcomes.  
- Service delivery: The teacher recruitment policy in public schools is not Katchi -specific, so 
they are likely to lack a dedicated teacher or a dedicated classroom for the Katchi class. 
Teachers traditionally rotate between all classes of primary on a yearly basis with little or no 
training for ECE, because in-service training only focuses on Grades 3 -5. Teachers are also 
not required to comply to standards  
- Institutional challenges: In the absence of an  implementation strategy linked to the ECE 
policy, financial commitment to ECE cannot be guaranteed nor sustained.  
 
Out-of-school children 
Even as public and private schools expand access, the number of children out of school continues to 
be very significant in Punjab. Estimates of the out of school children (OOSC) vary substantially 
depending on the data source and the methodology used to perform the estimation.27 Employing the 
methodology developed by UNESCO-UIS and UNICEF on the PSLM, results in a total of 8.27 million 
children between 5 and 16 years old out of school in 2013 -14 in Punjab. The estimates in the 
Pakistan Education Statistics report put the number in 2016 -17 at 10.5 million  (55% of them girls) . 
Despite the reforms and progress in exp anding school enrolment, the province needs to intensify 
its efforts in increasing enrolment capacity, especially for the accommodation and retention of 
students beyond primary school age. It has been noted that there remain many underserved 
areas; especia lly void of post -primary or secondary schools . Additionally, focus should be placed 
on girls‘ enrolment and the accommodation of children with special needs. The expansion of 
school places to increase enrolment must be complemented by policies and practice s to ensure 
retention at all levels (elementary, secondary and higher education).  
                                                 
27 Furthermore, none of the available sources has up-to-date population estimates on the basis of the 2017 national census yet. 
Therefore, the estimates should be taken as indicative.
<<<PAGE=44>>>
43 
 
Non-formal education 
It is generally agreed that the Non -Formal Education (NFE) sector in Pakistan can be the bridge to 
address the critical situation of a huge number of out-of-school children, yet the NFE sector is largely 
neglected. The Punjab Non-Formal Education Policy 2019 is the first NFE policy of the province. The 
Punjab Youth Policy 2012 under Education for Youth Development commits to promotion of non -
formal education and emphasizes public private partnership. Policy promulgation is critical to create 
a level of parity between the formal and non -formal education subsectors. Such policy should also 
address the fragmented manner, lack of accountability and funding c onstraints facing Non -formal 
Education.  
 
Compared to other budgets, NFE is generally underfunded.  The draft NFE policy aims to commit 5 
percent of the education budget to NFE , which is significant but would also require the Literacy and 
Non-Formal Basic Education Department (L&NFBED) to attract funds to the sector. 
 
The public NFE offer is comprised of various programmes and projects. Teachers of NFE have lower 
qualification levels than those in the formal system. However, due to the need to cover the offer, the 
standards are further lowered. This has a direct impact on the ability of the teacher to differentiate 
and support students in a multi-grade environment and that need additional support.  This could also 
be influenced by the type of contracts and low salaries. 
 
Training and professional opportunities exist but  are not adequate to prepare teachers to deliver 
quality Non -Formal Education. The L& NFBED has a dedicated Human Resources Development 
Institute, a unit in the department that is responsible for assessing training needs through classroom 
observations and exam results of children.  A Training Needs Assessment (TNA) has been 
conducted for all teachers, and they participate in cluster -based peer learning and problem -solving 
meetings. However, there is no training plan in terms of refresher courses and induction of new 
teachers mostly the training is done as and when the funding is available.  
 
Infrastructure 
While investments have been made to improve the learning environment, critical inputs are still 
lacking. Considerable advancement has been made in recent years with regard to school 
infrastructure and the provision of basic facilities. More than 96% of the schools have basic facilities 
(drinking water, toilets, electricity and boundary wall). More than 97% of the schools have a main 
gate, while more than 89% of the schools have sewerage facility.  However, other facilities such as 
playground and library are lacking in schools. Computer labs, Science labs and ECE Classrooms 
are significantly lacking in schools as less than 15% of the schools have each of these advanced 
facilities. Routine and preventive maintenance of schools are almost non -existent. A policy on 
minimum standards for educational facilities should be enunciated and a programme for retrofitting 
of schools according to the standards should be embarked upon. 
 
 
Priority Programmes 2  
In view of the challenges mentioned, the following specific objectives and programmes  have been 
proposed to guide the priorities of education sector in Punjab with respect to access to schooling: 
 
Programme 2.1 – Enablers for increased school access and retention 
Specific objective: Increase access and retention from ECE to post-secondary education
<<<PAGE=45>>>
44 
There are over 10 million children out of school, including in rural and hard to reach locations.  
The PESP seeks to increase access through expanding the school infrastructure from early 
childhood education to secondary levels, ensuring that new and existing infrastructure 
follows standards, reducing families‘ costs of schooling through cash transfers and other 
means, and strengthening PPPs.  
- A six step ECE model  will focus on: provision of a dedicated and trained teacher, 
curriculum and learning standards, scheme of study and lesson plans, classroom 
resources, assessments, and management and monitoring. This will require: 
- Ownership and accountability of ECE beyond QAED, so that the construction of ECE 
friendly classrooms,  development of ECE content, introduction of ECE standards, 
monitoring and quality assurance of ECE, and timely enrolment (and retention) of 
children into ECE is the shared responsibility of the SED, PMIU, PCTB, QAED, PEF, 
PEIMA and district education departments 
- Prescriptive guidelines to AEOs on how to monitor and support improvements to the 
delivery of ECE 
- Sustained financial commitment to the expansion of ECE throughout the province 
- Emphasis on ECE in low and late enrolment districts, so that it serves the children 
that need it most 
- Involvement of SCs in enrolment of children into ECE and oversight of ECE delivery 
- Integration of ECE beyond katchi, up to Grade 2 
- Smooth transition from ECE to higher grades 
- The number of learning spaces will increase as a result of the development of ECE 
infrastructure, the construction of new schools in needy areas, the upgradation of schools 
at elementary and secondary levels, and the establishment of afternoon shifts in schools 
where there is a need. By expanding the number of spaces, this strategy will also facilitate 
access and mainstreaming of children with mild disabilities and those having completed  
non-formal education. To mainstream children with mild disabilities it is critical that school 
infrastructure is compliant to the needs of children with disabilities.  
- Public Private Partnerships will be strengthened so that they can expand reach to out of 
school children. This programme will also intro duce measures to compensate families for 
the costs of schooling. For instance, transport facilities will be provided on a needs basis 
to students enrolled in afternoon shifts, and school meal programmes will be introduced 
as a pilot in some districts.  
- Existing cash transfer -based interventions, such as the  girls‘ stipends and brick -kiln 
programmes, will be restructured and integrated with existing social protection 
programmes. Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT ) funds (including girls‘ stipends)  will be 
revisited to improve their efficiency and sustainability.   Funds from CCTs will be partially 
redirected to provide localized access solutio ns, such as classroom provision or 
transportation.  
- The government‘s Campaign for Access and Retention through Enrolment (CARE) 
programme aims to enrol out of school children (OOSC) in schools through a combination 
of demand- and supply-side interventions. It targets  children aged 5-10 years, who have 
either dropped out or never been enrolled in school and is being piloted in five districts. 
 
Figure 13:Key components of the CARE programme
<<<PAGE=46>>>
45 
 
        
- The Insaf Afternoon School Programme will be supported to provide middle and 
secondary schooling and increase the supply of schools for primary school graduates.  
The programme has already been launched in 22 low enrolment districts, with 719 
schools notified and 403 schools already participating. The programme benefits from the 
Department for International Development‘s (DFID) Sustainable Transition and Retentio n 
in Delivering Education ( STRIDE) programme and its provision of bicycles for boys and 
transportation vouchers for girls.  Primary schools are being upgraded to middle schools if 
one does not exist within a 3 kilometer radius, and middle schools if a high school does 
not exist within a 5 km radius. Students are eligible if they are dropouts or have been 
enrolled in distant schools. Teachers are engaged if they have five years‘ experience, a 
Masters‘ degree and preferably reside within 5 km of a school ; they will be given a 
monthly honorarium to work in the afternoon shift.  
- Access and equity interventions in the PESP will also have a gender dimension. While 
Punjab has succeeded in improving overall gender parity, girls are sti ll less likely to 
survive till Grade 10 and to enrol in the province‘s less developed districts. The GoPb and 
its development partners have been running interventions to promote girls‘ retention (such 
as girls‘ stipends).  However, a more holistic approach is required. Some of the 
interventions proposed in the PESP include: 
- provision of separate schools at high and higher secondary level for girls (SpED) 
- building new schools for girls (SpED) 
- promoting girls‘ education at middle level in existing NFE centres (L&NFBED) 
- upgradation of existing primary schools to middle level (L&NFBED) 
- starting vocational education & training at middle level (L&NFBED) 
- developing new manuscripts keeping in view gender sensitivity (SED)  
- revisiting stipends for girls (SED) 
- providing female-friendly washrooms in schools (SED)  
- School Councils will be strengthened to provide school level solutions, such as classroom 
construction, enrolment drives and school repairs . Construction responsibil ity will be 
decentralized to School Councils, with financial and quality control support from the SED. 
 
Programme 2.2 – Functional and adequate school facilities 
Specific objective: Ensure provision of functional and adequate basic school facilities; including 
disability-friendly infrastructure in all schools
<<<PAGE=47>>>
46 
- All new and existing schools will be constructed or upgraded to meet SED minimum 
standards. This will ensure that all schools provide a minimum package of services, 
including potable water, electricity, and disability-friendly facilities.  
- Furthermore, all schools will include female-friendly washrooms, particularly at post -
primary levels.  
- To encourage practical and applied learning, schools from middle to higher secondary 
levels will be equipped with science labs, libraries and IT infrastructure.  
- Recreational space with equipment wi ll be provided and encourage children to exercise 
and play.  
 
Programme 2.3 – Non-Formal education 
Specific objective:  Enhance access to NFE for children and adolescents , youth and adults, and 
ensure mainstreaming of children in formal schools 
Non-formal education and adult literacy programmes are essential to reaching out of school 
children and youth and ensuring that adults have the skill s needed to engage with their 
community and seek employment opportunities.  
- The PESP will expand access by establishing new NFE centres in areas where there are 
many out of school children.  
- Existing centres will be enhanced to support additional children and provide a conducive 
environment for learning.  
- L&NFBED will establish criteria for selecting venues for setting up non-formal education 
schools.  
- As centres expand so will the level of NFE  programme provided, from primary level to 
middle level. 
 
Literacy programmes will include skills training and vocational and technical training 
opportunities to ensure that in addition to literacy skills, adults are able to improve their livelihood 
and employability perspectives.  
 
It is envisioned that there will be four types of L&NFBE programmes28: 
i. Non-formal Basic Education schools will provide primary level classes from 0 -level 5 for 
out of school children.  
ii. Non-formal Education Feeder schools will provide classes from 0-level 3 education to out 
of school children 
iii. Adolescent and Adult Centers will serve adolescents and adults  
iv. Community Learning Centers will be explored to reach vulnerable populations  
 
A pillar of the PESP is supporting the mainstreaming of students from NFE to formal education. 
This will be a continuous process and will apply to all grades from 0 to 10.  
- For children in NFE programmes that are levelled to formal school levels 0 -10, they will 
be considered equivalent to the formal school grade.  
- Organizations that offer literacy programmes will be required to ensure that their 
programmes are implemented according to specific standards.  
- L&NFBE Department will coordinate with other bodies, such as social welfare, labour, 
women development and technical and vocational education.  
- Public Private Partnerships will also be used to expand reach and to raise quality.  
                                                 
28 Literacy & Non-formal Basic Education Department, Government of Punjab. 2018. Punjab Literacy & Non-formal Education 
Policy 2019
<<<PAGE=48>>>
47 
- Communities will be involved in efforts to raise awareness about the importance of 
education, particularly of girls, to identify out of school children and to motivate their 
participation in NFE programmes.  
- The NFBE will explore the potential of introducing an accelerated education programme 
(AEP). These programmes will target children who were unable to enrol into school due 
to demand-side constraints, and will bridge them to the relevant grade level in formal 
schools.  
Key features to be considered for the programme: 
- Target OOSC and drop outs who can access a neighbouring primary or middle 
school, and supporting them to enrol into a relevant AEP  
- Respond to the needs of students when developing AEP schedules 
- To enable smooth transition to the formal system, students should be retained in their 
AEP centers  till it the start of the formal academic year. This would help provide  
continuity and minimize the chances of them dropping out during transition.  
- Budget allowing, c onsider providing stipends to AEP students so that they are 
encouraged to continue their courses.  
- Develop a curriculum that is integrated both horizontally (across subjects) and 
vertically (across grade levels) to accelerate the speed of learning. 
 
Programme 2.4 - Access for marginalized children, including children with special needs 
Specific objective: Increase access for marginalized children including children with special needs, 
from ECE to secondary education 
The PESP recognizes that there is a gap in serving all children, including the most marginalized. 
Through a combination of policie s, plans and service provision, children will be supported to 
realize their right to education.  
- The first steps would be to formulate a special education policy and implementation 
framework, with clearly identified roles and KPIs for each stakeholder.  
- A thorough review process of the curriculum and textbooks, and of teaching and learning 
materials will be conducted to ensure that they respond to the needs of marginalized 
children and children with disabilities.  
- Teachers will be trained on managing incl usive classrooms and supporting inclusive 
practices among their students.  
- An assessment framework will be developed for SpEd‘s schools and centers, and 
assessments will be designed to support the learning needs of all children. 
- Dearth of data on children with disabilities will be tackled through data collection efforts 
on the prevalence of disabilities, through partnerships with other government s, the 
private sector  and international agencies. The PMIU census will also be expanded to 
capture disability data.  
- An infrastructure plan will provide the guidance and minimum standards to ensure that all 
schools and NFE centres have in place disability-friendly infrastructure.  
- Public private partnerships will be promoted to improve the supply of special education 
- A communication s strategy will be developed to encourage parents of children with 
special needs to send them to schools or special education centres.  
 
Strategic Area 2– Access, Retention and Equity 
 
New Deal 2023 Strategies 
Improve access, retention and equity
<<<PAGE=49>>>
48 
Improve and scale high-quality pre-primary education 
 
Priority Programmes 2 Objective: Provide adequate and sufficient access to education 
for children from pre -primary to secondary , including marginalized and children with 
special needs 
 
Specific Objectives Main Activities 
 
2.1 Increase access and 
retention from ECE to post-
secondary education 
· Develop ECE infrastructure in line with the ECE Policy, and 
guidelines for implementation 
· Upgrade existing schools and establish new ones 
according to SED criteria, especially at elementary and 
secondary levels 
· Introduce afternoon shifts in schools where they are 
needed and provide transport facilities to students enrolled 
in afternoon shifts on needs basis 
· Introduce skills -development programmes at secondary 
school levels, including workshops in selected secondary 
schools 
· Strengthen public-private partnership modalities to expand 
access to education 
 
2.2 Ensure provision of 
functional and adequate basic 
school facilities; including 
disability-friendly infrastructure 
in all schools 
· Delineate minimum standards for educational infrastructure; 
including disability friendly infrastructure 
· Implement programmes to provide adequate facilities: safe 
buildings, classrooms, potable water, toilets, electricity, 
furniture and recreational and sports areas 
· Provide libraries, science labs and IT infrastructure in 
schools 
 
2.3 Enhance access to NFE for 
children and adolescents, youth 
and adults and ensure 
mainstreaming of children in 
formal schools 
· Establish new NFE centres to enrol out of school children 
· Upgrade existing NFE schools to provide middle level 
education on needs-basis 
· Build partnerships between L&NBED and SED to start 
literacy centres in formal schools in afternoon shifts 
· Foster public -private partnerships to enhance supply side 
interventions in literacy and non-formal education 
· Mainstream children from NFE programmes to formal 
schools 
 
2.4 Increase access for 
marginalized children including 
children with special needs, 
from ECE to secondary 
education 
· Revise curriculum, textbooks, teacher training and 
assessment framework to enable marginalized students to 
fully participate in the educational process
<<<PAGE=50>>>
49 
 
Priority programmes 3 – Objective: Promote quality education in a safe, inclusive and 
conducive learning environment for children  
 
The geographical topography and the climatic conditions of the Punjab makes it more vulnerable to 
natural disasters, such as floods and droughts, particularly in the southern areas. The increasing 
incidence of disasters, particularly since 2010, 29 in the region has also increased vulnerability of 
disaster-prone communities, especially affecting children. The table below details the vulnerability of 
districts with respect to various disasters: 
 
Table 5. Vulnerability of Punjab districts to various natural disasters 
Disaster Type Vulnerable District 
Riverine 
Flooding 
Indus 
Jhelum 
Chenab 
Ravi 
Sutlej 
Flash Floods Mianwali, D.G. Khan, Rajanpur 
Urban Floods Lahore, Rawalpindi, Gujranwala, Sialkot, Faisalabad, Narowal, Sheikhupura, 
Multan 
Droughts The areas of Cholistan in district Bahawalnagar and R.Y. Khan 
Source: Punjab Disaster Response Plan 2017. 
 
The PSESP 2013-2017 outlined a plan to develop and implement a policy on Disaster Risk 
Reduction (DRR) for mitigating the impact of possible future disasters on schools. The PSESP 
recommended conducting an Education System Diagnosis (ESD) to gauge the impacts of disasters 
and its effects on the performance of the education system. The ESD could not be initiated during 
the PSESP implementation period.  
 
Priority Programmes 3 
 
Programme 3.1 – Safe, clean, green, healthy and hygienic physical environment 
Specific objective: Promote safe, clean, green, healthy and hygienic physical environment 
incorporating elements of disaster risk management 
Punjab is prone to natural disasters, including earthquakes and floods. The SED has developed a 
Provincial School Safety Plan of Action  for safe schools and educational buildings in Punjab. 
Additionally, the SED conducted a baseline study on Disaster Awareness and Mitigation Support to 
measure the level of awareness of potential natural hazards faced by the people in six high risk 
Union Councils of districts Dera Ghazi Khan and Rajanpur.  
- The QAED has also developed teacher training modules with a focus on DRR.  
- However, these modules will need to be updated and aligned with the emerging DRR 
priorities.30  
                                                 
29 Provincial Disaster Management Authority Punjab, 2017. Provincial Disaster Response Plan 2017.  Available at 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Punjab%20Disaster%20Response%20Plan%202017_Part1.pdf. Accessed 
on May 10, 2018.  
30 The modules were developed in the aftermath of 2010 floods and therefore, are quite dated.
<<<PAGE=51>>>
50 
- New schools will be constructed against improved codes to ensure that buildings are 
earthquake and flood resistant. 
- Existing structures will benefit from structural enhancements to ensure that they are safer for 
children and teachers.  
- Importantly, teachers will be prepared in case of an emergency and children will learn and 
practice what to do in the event of a natural disaster. 
 
Programme 3.2 – Safe and protective behavioural practices 
Specific objective: Ensure safe and protective behavioural practices 
- Schools must be safe from violence, bullying and other harmful or discriminatory practices.  
- Teachers will be trained to incorporate positive discipline as part of classroom management 
and to recognize bullying or other forms of violence or disc rimination between students as 
well as other teachers.  
- Feedback mechanisms will be institutionalized so that incidences can be reported and 
followed up.  
 
Programme 3.3 – Inclusive education 
Specific objective: Establish an enabling environment for children with special needs in mainstream 
schools and institutions 
 
It is generally acknowledged that the Punjab has done more for special education than any other 
province. However, the special education sector has many challenges to contend with. At pres ent 
most special education institutes are located in urban areas and thus not readily available in rural 
communities. A more equitable distribution of opportunities for learning is required. There is overall a 
need for the enunciation of a comprehensive po licy and plan on special and inclusive education. 
Special education institutions need to be retrofitted to ensure accessibility and student safety. The 
Primary GER of children for whom a disability is reported reached 12.1% in 2015, the Middle GER 
was 10.8% and the combined Secondary GER was 2.6%.31 
 
The Special Education Department currently runs 288 institutes, centres, colleges and vocational 
institutes. It is also running some pilot projects on inclusive education with the Punjab Education 
Foundation (PEF) aimed at children with mild disabilities.  However, the lack of data in respect to 
children with special education needs is a major obstacle for devising appropriate strategies, 
including a more inclusive approach to educational interventions.  Some surveys provide an 
indication of the challenge for children with disabilities.  
 
The TEACh project in Punjab, for instance, used a set of questions for children aged 5 -17 years, 
based on the Washington Group on Disability Statistics, established under the United Nations 
Statistical Commission. As a resul t, the report finds that 11% of 8 -12 year olds surveyed present 
some type of disability. This survey also highlights the intersectional evidence on disability, gender 
and poverty. A recent report using the Nielsen survey in Punjab, which covered a wider sa mple, has 
found that disability is indeed a significant barrier for children‘s access to education. Only one in ten 
surveyed children 5-16 years old were attending school in 2015.  
 
An Institutional Plan for Special Education Department (SpED ) 2017 -2020 has been developed, 
laying out six core sector plan priorities and institutional capacity required to address associated 
                                                 
31 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft.
<<<PAGE=52>>>
51 
challenges. This is a positive development, but the entire paradigm of education for children with 
disabilities needs to be linked to the Punjab‘s school reform programme. Presently, education for the 
persons with disabilities does not find a place in with the larger debate taking place on education. A 
survey in 2012 32 concluded that schools are currently unprepared to make inc lusive education a 
reality due to factors such as the lack of clear admission policies for children with special needs, little 
knowledge among school administrators regarding how to implement inclusive education, 
inaccessible school infrastructure, and the  absence of professional development opportunities for 
teachers to implement inclusive education. The professional capacities of special education teachers 
and educators are not sufficient to meet children‘s needs. Finding enough qualified teachers is a 
major challenge. There are 1,070 posts of teachers that are lying vacant. This gap also affects 
quality as the teachers must take on additional or large classes, even in subject areas they are not 
trained to teacher. Once teachers are selected, they are ofte n not prepared to teach appropriately. 
ASER reports indicate that learning outcomes for children with disabilities in Punjab (3-16 years) are 
lower than those for children without disabilities for both literacy and numeracy. This is because 
these children find it difficult to comprehend what is being taught in class due to visual and hearing 
impairment, among other challenges . Assistive devices are given to children, but many needy 
children do not get these due to limitations in budgets.  
 
The current polic ies and programmes fall short in providing adequate inclusive and services for 
children with disabilities. New interventions are project driven, the projects could eventually provide 
key learning opportunities, but are too small and not likely to have an i mpact without a strong 
political commitment at the national and provincial levels on the issue of inclusive education. Due to 
lack of coordination amongst the relevant departments, many children are falling through the cracks. 
Moreover, a number of issues should be addressed with an inter -sector approach, involving health 
for early detection and psychological support, and social protection for families. However, the 
education of children with special educational needs is being looked into in isolation witho ut forming 
appropriate synergies. 
 
In view of the challenges mentioned, a series of strategies have been proposed to reach objectives 
of inclusive education , especially to ensure that welcoming and safe spaces for children with 
disabilities.  
- Firstly, schools must be designed to facilitate access for those with various disabilities, 
including physical disabilities. School enhancements such as ramps, handrails and wider 
doors are examples of light rehabilitation that can be integrated into schools.  
- Teacher training and professional development will include disability sensitization to ensure 
classrooms are managed inclusively and teachers have strategies to support learning for all.  
- Health services will include screening and assessment to identify physic al and intellectual 
disability and coordinate with appropriate health services to ensure that on -going referrals 
are available.  
- Additionally, adapted learning materials will be available with teaching aids to enhance the 
learning experience of children with disabilities.  
 
A recent success has been the handover of inclusive education from the SpEd to the SED, which 
means that accountability and responsibility of inclusive education will be with the SED and its 
district and school staff, engendering greater ownership.  
 
                                                 
32 Shaheen Pasha 2012. Readiness of Urban Primary Schools for Inclusive Education in Pakistan. Journal of Research and 
Reflections in Education. Vol.6, No.2, pp113 -128. http://ue.edu.pk/jrre/articles/62003.pdf.
<<<PAGE=53>>>
52 
Figure 14: Results flow diagram for Strategic Area 2 
 
 
 
Strategic Area 2– Access, Retention and Equity 
 
New Deal 2023 Strategies 
Improve access, retention and equity 
Improve and scale high-quality pre-primary education 
 
Priority Programmes 3  Objective: Promote quality education in a safe, inclusive and 
conducive learning environment for children  
 
Specific Objectives Main Activities 
3.1. Promote safe, clean, 
green, healthy and hygienic 
physical environment 
incorporating elements of 
disaster risk management 
 
· Develop a programme to promote green environments in 
schools 
· Provide disaster-prone infrastructure in schools 
· Introduce earthquake and flood resistant designs in the 
construction of new school buildings 
 
3.2. Ensure safe and protective 
behavioural practices 
· Develop and implement a strategy for safe 
behavioural practices among teachers, non -
teaching staff and students 
· Incorporate prevention of child abuse and other 
harmful practices in teacher trainings 
 
3.3 Establish an enabling · Conduct screening and assessment tests to identify
<<<PAGE=54>>>
53 
New Deal on Governance and 
Management 
 
An effective governance system 
must be in place to improve the 
quality and access to education, 
ensure progress and efficient 
utilization of resources 
 
environment for children with 
special needs in mainstream 
schools and institutions 
 
physical and intellectual disability at formal schools in 
coordination with Health and Special Education 
departments 
· Ensure safety of children with special needs 
· Train teachers in disability sensitization and inclusive 
teaching methods 
Provide specialized textbooks, teaching materials, 
suitable assistive devices and teaching aids to 
enhance the learning experience of children with 
special needs 
 
 
2.3   Strategic Area 3 – Governance and Management 
 
The 18th Constitutional Amendment decentralized education to 
the provincial level. Important steps have been taken to devolve 
power to local authorities and increase accountability in the 
education system in Punjab. However, the process  needs to be 
re-evaluated, with more clearly defined roles and 
responsibilities, and better coordination and alignment of 
accountability mechanisms. In addition, there is a need to 
address capacity constraints in order to have a more effective 
educational administration and better implementation of 
education reforms. 
 
Budgetary allocations over the years clearly illustrate that the 
government is making significant investments in education  with 
the hope of addressing its  many challenges, yet the overall 
contribution to t he education sector has decreased in 
comparison to other sectors. For the financial year 2018 -19, for 
instance, the spending on education was Rs 332.5 billion. The 
education budget in Punjab has increased significantly over the 
last seven years. In 2010 -11, a budget of Rs. 155 billion was 
earmarked for education sector in Punjab. 33 It has more than 
doubled since then with the allocation of Rs. 349 billion in 2017-
18. This represents an increase of 125% during these years in 
nominal terms and 43% in real terms. However, while education 
has been a priority in the agenda for the Punjab  government 
during these years, the share of resources allocated to the 
education sector does not reflect this. While the provincial 
resource base has increased significantly, the share of 
education in the government budget has been declining since 
2013-14. The share of education in Punjab‘s budget has 
declined from 26% in 2013-14 to 17.7% in 2017-18.  
 
Figure 15: Share of the education budget in Punjab government’s budget (Billion PKR and Percent) 
                                                 
33 Data on budget allocations as processed from Punjab Budget books of various years. 
Strengthen departmental efficiency 
 
Strengthen decision-making through an 
Integrated Management Information 
System (IMIS). 
 
Improve efficiency via a Performance 
Management Framework to improve 
quality and efficiency of service delivery.  
 
Introduce a revised Teacher Transfer 
and Posting Policy to address the 
existing gaps present in the system 
 
Drive reforms through a department 
delivery team 
 
Empower education management 
 
Select competent leadership for all 
schools 
 
Empower DEAs by providing financial 
and administrative support and autonomy 
 
Transform School Councils to reflect a 
larger role for parents and the community 
 
Provide customised training and 
support material to education 
managers to helped them deliver their 
jobs well
<<<PAGE=55>>>
54 
 
 
 
A review of the PSESP  2013-2017‘s budget for the five-year period does illustrate one constraint in 
the sector. As can be seen from the above chart, the actual allocations during these five years of 
PSESP implementation were significantly short of the highly ambitious projectio ns made in the 
PSESP. 
 
Figure 16: Comparison of Projected and Actual SED Budgets34 
 
 
To a great extent, this positive trend is due to rising transfers from the federal divisible funding pool, 
which constitute s the bulk of the funding for the provincial governments in Pakistan. The funds 
distributed to Punjab have increased on average by around 8% each year in real terms between 
                                                 
34 Source: PSESP document and Budget Books 
898 
1,095 
1,447 
1,681 
1,971 
233 260 287 296 349 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Provincial Budget Education Budget
26% 
23.7% 
19.8% 
17.6% 
17.7% 
222 
273 
334 
397 
463 
205 
234 250 259 
298 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
in Rs. Billion 
Budget Projected by PSESP Budget Allocated for SED
<<<PAGE=56>>>
55 
2011-12 and 2017 -18.35 In this sense, the outlook for education funding in the provin ce in the past 
few years has been encouraging. 
 
Priority programmes 4 –Objective: Strengthen good governance of the education sector for 
equitable access and high-quality education 
 
Data Management and Evidence-based Decision-making 
Punjab has a results -driven approach to decision-making with a strong focus on monitoring targets. 
However, the decision -making process is largely top -down. The target -driven approach largely 
revolves around the districts as key unit of analysis. The DEAs and, subsequently, other levels of 
education administration were assigned targets against key indicators from the School Education 
Department each year. There is a need for targets against various indicators to be set in consultation 
with the officials at respective level of governance to align these with ground realities, skills base and 
resources available at these levels. This will make the target setting more realistic as well as 
establish a broad-based ownership of these targets among the officials at the service tier. Local level 
planning should contribute in this respect, but the current capacity levels would not allow planning 
and implementation to be effectual. 
 
Data management within the education sector is a major challenge. Currently, one can tur n to a 
variety of sources for information on the education system, however too often there are 
discrepancies in information among these for the same indicator. Effective management and 
decision-making require a system of relevant, reliable and timely availability of data.  
- The data management system must be comprehensive and built on relevant indicators that 
will allow for accurate and thorough monitoring and assessment of the education system.  
 
One of the areas in which the r elevant data is not available  concerns children with disabilities. In 
fact, the biggest issue Pakistan faces in addressing the issue of education for children with 
disabilities is not having the right set of data on Persons with Disabilities (PWDs). There is no 
standardized instrument to collect data on disabilities. The discrepancies in prevalence and types of 
disabilities show that the purpose of surveys and survey instruments used are different and the 
results therefore cannot be used appropriately for developing a comprehensive stra tegy on 
education for persons with disabilities.  
 
The lack of timely data related to out of school children and to non-formal education makes it difficult 
to make evidence -based decisions, particularly to ensure that NFE is accessible and inclusive. 
Children in NFE programmes are not counted by the Punjab Education Management Information 
System (PEMIS) due to weak links between the SED and L&NFBED. The L&NFBED department 
does not have monitoring indicators and reports available to draw conclusions on what kind of 
school level problems, including education quality, are being encountered and how these reports are 
used to rectify issues. 
 
The L&NFBED does not have data on children who have been mainstreamed into the formal school 
system and at which level. The  importance of consolidated, reliable and accessible data on 
efficiency of the NFE system, quality and learning outcomes can play a key role in informing policy. 
There is also a lack of qualitative analysis and documentation of lessons learned and case stu dies 
that can be beneficial in understanding and prioritizing issues for planning purposes. 
                                                 
35 The total NFC has registered an increase of 6% per year on average during this period.
<<<PAGE=57>>>
56 
 
Despite improvements in data collection, there are shortcomings on information on school 
management, and dissemination and effective use of the data are limited, i ncluding on learning 
assessments. School management information would incorporate aspects of operational practices, 
monitoring processes and outcomes, and people management. However, data collection systems of 
the government departments and independent sur veys do not collect any information at the school 
level on these aspects. 36 In terms of learning outcomes, several types of assessments are 
conducted but the resulting information is not being used to make evidence -based decisions by 
various stakeholders.  
 
The capacity of education managers at various levels as regards the planning, monitoring and 
implementation of various interventions is very low. There is a need to design and deliver training 
programmes for key staff and also recruit new staff into the system that have these capacities. 
 
Private sector engagement 
The PSESP 2013 -2017 envisaged integrating the private sector into the government‘s p olicy 
framework. The Punjab Private Educational Institutions (Promotion and Regulation) (Amendment) 
Act 2016 introduced various amendments including mandatory registration of private institutions and 
regulation of fee structure of the p rivate educational institutions. However, there has been little 
progress towards formulation of a comprehensive policy for integr ating the private sector into the 
overarching government‘s objectives and standards. A considerable percentage of private schools 
remain unregistered across all districts. Moreover, the Act or the sub -ordinate legislation do not 
include standards for quali ty. As a result, enrolment in private schools remains unaccounted in the 
overall district enrolment figures. Consequently, the actual number of out of school children may 
appear higher than the actual number of children facing the access challenge causing the over -
reporting of out of school children in a given district.  
 
Punjab has a strategy of Public Private Partnerships to expand access to school. The Punjab 
Education Foundation (PEF) has played a significant role in providing access to education to the  
children from underserved areas. However, there is limited coordin ation between SED and PEF at 
the service delivery tier. After registration, there is little subsequent interaction between district 
education authorities  and PEF partner schools . All monito ring is carried out by PEF‘s monitors 
against pre -determined monitoring indicators. PEF has  a mechanism that locks the minimum 
acceptable performance from partner schools through Quality Assurance Tests (QATs) administered 
annually to students; however it needs to analyse trends in performance to inform improvements in 
school support. PEF and the SED operate as parallel streams, with limited exchange of information.  
 
Priority Programmes 4 
These priority programme s address governance and coordination needs within departments, 
agencies and units, and between them. They also focus on the need for improved data management 
and use contributing to more effective and evidence-based decision-making. Financial planning and 
management are also addressed through capacity development support. Th e priority programmes 
align with the third pillar of the New Deal that addresses governance of the education system.  
 
Programme 4.1 – Coordination and regulation 
Specific objective: Strengthen governance and coordination frameworks within the public education 
system, other line departments and with private providers 
                                                 
36 E-pact (2018), op.cit.
<<<PAGE=58>>>
57 
The ESA notes that while decentralization will be promoted as a way to improve service delivery, 
there is a need to strengthen the coordination and interaction of departments , agencies,  and 
units, both horizontally and vertically.  
- The PESP places emphasis on governance structure s that promote collaborat ion. The 
SED has constituted a committee called Coordinated Action for Reforms to Education 
(CARE); the committee consists of the heads of PCTB, QAED, PEC and the PMIU and is 
expected to improve coordination, harmonization and feedback loops among key SED 
institutions. However, this is limited to coordination among the he ads of these 
organizations. Linkages need to be more thoroug h—for instance between PEC‘s 
Research Cell, QAED‘s Academic Development Unit (ADU), and PCTB‘s Curriculum and 
Manuscripts Wings. PESP prescribes interdepartmental coordination. 
- To improve inter-district planning and management, districts will be required to develop, 
deliver and track progress against district and sub-district education plans. DRCs will be 
leveraged to drive the delivery of these plans.  
- PESP also places emphasis on strengthening collaboration with the private sector . 
However, to ensure timely, well-coordinated and informed decisions, a robust framework 
is needed to guide public-private partnerships  and coherent, coordinated growth of 
PSSP, PEF and NFBE schools.  
 
Programme 4.2 – E-governance, evidence-based planning and management 
Specific objective: Enhance planning, monitoring and evaluation across all levels for evidence-based 
decision-making 
Evidence-based decision-making relies on the regular collection of data, its analysis and use. 
The private sector, though required to share data as part of the registration process, do so to a 
limited extent. Furthermore, there is limited access by decision -makers to reliable data on out of 
school children. Moreover, various departments, agencies and units maintain their own 
databases.  
- Centralizing and mainstreaming data management will ensure that a complete picture of 
education supply and demand is well understood. This includes centralizing SED public 
school data, with various other datasets including from L&NFBE D, SpED and private 
sector. 
- While data driven decision making will be informed by routine data collection processes 
and assessments, a research unit will also be established to provide needs -based, in-
depth reports on prevalent issues on the education sector and to carry out research to 
help the design and delivery of innovative practices to improve e ducation outputs and 
outcomes. 
- Managers will be trained on using data to support planning and management. While the 
SED has a culture of data-informed planning and management, the SpED and L&NFBED 
do not. They will invest in identifying expertise in developing plans and using data. 
 
School Information System (SIS) 
 
In 2017, the Punjab Information Technology Board (PITB) collaborated with the SED to introduce a 
SIS. This tablet-based system allows schools to self -report teacher and student -level data in real 
time. The SIS has registered 11.6 million students, along with their parent‘s identification numbers 
and telephone numbers, their date of birth, enrolment year an d grade. To date, 48,058 of 48,283 
schools, and 382,917 teachers and 73,131 support staff, have registered with SIS. SIS provides a 
tremendous opportunity for targeted and hence efficient data -driven decision -making and 
performance management.  Because it tracks individual students, it can also support collaboration
<<<PAGE=59>>>
58 
between the SED, TEVTAs and the L&NFBED – for example, if the SIS  identifies recent drop outs, 
they can be redirected to NFBE centers or to TEVTAs.   
 
- The SIS will be integrated with the National Database and Registration Authority 
(NADRA) to further establish its credibility and to support with tracking dropouts.  
 
Programme 4.3 – Financial planning and management 
Specific objective: Improve financial planning and management in the education sector 
In a context of increasing devolution of responsibilities from the provincial level to the district and 
sub-district levels, it has been noted that staff do not have sufficient financial planning and 
management capacity. It is important that staff are recruited with education and experience in 
financial manageme nt and that managers and decision -makers have knowledge of financial 
management principles and concepts to make informed decisions.  
- To develop capacity of key personnel, training will be provided to education managers in 
financial planning and management.  
- Within education departments, dedicated financial management cells will be established 
and staffed by qualified personnel.  
- Newly recruited personnel will undergo an induction to become familiar with the financial 
management systems and structures.  
- This will promote division of labour among positions at the district and sub -district levels 
and ensure transparent and checks and balances around financial decisions.  
- The PMIU has committed to a School Improvement Framework, which will set and track 
targets for school improvement  – this can be used by school leaders to mobilize 
resources and build momentum around school improvement.   
- To improve financial management at the school level, the GoPb will introduce an online 
disbursement system for Non-Salary Budgets. 
 
Strategic Programme Area 3 - Governance and Management 
New Deal 2023 Strategies 
Strengthen School Education Department 
Empower School Leaders and Administrators 
 
Priority Programmes 4 Objective: Strengthen good governance of the education sector 
for equitable access and high-quality education 
 
Specific Objectives Main activities 
4.1. Strengthen governance and 
coordination frameworks within 
the public education system, 
other line departments and with 
private providers 
· Develop a regulatory mechanism for private 
education sector and public-private partnerships 
 
4.2. Enhance planning, 
monitoring and evaluation across 
all levels for evidence-based 
decision-making 
· Improve data collection, management and use 
(including on OOSC, children and youth with 
special education needs) 
· Streamline and integrate various education 
datasets in the education sector 
· Strengthen existing monitoring mechanisms for
<<<PAGE=60>>>
59 
continuous improvement of education service 
delivery 
· Drive implementation of education reforms 
through a Secretary Delivery Unit 
· Measuring, monitoring and reporting of SDGs 
4.3. Improve financial planning 
and management in the education 
sector 
· Build capacity of education managers on 
financial planning and management 
 
 
Priority programmes 5 –Objective: Promote effective leadership and management of the 
education sector for better service delivery 
 
Roles and responsibilities 
There are various institutions in the Punjab empowered to support quality learning, but they are often 
unable to  implement adequately their mandates. There is duplication of roles across different 
institutions, which suggests that they work independent of each other. For instance, PEC, PCTB and 
QAED do not have regular and frequent intera ction with each other in order to share relevant work, 
information, insights and recommendations. There are t wo potential reasons for this. First, the 
institutions lack the ability to recruit qualified and experienced professionals. Second, even if such 
human resources were acquired, there are factors such as working environment, service rules etc . 
that do not encourage retention. At the same time, qualified and competent subject specialists, 
assessment experts, psychometricians, data analysts and other  experts related to the field are not 
easily available. 
 
A better managed, monitored and administered education sector requires collaboration among all 
agencies involved in the management and delivery of educat ion. For example, t here is no 
provincial policy framework for introducing the technical stream in school education in Punjab. The 
Punjab School Education Sector Plan (PSESP) 2013 -2017 recommended the  establishment of a 
coordination mechanism between SED and TEVTA in order to develop linkages between tec hnical 
and vocational education and general education. The Punjab Skills Development Plan also 
emphasizes this as a crucial need in order to build human capital in the province.  
 
The spirit of devolution and the establishment of DEAs was to strengthen and empower the service 
delivery tier to plan, coordinate and execute various activities towards improving the state of 
education in the districts. New structures at district level have been introduced, but there is a need to 
review them, as there exists ambiguity as to reporting and coordination lines. The Punjab Local 
Government Act, 2013 vested the control of government schools in the district education authorities 
(DEAs). However, there was inadequate delegation of authority to the DEAs as compared to the role 
envisaged by PLGA 2013.
<<<PAGE=61>>>
60 
Presently, there is no specialized management cadre for the School Education Department. Subject 
Specialists, head teachers and other personnel from the teaching cadre are appointed at  
administrative posts such as AEOs, DDEOs, DEOs etc. These personnel, once posted against new 
designations, could a gain be reverted to their posts within the teaching cadre. The recruitment of  
AEOs is significant as it comes as an initiative of the School Education Department aimed at 
introducing a specialized management cadre at the service delivery tier. 
 
Human Resource Management  
Staffing gaps at the sub -provincial level remain and present capacities in some area s are  weak. 
There is a need to complete new recruitment of positions so that intended reforms can be fully 
implemented. The modality for filling positions is by transfer, whereas recruitment of new staff 
remains delayed often, which limits the ability to bring on board staff that may have needed skills 
and capacities that currently do not exist among existing staff.  
 
One of the major challenges re lated to management of personnel is the absence of a 
Performance Management Framework. Human Resource polices have been improved, yet 
traditional practices remain. Yearly performance appraisals are carried out in a traditional way 
without much regard to the performance of incumbents against various output related indicators. 
Performance evaluation and subsequent career progression of personnel is seldom based on their 
achievements against the parameters outlined by their official job descriptions and responsibilities. A 
Performance Management Framework  would be applicable to all education man agers and 
supervisors. It would include measures for performance evaluation for all tiers of employees. It 
would also outline the system of protocols for recruitment and transfer of staff . 
 
Community engagement 
The PSESP 2013 -2017 assigned high importance to the community involvement and its role in 
addressing the access challenge. For this, the PSESP outlined strategic measures to achieve the 
objectives of effective involvement of communities in schools and facilitating the enrolment and 
retention of children in schools. The PSESP recommende d a review of the current functionality and 
capacity of School Councils (SCs) to identify key weaknesses/strengths and development of a 
strategy for SC revitalization. The development of rules and regulations for SCs, as envisaged by 
PSESP, has been comple ted. The involvement of parents in the successful implementation of 
inclusive education is well documented. Community involvement is also an effective inclusive 
feature; howeve r, the parent schools‘ councils in Pakistan have not been very effective . This  
 
The role of AEOs in school improvement  
 
In the last two years, the role of AEOs has been redefined so that they have more thorough 
oversight of a small number of schools. In July 2019, the Terms of Reference for AEOs were 
further revised, and they were allocated two primary responsibilities: gen eral school support and 
support to Head Teachers and Teachers in their leadership, management and instruction roles. 
Key responsibilities include developing School -Based Action Plans (SBAPs) according to School 
Improvement Frameworks (SIF), tracking school  progress against these action plans, and 
maintaining the SIS. AEOs will also provide academic leadership by ensuring routine school -based 
assessments and their use in improving teaching and learning, carrying out classroom 
observations and providing feedb ack, ensuring CPD, accommodating the needs of students with 
disabilities, and managing School Councils. The AEO therefore provides a critical link between 
PESP priorities and their realization the school level.
<<<PAGE=62>>>
61 
demands new ways of creating involvement of communities and parents to the benefit of schools, 
teachers and the children.  
 
The School Councils, in addition to being responsible for improving various access, quality and 
infrastructure related indicators of schools, are also custodians of the Non-Salary Budget (NSB). To 
utilize effectively the Non -Salary Budget, School Councils are required to prepare a School Based 
Action Plan (SBAP). The plans and the use of the operational budget, however, have limitations , 
which stem from weak capacity of School Councils in planning, budgeting and executing the 
resources transferred under the Non-Salary Budget. 
 
Priority Programmes 5 
These priority programmes focus on realizing the objectives of decentralized implementation and 
accountability of the education system. Empowering school leaders and administrators is a key 
component of the New D eal. Communities also play an essential role to support enrolment and 
retention, especially for vulnerable children that are out of school and children with disabilities.  
 
Programme 5.1 – Devolution for high quality education 
Specific objective:  Empower local education bodies and schools to better implement 
education policies and ensure high quality education 
The PESP recognizes that schools play the central role in cultivating learners and therefore 
places emphasize on empowering schools‘ leaders as well as sub-provincial education 
managers to support decision-making closer to where decisions are implemented.  
- Decision-making will be further decentralized from the provincial level to ensure that 
education managers, especially at the markaz and tehsil levels are empowered.  
- AEOs will have more authority to support schools in their zone . Principals and teachers will 
be empowered to make decisions relevant to their context and needs. This will increase 
accountability and responsiveness while e nsuring that teachers and children have the 
resources needed to learn in conducive environments. The following steps can be taken to 
empower schools: 
- Enable schools to use data on their performance to develop  annual school 
improvement plans that ar e linked to district and sub -district education plans, but with 
targets that are decided by schools, keeping in view their needs and performance 
aspirations 
- Equip AEOs with the management tools required to oversee the timely delivery of 
school improvement plans and with the support required to overcome challenges , and 
enable them to stimulate dialogue with communities on school improvement 
- Revise the plans annually to ensure a culture of ongoing improvement 
- Encourage sub-district level meetings where school leaders and AEOs can compare 
notes and learn from each other‘s experience in school improvement 
- Ensure that teachers and parents contribute to, and have ownership of these plans 
- Timely receipt of NSB funds  will allow school leaders to exercise more control over 
meeting school needs. 
 
Programme 5.2 – Development of education system management capacities  
Specific objective: Enhance education sector leadership and management capacities at 
provincial and local levels 
Similar to teachers and trainers, education managers require regular, needs -based continuous 
support to enhance their leadership and managerial capacities.
<<<PAGE=63>>>
62 
- Professional development programmes will be created, and managers will be allocated 
time to participate in learning activities.  
- Equally important is the motivation and career pathways available to managers. A 
performance management system will be developed to ensure that managers are 
participating in targeted trainings and that their investment in professional development is 
linked to career advancement and deployment.  
- This data will also be linked to the provision of incentives, financial or non-financial, such 
as additional professional development oppor tunities, temporary appointments, or other 
career advancing opportunities, to encourage managers to prioritize learning.  
- Effective management of services requires skills in management and administration. In 
Punjab however, teachers are usually promoted as education managers – with this 
practice, schools lose experienced teachers and gain inexperie nced managers. In 2009, 
the National Education Policy recommended provincial education management cadres,  
with the premise that  such a cadre, recruite d and trained with the skills required for 
effective administration, is expected to increase the efficiency of district education 
departments. Punjab has since been exploring the concept. Education management 
cadres have successfully been introduced in Khyber Pakthunkhwa and Sindh, and 
lessons from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa demonstrate that districts led by officials from the 
management cadre continuously outperform districts led by managers selected from the 
teaching cadre.  PESP therefore proposes such a cadre. Such a cadre will also insulate 
education management fr om internal and external influence (such as exerted on 
teachers by politicians).   
- The government is in the process of introducing a Human Resource Management 
Information System (HRMIS), which will be integrated with e-transfer and SIS data. The 
New Deal proposes registering of all human resource to this MIS.  
- QAED introduced a School Leadership Development Programme for middle and 
secondary leaders in 2018; this programme has already supported 15,000 s chool 
leaders and is expected to continue till 2020. The PESP recommends routine 
management and academic leadership trainings for school heads.  
- Improved recruitment, a specialized management cadre, professional development and 
career ladders will be informed by a Performance Management Framework (PMF) for the 
province.  
- The L&NFBE D‘s DEOs participate in leadership training at the Punjab Management  
Professional Development Department (MPDD).  While these should be continued, the 
L&NFBED should ensure that these trainings respond to the spectrum of challenges 
faced by district officials working in different locat ions and different contexts in the 
province. 
 
Programme 5.3 – Community engagement 
Specific objective: Promote effective engagement of communities for school improvement 
and better education service delivery 
- School Councils will play a central role in suppor ting the delivery of quality education in 
communities.  
- These c ouncils will be restructured and supported to make needs-based request s on 
important educational issues.  
- They will work closely with education managers at sub-provincial level that will represent 
their needs with the SED.
<<<PAGE=64>>>
63 
- Online disbursement of the NSB will allow more timely and efficient use of school funds 
by School Councils to meet school needs. 
- In addition, to promote the engagement of young people from the communities, the 
PESP will promote a culture of volunteerism. 
- The L&NFBED has notified School Management Committees (SMCs) for all its centers. 
These SMCs consist of existing and retired teachers and government officials; they have 
monthly meetings. A continuous focus is enrolment, retention and attendance. The 
SMCs should also play a role in supporting learning processes and facilitating transition 
to formal schools or technical and vocational schools.  
- The complaint cell for various complaints will be integrated into one system, so that they 
are categorized and directed towards relevant authorities for resolution and follow up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Results flow diagram for Strategic Area 3
<<<PAGE=65>>>
64 
 
 
 
Strategic Programme Area 3 - Governance and Management 
New Deal 2023 Strategies 
Strengthen School Education Department 
Empower School Leaders and Administrators 
 
Priority Programmes 5 –Objective: Promote effective leadership and management of 
the education sector for better service delivery 
 
Specific Objectives Main activities 
5.1 Empower local education 
bodies and schools to better 
implement education policies 
and ensure high quality 
education 
· Strengthen autonomy of local education 
authorities/bodies and the implementation of its 
structure and policies 
· Delegation of powers to education managers, 
especially at markaz and tehsil levels 
· Strengthen the role of AEOs to support effective 
service delivery at school level 
5.2 Enhance education · Develop professional development programmes of
<<<PAGE=66>>>
65 
sector leadership and 
management capacities at 
provincial and local levels 
male and female education managers and 
professionals in educational planning and 
management 
· Develop an informed performance management 
system for educators and administrators and linked to 
incentives and professional development 
5.3 Promote effective 
engagement of communities 
for school improvement and 
better education service 
delivery 
· Engage local councils for improvement of school 
education 
 
3 Assumptions and dependencies 
 
Successful delivery of the PESP depends upon strong intra- and inter -departmental coordination, 
and leveraging the inputs of development partners. For example, to achieve aspirations for teaching 
and learning, the SED, PCTB, QAED and PEC need to work in sync with each other . Textbook and 
teacher development should be informed by assessments , and this teaching and learning process 
needs to be scaffolded by a curriculum that responds to learning requirements and standards for the 
performance of the education system. While the PESP aspires for these improvements, a 
coordinated and widely owned approach is critical.    
 
Improvements to access, retention and equity  also require a syndicated approach involving SED, 
PEF, PSSP, SpED, TEVTAs and L&NFBED.  A common mission, and e ffective communication and 
coordination around the mission is also necessary between the various layers of delivery: provincial, 
district and sub-district: on strategies, results, risks and challenges.  
 
 
Collaboration to deliver results 
 
In order to mount a collective response to the challenge posed by Article 25 -A and SDGs, the 
coordination between School Education Department and its various allied departments is of crucial 
significance. For instance, Punjab Examination Commission (PEC), in addition to conduction terminal 
exams for primary and elementary cycle, may provide valuable insights to Quaid e Azam Academy on 
Educational Development (QAED) in designing the training programs for teachers in areas where 
students continue to exhibit l ow pes.rformance. Similarly, the insights can also enable Punjab Curriculum 
and Textbook Board in designing, approving, printing and disseminating relevant and quality textbooks 
and supplementary guides keeping in view the needs of teachers and students. However, these 
departments are largely working in isolation from each other.  
 
Similarly, it is also imperative that there are linkages between School Education Department, Special 
Education Department, Non -Formal Basic Education Department, the Technical Education and 
Vocational Training Authority, Health Department and related departments for a holistic response to the 
educational needs of children at various levels and the society at large, and for ensuring health, learning 
and psychosocial wellbeing to ensure that all g irls and boys have access to quality early childhood 
development, care and pre -primary education so that they are ready for primary education (SDG -4 
taregt4.2). Distant and remote localities, where schools based on the brick and mortar model are not 
feasible, can be provided access to education through Non -Formal and Basic Literacy department. These 
children may be mainstreamed in the formal schooling system after the completion of their basic 
education. Similarly, the children opting to acquire marketable skills may have opportunity to pursue
<<<PAGE=67>>>
66 
technical and vocational education alongside or after completion of their formal education. However, 
barring a few small -scale collaborative initiatives, an effective coordination mechanism which may create 
greater system efficiency and synergy among these departments is largely missing.   
 – PESP ESA 
 
 
The SED‘s CARE is expected to improve coordination, harmonization and feedback loops among 
key SED institutions. Each institution should also consider a resource mobilization strategy to (i) 
assess the resources available to deliver PESP commitments, (ii) potential support from 
development partners, (iii) and external support and constraints.  
 
As for human resource, their capability to deliver their roles is essential. The SED will need to: 
- Assess the gaps between envisioned roles and current performance 
- Determine the shortcomings that can be improved internally (eg through C PD, additional 
onsite support, technology etc) 
- Determine the shortcomings that need to  be addressed in collaboration with other 
departments – for instance strengthening pre-service teacher education through the Higher 
Education Department  and through universities,  training on the use of technology for 
planning and management through the PITB, etc 
 
Predictability in financing is also critical. The GoPb‘s Medium Term Budgetary Framework (MTBF) 
has allocated funds to various SED institutions, based upon these institutions‘ recommendations and 
projections.  
 
The PESP has proposed an inter-department coordination committee to oversee delivery of planned 
interventions. This committee is critical for timely planning and implementation, routine tracking and 
monitoring and effective use of resources for PESP.  One of the key functions of t he committee, as 
soon as it is constituted, should be to map dependencies with other sectors and relevant institutions 
on which smooth implementation is dependant. For example, liaison with the HE D and with 
universities to inform the curriculum, design and content of pre -service teacher education, and 
liaison with the Department of Industries to determine employable skills that can be taught alongside 
the mainstream curriculum. Ideally, this committee should have representation from the Finance and 
Planning and Development departments, for timely approvals and release of funding. This 
committee should also liaise with development partners so that PESP delivery can leverage their 
support.  
 
The strategies in the PESP have been broadly articulated. The organizations responsible for delivery 
will develop operational plans with detailed activities: how the intervention s will be delivere d, how 
vertical and horizontal linkages will be established to s upport delivery, and how performance will be 
tracked and course redressal initiated, if needed . The inter-department coordination committee will 
be expected guide the development of these operational plans.  
4. Costing and Financing 
   
The cost of the  PESP 2019 -2023 has been computed by means of a projection and simulation 
model, based on the targets set by School Education, Special Education and Literacy and Non -
Formal Basic Education  departments. As table 6 shows, the costs are expected to rise throughout 
the plan implementation period, reaching over 355 billion Rupees in the last year (in constant prices 
of 2016). The bulk of the costs, which depend on enrolment and school organization targets (scale
<<<PAGE=68>>>
67 
components) would represent, at the end of pl an implementation, 0.94% of the country‘s GDP, or 
19.14% of the Punjab‘s total government budget.  
 
 
Table 6. Total costs of the PESP 2019/20-2023/24  
 
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Cost of scale components (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)  
        
316,939  
        
336,943  
        
359,612  
        
383,767  
        
423,296  
Cost of scale components (in million of PkRs, at 
2016 constant prices)  
        
269,883  
        
274,300  
        
279,346  
        
283,914  
        
298,245  
as % of Pakistan GDP 
    0.80% 0.82% 0.84% 0.87% 0.94% 
as % of Punjab global budget 
    16.35% 16.72% 17.25% 17.87% 19.14% 
Cost for Priority Programmes 1 (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)                
6,133  
             
9,051  
           
12,517  
           
16,111  
           
20,341  
Cost for Priority Programmes 2 (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)              
41,603  
           
45,792  
           
50,326  
           
55,282  
           
60,699  
Cost for Priority Programmes 3 (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)                
1,403  
             
1,584  
             
1,249  
             
1,249  
             
1,092  
Cost for Priority Programmes 4 (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)                    
572  
                 
275  
                 
175  
                 
176  
                 
176  
Cost for Priority Programmes 5 (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices)                    
764  
                 
714  
                 
410  
                 
410  
                 
310  
PESP total cost (in million of PkRs, at 
current prices) 
        
367,414  
        
394,358  
        
424,290  
        
456,995  
        
505,914  
PESP total cost (in million of PkRs, at 2016 
constant prices) 
        
312,865  
        
321,041  
        
329,588  
        
338,089  
        
356,456  
 
Note: Costs of priority programmes include activities in the implementation plan that are not scalable (i.e. not based 
on projected enrolment, etc.) 
 
 
 
Table 7. Costs of the PESP 2019/20-2023/24 by department 
 
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
PESP cost for School Education (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices) 
        
359,677  
       
385,589  
        
414,610  
        
445,903  
        
493,457  
PESP cost for School Education (in million of PkRs, 
at 2016 constant prices) 
        
306,276  
        
313,902  
        
322,069  
        
329,882  
        
347,679  
PESP cost for Special Education (in million of 
PkRs, at current prices) 
             
5,578  
             
6,172  
             
6,869  
             
7,853  
             
8,898  
PESP cost for Special Education (in million of PkRs, 
at 2016 constant prices) 
             
4,749  
             
5,024  
             
5,336  
             
5,810  
             
6,270
<<<PAGE=69>>>
68 
PESP cost for Literacy & Non-Formal Ed (in 
million of PkRs, at current prices) 
             
2,776  
             
3,307  
             
3,628  
             
4,184  
             
4,649  
PESP cost for Literacy & Non-Formal Ed (in million 
of PkRs, at 2016 constant prices) 
             
2,364  
             
2,692  
             
2,818  
             
3,095  
             
3,276  
 
 
As Table 8 shows, the costs of the plan, including scale components and priority programmes, could 
be absorbed by the budget forecasted for the three education departments combined, until 2020/21. 
The last t hree years of plan implementation, however, would require the mobilization of additional 
resources. In 2021/22 the funding gap is estimated to be 2.07% of the expected budget for the three 
departments; in 2022/23 it would rise to 4.97%; and in 2023/24 the funding gap would climb up to 
11.25%. 
 
Table 8. Funding gap (Primary Budget Balance) of PESP 2019/20-2023/24 
 
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Total PBB (in million of PkRs, at current prices)               
6,103  
                 
618  
-           
8,613  
-         
21,623  
-         
51,161  
Total PBB (in million of PkRs, at 2016 constant 
prices) 
             
5,197  
                 
503  
-           
6,690  
-         
15,997  
-         
36,047  
PBB as % of Pakistan GDP 0.02% 0.00% -0.02% -0.05% -0.11% 
PBB as % of Punjab global budget 0.31% 0.03% -0.41% -1.01% -2.31% 
PBB as % of Punjab budget for School Ed, 
Special Ed and L&NFBE 1.63% 0.16% -2.07% -4.97% -11.25% 
 
Note: PBB = Budget - Costs of the Plan 
 
 
The funding gap affects the education departments quite differently, a reflection of their own levels of 
budget allocation. While the costs of the Plan‘s strategies could be absorbed by the current budget 
allocation to the SED  until 202 0/21, the interventions to be implemented by Special Education 
Department and by Literacy and Non -Formal Basic Education Department will require substantial 
additional resource mobilization right from the start. The funding gap resulting from the interventions 
proposed for Special Education would be 44% in the first year of Plan implementation, rising to 
102% in the last year of impl ementation. In the case of L&NF BED interventions, the funding gap is 
even more substantial. A careful resource mobilization strategy would be required to undertake all 
proposals. 
 
Table 9. Funding gap (Primary Budget Balance) of PESP 2019/20-2023/24 by department 
 
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
PBB for School Education (in million of PkRs, at 
current prices)                
8,480  
             
3,817  
-           
4,697  
-         
16,466  
-         
44,819  
PBB for School Education (in million of PkRs, at 
2016 constant prices)                
7,221  
             
3,107  
-           
3,648  
-         
12,182  
-         
31,578
<<<PAGE=70>>>
69 
PBB as % of Budget for School Education   2.30% 0.98% -1.15% -3.83% -9.99% 
        PBB for Special Education (in million of PKRs, at 
current prices)   -           
1,717  
-           
2,159  
-           
2,718  
-           
3,577  
-           
4,494  
PBB for Special Education (in million of PKRs, at 
2016 constant prices)   -           
1,462  
-           
1,758  
-           
2,111  
-           
2,646  
-           
3,166  
PBB as % of Budget for Special Education   -44.46% -53.80% -65.46% -83.64% -
102.02% 
        PBB for Literacy & NFBED (in million of PKRs, at 
current prices)   -           
1,277  
-           
1,749  
-           
2,016  
-           
2,524  
-           
2,939  
PBB for Literacy & NFBED (in million of PKRs, at 
2016 constant prices)   -           
1,087  
-           
1,424  
-           
1,566  
-           
1,867  
-           
2,071  
PBB as % of Budget for Literacy & NFEd   -85.20% -
112.31% 
-
125.09% 
-
152.04% 
-
171.90% 
 
 
5. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is essential to effectively and efficiently  manage the overall 
implementation of the PESP.  It is important for a robust system to be in place and guided by clear 
objectives and principles. Strong monitoring and evaluation practices that are transparent and 
objective contribute to a credible process  that supports the improvement of the education system 
overall. It provides the evidence-base to make informed decisions that lead to greater accountability 
and improvements in teaching and learning, which ultimately contributes to improve student 
outcomes. This chapter outlines the monitoring and evaluation objectives, principles, management 
structures and processes. It also provides the results framework by which the plan will be monitored 
and evaluated throughout its implementation.  
 
M&E Objectives 
 Support improvements in the design and implementation of education activities 
 Support evidence-based decision-making to inform policy and programme  
 Facilitate policy dialogue between government of Punjab education stakeholder 
 Generate learning to establish good practices and develop quality improvements of teaching 
and learning processes 
 
M&E Principles 
 Transparency – Processes and practices will be openly shared with relevant stakeholders. 
The data and findings collected during M& E practices will be made available. Regularly 
reporting will be shared and posted for public use to ensure that all stakeholders are 
informed about the progress in the education system.  
 Accountability – Departments, agencies and partners will be responsible for implementation 
of the plan and its activities according to established procedures and timelines. Regular 
reviews will be conducted to ensure that all implementing entities have executive their 
responsibilities in a timely and efficient way.   
 Resulted-based Monitoring – M&E practices will be  demand driven  and focused on 
achieving targets and outcomes as identified in the PESP results framework
<<<PAGE=71>>>
70 
 Equity and gender equality  – Data will be disaggregated to ensure that actions designed 
based on analysis of data benefits all boys and girls, regardless of their situation. This will 
include, but not limited to, sex, age, location, disability, and other relevant data points.  
 Objectivity – M&E processes will be designed based on technical requirements. Analysis of 
data will be based on standard practices with the aim of informing policy design and 
programme improvement. Interpretations will be based on evidence and procedures will be 
well documented.  
 
5.1 Monitoring Structure 
Monitoring and evaluation is the responsibility of all stakeholders involved in the implementation of 
the PESP. It is important activities and results are well coordinated between the SED, SpED and 
L&NFBED. To ensure coordination and collaboration and to reduce duplication of effort, a monitoring 
and evaluation technical working group (M&E TWG) will be established and chaired by the SED. The 
M&E TWG will include representatives from each of the three governme nt agencies as well as 
development partner, civil society and othe r government agencies, such as TVET and Health 
Department. The M&E TWG will meet on a regular basis and will be respons ible for preparing the 
programmes for the various monitoring and evaluation activities, ensuring alignment activities, and 
guidance for the sector.  
 
5.1.1. M&E activities 
During the implementation of the PESP, monitoring will be on-going, and evaluation will take place at 
strategic bench marks within the timeframe of the Plan. The most important monitoring activities 
include: Routine, Quarterly and Annual Reviews. Additionally, mid-term and final evaluations will be 
conducted.   
 
Routine: 
Routine monitoring activities occur at various levels of government including at the provincial level 
and district level. Streamlined responsibilities of the AEOs and MEAs will ensure efficient school-
level monitoring and ensure the necessary feedback loop to head teachers and teacher s. At the 
provincial and district levels, education officers in each department will follow up on implementation 
of the annual work plans. District Review Meetings will be held regularly and organized by the district 
education office.   
 
 
Quarterly:  
Led by the M&E technical working group, official meetings will be head on a quarterly basis to review 
implementation of the annual work plans and achievement against targets in the PESP. This will be 
an opportunity to engage government, development partner s, civil society and other stakeholders in 
discuss progress achieved and if necessary, agree upon corrective measures to ensure continued 
implementation.  
 
Annual Reports and Reviews 
Current there are many data systems collecting information across the sector. An integrated 
education management system is proposed to harmonize data collection. Data from the integrated 
management information system be will used in producing the annual se ctor performance report. 
This analysis will serve as the basic document for an annual joint education sector review (JESR), 
which will assess achievements and shortcomings, and agree on improvements.
<<<PAGE=72>>>
71 
The joint education  sector review  shall include representations of SED, SpEd, L&NF BED, 
Development Partners, Civil Society, Private Sector and other education stakeholders to review 
progress and agree on priorities for the next year.   
 
Mid-term Evaluation 
A mid-term evaluation will be conducted in 2021 at the half way point of the PESP. This will be an 
opportunity for all stakeholders to comprehensively review the PESP again the established targets 
and introduce changes to the PES P, if necessary. The mid -term evaluation will be a formative 
feedback into programme implementation to improve performance.  
 
Final Evaluation:  
A final evaluation will be conducted in the final year of the PESP to assess overall achievement of 
the plan. The final evaluation will be summative, not only to assess impacts and outcomes , 
relevance, cost-effectiveness, and sustainability, but also to analyze the reasons results have been 
achieved or not achieved, and to derive lessons for policy revision and for preparing the next plan. 
This will also serve as a first step in preparing for the next five-year sector plan.   
 
Annual reporting as well and the Mid -term and Final evaluations will assess how Punjab is 
progressing against international target as well, including the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), particularly SDG 4. Indicators will be integrated into the M anagement Information System  
will contribute to the provincial and national reports.  
 
5.1.2. Management Information System  
SED currently relies on the Punjab Education Management Information Sys tem (PEMIS). Other 
databases exist such as the L&NF BED management information system  as part of this Plan, an 
integrated plan will be developed and used to collect, manage and use data for evidence base 
planning and management of the education system. Data from the private sector shall also be 
included in the integrated management information system.  
 
5.2 Key Performance Indicators and Programme indicators 
The Results Framework  provides the overall blueprint for monitoring  and evaluating  the 
implementation of the plan and demonstrating achievement of established targets. The Results 
Framework is organized by strategic priorities, plans and programmes objectives. Key performance 
indicators have been identified to demonstrate  achievement for the system overall. In some cases, 
new indicators have been introduced and will require new tools and procedures to be development, 
in other cases, collection procedures are well established.
<<<PAGE=73>>>
72 
 
Table 10. Key Performance Indicators 
 
S.No. KPIs Gender Baseline Mid-Term 
Target 
End Target 
2017-18 2021-22 2023-24 
A. Finance and Management 
A1 Percentage of provincial 
budget allocated for 
education 
- 17.50% 20.00% 22.00% 
A2 Joint Education Sector 
Reviews conducted 
- 0 2 4 
A3 Utilization of non-salary 
budgets at school level 
- 90% schools 
with 50% 
utilization on 
current year 
release 
100% schools 
with 70% 
utilization on 
current year 
release 
100% schools 
with 90% 
utilization on 
current year 
release 
B. Access and progression 
 
B1 School Entry 
 
B1.1 Net Intake Rate to Primary 
School 
Boys 55.50% 57.75% 60% 
Girls 56.90% 58.95% 61% 
Total 56.20% 58.35% 60.5% 
B2 School Readiness 
 
B2.1 Percentage of children 
attending first grade who 
attended pre-school in 
previous year 
Boys 90.60% 91.30% 92% 
Girls 90.70% 91.35% 92% 
Total 90.65% 91.33% 92% 
B3 School Attendance 
 
B3.1 Net Attendance Ratio (NAR) 
Primary 
Boys 65.80% 70.40% 75% 
Girls 65.10% 70.05% 75% 
Total 65.40% 70.20% 75% 
B3.2 GPI NAR Primary  0.99 1 1 
B3.3 Adjusted Net Attendance 
Ratio Lower Secondary 
Boys 35.90% 40.45% 45% 
Girls 37.60% 41.55% 45.5% 
Total 36.70% 40.98% 45.25% 
B3.4 GPI Adjusted NAR Lower 
Secondary 
 1.05 1.03 1.01 
B3.5 Net Attendance Ratio Upper 
Secondary 
Boys 27.80% 33.90% 40.0% 
Girls 30.00% 34.50% 39.0% 
Total 28.90% 34.20% 39.50% 
B3.6 GPI NAR Upper Secondary   1.08 1.02 0.98
<<<PAGE=74>>>
73 
B4 Transition and Completion 
 
B4.1 Primary School Completion 
Rate 
Boys 47.3% 55.7% 55.9% 
Girls 47.6% 57.1% 56.9% 
B4.2 Transition Rate to Secondary 
Education  
Boys 89.7% 91.6% 92.3% 
Girls 84.5% 86.6% 87.3% 
B4.3 Middle Education Completion 
Rate 
Boys 39.0% 47.3% 51.4% 
Girls 36.6% 48.3% 52.8% 
C. Quality 
 
C1 Grade 5 exam performance (mean score) 
 
C1.1 English Total 59 61.5 64 
C1.2 Science Total 56 58.5 61 
C1.3 Urdu Total 63 65.5 68 
C1.4 Mathematics Total 61 63.5 66 
C2 Grade 8 exam performance (mean score) 
 
C2.1 English Total 62 64.5 67 
C2.1 Science Total 53 55.5 58 
C2.3 Urdu Total 73 75.5 78 
C2.4 Mathematics Total 52 54.5 57 
C3 Teacher qualifications 
C3.1 % teachers participating in in-
service training per year 
Total 90,000 Not provided  Not provided  
D Special Education  
 
D1 Growth in number of 
Schools/Centres 
Total 294 6.5% 13.5% 
D2 Growth in enrolment - Katchi/ 
Primary 
Boys 16,020 18.5% 37% 
Girls 9,123 21% 42.5% 
Total 25,143 19.5% 39% 
D3 Growth in enrolment -Middle Boys 2,307 15% 30% 
Girls 1,489 17% 34% 
Total 3,796 15.5% 31.5% 
D4 Growth in enrolment – 
Secondary 
Boys 1,105 22% 44.5% 
Girls 549 32% 63.5% 
Total 1,654 25.5% 51% 
D5 % teachers participating in in-
service training per year 
Total 29% 39.50% 50% 
D6 % of schools with functional Total 74% 79.50% 85%
<<<PAGE=75>>>
74 
local councils 
E Literacy & Non-Formal Basic Education  
 
E1 Growth in number of Literacy 
Centres 
Total 2,160 25% 50% 
E2 Growth in Pass Outs of 
Literacy Centres 
Male 3,240 25% 50% 
Female 29,160 25% 50% 
Total 32,400 25% 50% 
E3 Growth in number of Non 
Formal Basic Education 
Schools (NFBES) 
Total 13,279 10% 20% 
E4 Enrolment of OOSC (miss 
outs & school drop outs)– 
Primary Education level 
Boys 180,000 10% 20% 
Girls 220,000 10% 20% 
Total 400,000 10% 20% 
E5 Number of Literates through 
Non Formal Basic Education/ 
Primary Schools 
Boys 210,060 10% 20% 
Girls 256,740 10% 20% 
Total 466,800 10% 20% 
E6 Mainstreaming into formal 
schools (Grade 1-5) 
Total 60,000 5% 10% 
E7 Grade 5 PEC pass outs Boys 3,060 10% 20% 
Girls 3,740 10% 20% 
Total 6,800 10% 20% 
E8 Formative Assessment for 
quality assurance (Urdu, 
English, Mathematics, GK, 
Science, Social Studies & 
Islamiyat) 
Total 60% 70% 80% 
E9 % NFBE/PS teachers‘ training 
(On-job) Total 100% 100% 100% 
E10 Non Formal Education 
Institution Management 
Committees at local level 
Total 
100% 100% 100%
<<<PAGE=76>>>
75 
 
Table 11. Outcome indicators for priority programmes 
 
Strategic area/ specific objectives Indicators Baseline Target 2023/24 
STRATEGIC AREA 1: QUALITY AND LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Objective 1. Improve 
teaching and learning 
practices for better learning 
outcomes 
 
% of girls and boys at all levels achieving a 
minimum proficiency level against a 
standardized framework  
n/a At least 40% girls and boys at 
all levels achieving a minimum 
proficiency level against the 
standardized framework 
     
1.1 Introduce standardized recruitment 
and deployment of educational 
practitioners and managers at all 
levels 
% of newly recruited and deployed teachers are 
based on new standards n/a 100 % 
1.2 Provide quality pre-service, 
induction and in-service training to 
education professionals 
% of teachers and managers (M/F) undergoing 
trainings in the CPD programme as per the 
framework of the respective departments* 
 
100% 
coverage of 
teachers and 
managers in 
SED 
 
100% coverage of teachers in 
SED, Special ED, L&NFBED  
 
 
% of teachers appraised as defined in the CPD 
programme  
 
n/a At least 50% teachers 
appraised 
1.3 Make available quality textbooks, 
and other teaching and learning 
materials 
% of schools that receive textbooks on time 
 
 
 100% 
 
100% of schools receive 
textbooks on time  
 
 
% of schools that receive teaching and learning 
materials n/a 
100% of schools have 
teaching and learning 
materials
<<<PAGE=77>>>
76 
1.4 Develop a quality learning 
assessment system based on 
standards, with support mechanisms 
and feedback loops between the 
classroom, school and policy levels 
Quality learning assessment system in place  Not in place In place 
% of schools that implement new formative 
assessment process n/a 100% 
1.5 Promote critical, scientific, 
analytical thinking in all spheres of 
education 
% of students that demonstrate 21st Century 
skills (measured according to defined standards 
in corresponding curriculum) 
 n/a  50% (M/F) 
1.6 Promote extra- and co-curricular 
activities and life-skill based education 
to ensure wholesome personality 
development 
% of schools that deliver extra and co-curricular 
activities  n/a 100% coverage in all schools 
1.7 Promote inclusion of elements of 
sustainable development and 
sustainable lifestyles, human rights, 
gender equality, environment-friendly 
behaviour, culture of peace and non-
violence, tolerance, democratic values, 
social cohesion, global citizenship, and 
appreciation of cultural diversity and of 
culture‘s contribution to sustainable 
development into teaching and 
learning activities 
Extent to which (i) global citizenship education 
and (ii) education for sustainable development, 
including gender equality and human rights, are 
mainstreamed at all levels in: curriculum; 
teacher training and student assessment system 
 n/a 
All elements incorporated in 
curriculum, teacher training 
and student assessment 
system 
1.8 Introduce technical, vocational and 
technology-oriented educational 
streams 
# of schools that offer technical, vocational and 
technology-oriented educational streams at 
secondary level keeping in view the local need 
and in synergy with local industry 
 n/a 
1,000 secondary schools 
offering technical vocation and 
education 
1.9 Introduce a qualification 
equivalence mechanism for students  % of students that are granted an equivalency  n/a  20% 
STRATEGIC AREA 2: ACCESS, RETENTION AND EQUITY 
 
Objective 2. Provide adequate and 
sufficient access to education for 
children from pre-primary to 
Net Intake Rate to 
Primary School  
Boys 55.5% 60% 
Girls 56.9% 61% 
Total 56.2% 60.5%
<<<PAGE=78>>>
77 
secondary, including marginalized 
children Net Attendance Ratio 
Primary 
Boys 65.8% 75% 
Girls 65.1% 75% 
Total 65.4% 75% 
Adjusted Net 
Attendance Ratio 
Lower Secondary 
Boys 35.90% 45% 
Girls 37.60% 45.5% 
Total 36.70% 45.25% 
Net Attendance Ratio 
Upper Secondary 
Boys 27.80% 40.0% 
Girls 30.00% 39.0% 
Total 28.90% 39.50% 
Growth in enrolment Special Education - Katchi/ 
Primary 
Boys 37% 
Girls 42.5% 
Total 39% 
Growth in enrolment Special Education -Middle 
 
Boys 30% 
Girls 34% 
Total 31.5% 
Growth in enrolment Special Education -
Secondary 
 
Boys 44.5% 
Girls 63.5% 
Total 51% 
Growth in number of Literates through Non 
Formal Basic Education/ Primary Schools 
 
Boys 20% 
Girls 20% 
Total 20% 
Growth in enrolment of OOSC at Primary 
Education level 
Boys 20% 
Girls 20% 
Total 20% 
2.1 Increase access and retention 
from ECE to post-secondary education 
% of children attending 
first grade who 
attended pre-school in 
previous year 
Boys 90.60% 92% 
Girls 90.70% 92% 
Total 90.65% 92% 
Gross Intake Rate Boys 81.0% 83.2%
<<<PAGE=79>>>
78 
(Primary) Girls 78.8% 80.2% 
Primary School 
Completion Rate 
Boys 47.3% 55.9% 
Girls 47.6% 56.9% 
Transition Rate to 
Secondary Education 
Boys 89.7% 92.3% 
Girls 84.5% 87.3% 
Middle Education 
Completion Rate 
Boys 39.0% 51.4% 
Girls 36.6% 52.8% 
2.2 Ensure provision of functional and 
adequate basic school facilities; 
including disability-friendly 
infrastructure in all schools 
% of schools following the minimum for 
educational infrastructure; including disability 
friendly infrastructure (Physical infrastructure 
school index)ii n/a 
50% of all secondary schools 
 
2.3 Enhance access to NFE for 
children and adolescents, youth/adults 
and ensure mainstreaming of children 
in formal schools 
% of non-formal education students 
mainstreamed into formal education 
60,000  10%  
2.4 Increase access for marginalized 
children including minorities, 
transgender and others from ECE to 
secondary education 
% schools physically adapted for children with 
special needs  n/a 50% 
Objective 3. Promote quality 
education in a safe, inclusive and 
conducive learning environment for 
children 
% of schools classified as safe n/a  75%  
3.1 Promote safe, clean, green, 
healthy and hygienic physical 
environment incorporating elements of 
disaster risk management 
% of schools that are upgraded to disaster 
prone standards  n/a  50%  
% of schools that meet minimum standards of 
physical environment   n/a  50%  
3.2 Ensure safe and protective 
behavioural practices 
% of schools which have initiated safe and 
protective behavioural practices in the 
classroom 
 
 n/a  100%
<<<PAGE=80>>>
79 
% teachers trained in prevention of child abuse 
and other harmful discriminatory practices  n/a  75% 
3.3 Establish an enabling environment 
for children with special needs in 
mainstream schools and institutions 
 % of schools with sufficient number of teachers 
trained in special needs 
 
n/a 
50% 
  
% of teachers of secondary schools who have 
received special needs training  n/a  20% 
STRATEGIC AREA 3: GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT 
Objective 4. Strengthen good 
governance of the education sector 
for equitable access and high-
quality education  
 
 
% of private schools that are registered with 
SED  n/a  90% 
Utilization of non-salary budgets at school level 
90% schools 
with 50% 
utilization 
100% schools with 90% 
utilization 
Joint Education Sector Review 
 
0 4 
4.1. Strengthen governance and 
coordination frameworks within the 
public education system, other line 
departments and with private providers 
Regulatory framework for education services 
private providers and PPPs in place Not in place In place 
4.2. Enhance planning, monitoring and 
evaluation across all levels for 
evidence-based decision-making 
Number of annual sector performance reports 
produced 0  At least 4 
Number of SDG-4 reports produced 0 At least 4 
4.3. Improve financial planning and 
management in the education sector 
% of education managers demonstrating 
proficiency in financial planning and 
management responsibilities 
 n/a  100% 
Objective 5. Promote effective 
leadership and management of the 
education sector for better service 
delivery 
% of schools implementing School Based Action 
Plans  n/a  80% 
% education managers trained in leadership and 
management 
  
100%  100%
<<<PAGE=81>>>
80 
5.1 Empower local education bodies 
and schools to better implement 
education policies and ensure high 
quality education 
% of local education bodies with approved 
implementation plans  n/a 50% 
5.2 Enhance education sector 
leadership and management 
capacities at all levels 
% of education managers that participate in one 
or more professional development programmes 
annually 
 
100% 
(15,000)  80% 
5.3 Promote effective engagement of 
communities for school improvement 
and better education service delivery % of districts with mobilized school councils 100%  100%  
 
 
Notes: iA standardized framework will be established to reflect minimum proficiency standards. These standards will be specific to formal, NFBE and Special 
Education, and also vary for different levels of education. ii Applicable to SED and Special Education Departments.  
Where no baseline values are available (n/a) , a measurement will be undertaken in the first year of implementation of the Pl an to produce  the corresponding 
values.
<<<PAGE=82>>>
81 
 
Annexes 
 
 
I. Summary Education Sector Analysis
<<<PAGE=83>>>
82 
 
I. Summary Education Sector Analysis 
 
 
An Education Situation Analysis (ESA) was conducted to identify the key achievements and 
challenges of the education sector in the Punjab. This chapter includes a summary of the findings of 
the situation analysis.   
 
1.1 The context of education development in Punjab 
 
Demographic pressures will continue to stress Punjab and its education system, despite 
decelerating population growth. Population growth rate in Punjab shows signs of deceleration. 
However, with an annual po pulation growth rate of 2.13, the impact on education service delivery is 
significant. Punjab has a young population: more than one -fourth of the total provincial population is 
of school -going age. The number of children 5 -16 years old is furthermore expec ted to continue 
growing in the medium -term. In addition to overall population levels, two other demographic 
characteristics make educational planning in Punjab complex: most of the 110 million people living in 
this province reside in the rural area (63.3%); and internal migration is very significant. 
 
 
Figure 18: Projected population of 5-16 years old in Punjab, 2013-14 – 2023-24 (millions) 
 
Note: population projections based on Pakistan Population Census 1998, and may change as a 
result of Census 2017 
 
 
Punjab presents higher human development indicators than other provinces in Pakistan. 
However, there are very sharp regional disparities within the province. Employing a multi -
dimensional measure of poverty, which takes into account not only income levels, but also indicators 
related to health, education and standards of living, it emerges that rural areas of the province are 
more deprived as compared to the urban areas. While 6.3% of the population in urban areas of 
15.5 15.9 16.3 16.8 17.2 17.6 18.1 18.6 19.1 19.6 20.1 
16.6 17 17.5 17.9 18.4 18.9 19.4 19.9 20.4 [VALUE] 21.5 
32.1 32.9 33.8 34.7 35.6 36.5 37.5 38.5 39.5 40.6 41.6 
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
5-9 years 10-16 years Total
<<<PAGE=84>>>
83 
Punjab can be co nsidered poor under this multidimensional index, the incidence soars to 43.7% of 
the population in rural areas. Southern districts of the province are more deprived than the central 
and northern districts. A breakdown of multi -dimensional poverty highlight s that deprivation in 
education (43%) and living standards (30.5%) are the major contributors to multidimensional poverty 
index in the province. 37 
 
Though Punjab has made efforts to increase literacy rates, women continue to be more 
disadvantaged than men,  particularly in rural areas. Overall, literacy levels are low and have 
varied very little since 2008 -09. Only 62% of the population above 10 years old in the province are 
literate: 72% in the case of men and just 54% in the case of women. The challenge is much bigger in 
rural areas, where 66% of men are literate and only 44% of women. 
 
Children‘s health and nutrition are important aspects of school preparedness. Indicators for the 
overall country and for Punjab in particular suggest that by the time children enter school, 
their health and nutrition are already compromised, to the point of affecting their chances of 
learning or remaining in school.  Firstly, child mortality rates are above other countries in the 
subcontinent. Infant mortality rate in th e province is 75 children per 1000 live births, while the 
mortality rate of children under age five is 95 per 1000 live births, compared to average rates for 
South Asia of 40.7 and 50.8 respectively.  
 
Secondly, a high percentage of children are underweigh t, stunted or wasted, with great disparities 
between districts.  Almost 30% of children in Punjab are stunted and 10% are severely so, reflecting 
the accumulative effect of chronic malnutrition. A total of 14% of children are underweight, and 4% 
severely so. Dera Ghazi Khan and Bahawalpur register the highest rates of children underweight 
and stunted, followed by Multan, Sahiwal and Sargodha.38 
 
The labour market is characterized by a high level of informality, low participation of women 
in the labour force, and high levels of youth unemployment and disenfranchising. Investing in 
women’s education would produce the highest returns.  At 54%, the proportion of the working -
age population of Punjab that is employed is quite low. However, the disaggregation of this  average 
by gender reveals that less than 30% of the women of working age actually are employed compared 
to 80% of men. 
 
Almost one in ten children 10 to 14 years work, a proportion that rises to nearly 13% in rural areas. 
Over 6% of children 10 -17 years a re engaged in hazardous work. Most employment is in the 
agriculture sector, which has the lowest productivity and growth performance. What is more, almost 
three in four workers in Punjab are part of the informal economy, regardless of gender and 
geographical area. Nearly 24% of the workers are unpaid family helpers. The distribution of 
unemployment by educational levels is characterized by a U -shape. The highest proportion of 
unemployed is concentrated among those who have less than primary education or who  hold a 
degree. This is related to the  
 
Youth unemployment rate doubles the overall unemployment rate. Moreover, a large proportion 
of young people –29%-- are neither in school nor working. For women the proportion rises to 47%39. 
                                                 
37 Planning Commission of Pakistan, Government of Pakistan (GOP). 2016. Multidimensional Poverty in Pakistan. 
UNDP, OPHI and GOP, Islamabad. 
38 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2017; UNICEF MICS 2014.  
39 All labour market figures are from: ILO (2017). Decent Work Country Profile Pakistan.
<<<PAGE=85>>>
84 
Studies of the rate of return to educational investment show that each year of schooling raises salary 
by approximately 5.4 percent in Punjab. The private rate of return in the urban labour market is much 
higher than the prevailing in the rural market, and overall returns are quit e high in the service sector 
compared to agriculture or industry. Workers with Tertiary Technical education have witnessed the 
highest increases in weekly wages in the period 1991 -2013. Various studies have found that 
investing in women‘s‘ education would contribute significantly to improve economic conditions for 
women and the overall economy.40 
 
All these aspects have serious implications for the education sector, the value of the education in the 
labour market as perceived by households, and the likelihood of creating a skilled workforce that can 
contribute to the economic development of Punjab and Pakistan.  
 
1.2. Structure of Education in Punjab 
 
Article 25A of the Constitution requires the State to provide access to twelve years of free and 
compulsory education to all children between 5 -16 years old. The 18th Constitutional Amendment 
decentralized education to the federal and provincial level. Pro vincial governments are responsible 
for providing education from pre-school to higher secondary level, as well as delegated key thematic 
responsibilities including education policy, curriculum, planning and standards setting to the 
provinces. In Punjab, Sc hool Education Department (SED) has the responsibility for ensure quality 
teaching and learning for formal public education across the province.  
 
Non-formal Education is administered by the Literacy and Non -Formal Basic Education Department 
(L&NFBED). It is mandated to improve adult literacy and provide non -formal basic education to out-
of-school and the socially disadvantaged children of the province. The department complements the 
SED in providing educational opportunities to students who have either dro pped out for longer 
periods or have never enrolled in formal schooling. 
 
The Special Education Department (SpED) currently runs special education institutes/centres/ 
colleges and vocational institutes catering for the educational needs to children of diffe rent age 
groups and educational levels (primary, middle, secondary and higher secondary). 
 
Vocational training is implemented across various formal and private sector providers. While there 
isn‘t one private sector organization response for private education the Punjab Education Foundation 
(PEF) has played a collaborative role with SED.  
 
                                                 
40 Jamal (2015). “Private returns to Education in Pakistan – A statistical Investigation”, Center for Business and 
Economic Research Working paper: 15(2)
<<<PAGE=86>>>
85 
 
Figure 19: Punjab Education System 
Source: Author 
 
1.3 Equitable access to education 
 
Over the last five years, Punjab has shown progress in school participation, but disparities 
by gender, location and socio -economic status persist, and children are less likely to 
continue beyond primary school grades. With a fertility rate that remains hi gh and such a high 
proportion of young population, the education system in Punjab will continue to endure a large 
pressure to incorporate the increasing number of children under 16 years old and thus fulfil the 
mandate of the Article 25A of the Constitutio n. In this context, the improvements in terms of 
increased school participation in the past five years are commendable, although there is still much 
need to intensify efforts to expand school coverage, especially before and after primary education, 
and ensure more equitable access. 
 
Overall, a higher proportion of children ages 5 to 16 years were attending school in 2017 regardless 
of grade compared to 2012 , according to various surveys conducted during this period . However, it 
is those of primary school age who are more likely to be attending school, compared to older 
children. School access becomes increasingly limited as children age and have to transit to higher 
education cycles. 
 
Punjab registers a high degree o f entry to primary education.  The Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) at 
pre-primary level has increased from 82% in 2014 -15 to 87.5% in 2016 -17, which is four points 
higher than the national average. Moreover, the Gross Intake Rate (GIR) to grade 1 has remained 
above 100% since 2014.  41 The GER at primary level was 93.2% in 2015 -16, although it had 
decreased since 2013-4. 
                                                 
41 Pre-primary GER and GIR as recorded in Pakistan Education Statistics 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17.
<<<PAGE=87>>>
86 
 
However, the GER drops considerably at secondary level , indicating lower transition and retention 
rates at post -primary levels. In 2015 -16, the G ER in middle education reached 56%, and that of 
secondary and higher secondary combined was just over 51%.  
 
Furthermore, GERs mask significant internal inefficiency in education, including an important 
proportion of children who are above the age for thei r grade. Considering the differences between 
the GER and the Net Enrolment Rates (NER), the issue of overage children is already apparent in 
primary school. According to the PSLM data, the NER at primary level in Punjab was 58.8% in 2015-
16 compared to a G ER of 93.2%. Moreover, NERs drop considerably after this level of education. 
Just 23.8% of children 10-12 years old are enrolled in middle education, and 27.4% of children aged 
13 to 16 years are in secondary education. In all cases, the rates fell between 2013-14 and 2015-16. 
This shows a significant drop in student enrolment at the correct ages for their level as we move up 
the educational ladder.42 
 
A deeper look into the enrolment rates illustrates the various types of disparities that exist in access 
to school in Punjab. Though this province fares better than others in terms of providing girls with 
opportunities to access education, gender differenc es in enrolment rates persist, especially after 
middle education. The gap in school coverage between urban and rural areas is even starker.  The 
parity index by geographical area both in terms of GER and of NER reveals a clear disadvantage of 
children in rural areas. In turn, these differences increase along the education cycle. While access to 
primary education is high overall, just 84 children in rural areas are enrolled at this level per 100 
children in urban areas (considering GERs). In middle education,  the proportion falls to 75, and in 
secondary education (lower and upper) to just over 57 children in rural areas per 100 of their peers 
in urban areas.43 
 
Disparities in enrolment are also significant at district level. At 40%, Bahawalpur records the lowes t 
NER at primary level in the province. The difference with the district with highest primary NER, 
Layyah, is a staggering 42%. Amid overall low rates of access to post -primary education, district 
differences are still evident in middle education and matri c. District Chakwal registers the highest 
NER in middle education (42%), but the gap with the district with lowest NER at this level, 
Muzaffargarh, is 30%. Similarly, the gap between the highest and lowest NER in matric at district 
level is 20% (29% for district Lahore, compared to just 9% for district Bahawalnagar). 
 
Socio-economic status emerges as one of the clearest markers of disadvantage for access to 
school. A recent report has found that household wealth is largely correlated with school enrolment 
in Punjab.44 The disparity surfaces already in primary school and becomes even more substantial in 
the next stages of the education cycle. The gap in enrolment between the poorest and the richest 
children is 22% in Primary GER and 97.5% in Secondary GER (see  the table below). Nevertheless, 
the report founds some improvements in education participation for the poorest quintile, albeit with 
relatively low levels of completion of the education cycles. 
 
Children from poorer households are far less ready or equipp ed to gain from schooling compared to 
their better-off counterparts. They are, for instance, more likely to have one or both parents who are 
                                                 
42 GERs and NERs as recorded in PSLM 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. 
43 Disparities as computed from latest PSLM survey. 
44 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector  Programme. Draft
<<<PAGE=88>>>
87 
illiterate and therefore get little or no support at home in terms of their studies; and they also show 
higher incidence of malnourishment. 
 
Table 2: GER. By expenditure quintile and level of education (%), 2015-1645 
1=poorest 84.1 18.3 
2 88.7 39.3 
3 99.4 54.2 
4 100.9 75.6 
5=richest 106.2 115.8 
All 93.2 51.3 
 
Just over half of the children enrolled in schools across Punjab are in government-managed schools. 
Considering both government and Punjab Education Foundation (PEF) schools, the proportion of 
children enrolled in the public sector rises to 62%. The Punjab Education Foundation was 
established as a public-private partnership (PPP) with the government to expand access to children, 
primarily in rural and hard to reach areas. Enrolment in PPP schools swelled by 121% since 2012, 
an indication of the Government of Punjab‘s strategy to expand p ublic-private partnerships. 
Enrolment in the public sector has grown by 14% over the last five years, with a significant increase 
of 9% just in the last year to 2017-18. However, progression within public schools is characterized by 
high internal inefficiency.46  
 
For every 100 students enrolled in Katchi grade, only 28 students remain until Grade 10  in 
government schools. The first loss is registered right at the beginning of the education cycle, in the 
transition from Katchi to Grade 1 of primary education . At this point, 36% of children enrolled in 
public schools either drop out or transfer to private institutions. Of those who continue in public 
schools, just 61% will reach Grade 5. Although the transition to middle  level education is quite high 
(over 96%), by the time children reach Grade 8, 15% would have left in three years. And between 
Grade 6 and Grade 10, one in four children would have left public schools. Among others, the major 
reasons for low survival rates include shortage of nearby schools, te acher shortage and 
absenteeism, poor teaching quality, poor school environment, family poverty, insecurity, and natural 
disasters.47 
 
                                                 
45 Source: e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft  
46 As flow rates are only available for government-managed schools, the related analysis is limited to these, and is 
based on Annual School Census data. 
47 AEPAM (2014). Pakistan Education for All Review Report 2015 .
<<<PAGE=89>>>
88 
 
Figure 20: Survival rates in public schools 
 
 
Even as public and private schools expand access, the number of children out of school continues to 
be very significant in Punjab. Estimates of the out of school children (OOSC) vary substantially 
depending on the data source and the methodology used to perform the estimation.48 Employing the 
methodology developed by UNESCO-UIS and UNICEF on the PSLM, results in a total of 8.27 million 
children between 5 and 16 years old out of school in 2013 -14 in Punjab. The estimates in the 
Pakistan Education Statistics r eport put the number in 2016 -17 at 10.5 million. In both cases, the 
highest proportion of excluded children can be found in the age group corresponding to secondary 
and higher secondary education. More than one in two adolescents of 15 and 16 years are excluded 
from education. 
 
Household-based surveys can shed more light on the characteristics of excluded children. According 
to the Punjab School Education Survey 2017 (PSES), out of the total population of 5 -16 years in 
Punjab, 8.2% have never enrolled in sc hools while 6.4% have dropped out of school at a certain 
stage. Girls are more likely to be in the first group, while boys are more likely to drop out early.  
Geographical location indicates the extent of marginalization even more strikingly: three in four out of 
school children estimated by the PSES 2017 reside in rural areas. Poverty and lack of schooling 
alternatives after primary education could be among the reasons why children in rural areas are 
excluded in such high proportion. 54% of the total OOSC aged 5-9 years in the province reside in 
eight districts, namely Rahim Yar Khan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Rajanpur, Muzaffargarh, Multan, 
Bahawalnagar, Faisalabad and Lahore. 
 
Households surveyed by the PSES were asked about the reasons why children were not in school. 
In almost one -third of the cases, the cited reason for dropping out of schools or not enrolling was 
related to socio -economic factors.  These include ‗financial is sues‘, ‗child is needed as a helping 
                                                 
48 Furthermore, none of the available sources has up-to-date population estimates on the basis of the 2017 
national census yet. Therefore, the estimates should be taken as indicative.
<<<PAGE=90>>>
89 
hand‘ and ‗distance and transportation‘. In 27% of the cases where the child had never enrolled and 
47% of the cases where the child had dropped out of schools, lack of interest in school on the part of 
child and the family was the reason.  
 
Part of the excluded are children with special educational needs that are not covered by the 
programmes of the Special Education Department.  The Special Education Department currently 
runs 288 institutes, centres, colleges and vocati onal institutes. It is also running some pilot projects 
on inclusive education with the Punjab Education Foundation (PEF) aimed at children with mild 
disabilities that does not require structural changes in schools.  
 
However, the lack of data in respect t o children with special education needs is a major obstacle for 
devising appropriate strategies, including a more inclusive approach to educational interventions. 
 
Some surveys provide an indication of the challenge for children with disabilities. The TEACh project 
in Punjab, for instance, used a set of questions for children aged 5 -17 years, based on the 
Washington Group on Disability Statistics, established under the United Nations Statistical 
Commission. As a result, the report finds that 11% of 8 -12 year olds surveyed present some type of 
disability. This survey also highlights the intersectional evidence on disability, gender and poverty. A 
recent report using the Nielsen survey in Punjab, which covered a wider sample, has found that 
disability is indeed a significant barrier for children‘s access to education. Only one in ten surveyed 
children 5-16 years old were attending school in 2015. The Primary GER of children for whom a 
disability is reported reached 12.1% in 2015, the Middle GER was 10.8% an d the combined 
Secondary GER was a disheartening 2.6%.49 
 
1.4 Learning 
 
Punjab is performing better than other provinces in terms of the learning outcomes of its 
students, and some improvements have been observed in the recent past. However, learning 
levels continue to be low to attain a prosperous and dynamic society.  Providing access to 
schooling is a first and important step, but ensuring quality education is essential to develop the 
knowledge, skills and values to play an active part in all dimensions of  life and contribute to social 
and economic development. Quality education requires strengthening inputs, processes and 
evaluation of outcomes. Standards need to be developed to determine what would be for Punjab an 
acceptable level of quality concerning the inputs, processes and outcomes of the education system.   
 
In Punjab, assessments have been used for many years to measure students learning to obtain 
information on the knowledge and skills acquired by these. However, there is little evidence to 
suggest a heavy focus on assessments or other strategies implemented have improved learning 
outcomes in the province. 
 
The National Achievement Test (NAT) conducted by NEAS in 2016 assesses learning achievement 
for Maths and Urdu language among a sample of stude nts enrolled in Grade -4, and Science and 
English language among a sample of students enrolled in Grade -8, across the country. Although 
students in Punjab perform better than their counterparts in other provinces, overall learning levels 
are still quite low . On average, girls perform better than boys do, and students in urban schools 
score higher than those in rural schools, in both grades 4 and 8.  
                                                 
49 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft .
<<<PAGE=91>>>
90 
 
Learning problems can be observed across the board for children of schooling -age, and not only at 
specific po ints in the schooling cycle. The ASER survey is revealing in this sense because it 
assesses the learning levels of all children ages 5 to 16 in sampled households in rural areas, 
regardless of whether they are enrolled in school or not. The assessments rel ate to basic literacy 
and numeracy abilities, designed to cover up to Class 2 level competencies in literacy, and 
numeracy competencies up to Class 3 level. The results for year 2016 in Punjab reveal a worrisome 
picture of basic levels of learning. Overall , 35% Class 5 children could not read a Class 2 story in 
Urdu and 44% Class 3 children could not read even a simple sentence in Urdu.  Moreover, reading 
levels for Class 5 children have deteriorated with respect to 2015. Basic reading skills are essential 
for further comprehension and are the foundation over which other competencies build. Arithmetic 
learning levels show that 40% Class 5 children could not perform a two-digit division and 42% Class 
3 children could not do a simple subtraction.50  
 
Assessment of English is also relevant, since it is one of the mediums of instruction in schools in 
Punjab. However, according to the ASER assessment, 43% Class 5 children could not read English 
sentences and 49.4% of Class 3 children could not recognize words in English, at Class 2 level.  
Furthermore, there has been a consistent drop in students‘ achievement in English language since 
2013. This puts into question the adequacy of the current language policy in the province.  
 
The socio-economic factors that shape inequality of opportunities in access to schooling are echoed 
on inequality of learning outcomes. Children from poorer house -holds presen t lower levels of 
learning than those from wealthier households in all the basic literacy and numeracy areas 
assessed. Richest children, for instance, are more likely to achieve the highest order skills, whereas 
poorest children tend to be unable to read o r to identify digits 1 -9. Moreover, this gap has persisted 
without major change since 2012. 51 Poor children are also less likely to attend school as showed 
earlier in this analysis. The ASER report shows that most of the children who are out of school are 
unable to read in Urdu (81%) or to recognize the first nine digits (82%).  It could be inferred, then, 
that being in school provides at least some beneficial effects on children‘s learning. 
 
Punjab has high stakes examinations for grades 5, 8, 9, and 12. At the level of primary and 
elementary, the stakes are in fact higher for teachers, whose promotions and transfers are likely to 
be affected by students‘ performance. The examinations conducted by the Punjab Education 
Commission (PEC) in grades 5 and 8 show low performance across all subjects assessed. Although 
performance is higher in Islamiyat and Urdu, the mean score in both grades hovers around 60.  In 
addition, there has been no significant improvement in overall mean scores in students’ performance 
from 2015 to 2017. The exception is the score reached in Mathematics and Science among grade 5 
students, which rose up to 20% from 2015 to 2017, and is an encouraging trend albeit still within low 
levels of performance. Another positive trend is the improvement showed by girls in grade 5, who in 
the latest exams reach very similar scores than boys in Maths and outperform them in all other 
subjects. 
 
Student performance is far better on Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ) as compared to Constructed 
Response Questions (CRQ) in both Grade 5 and Grade 8. The difficulties in responding to CRQ are 
probably related to the low results in higher order skills. The results raise the question about the 
                                                 
50 Figures reported in ASER (2017). ASER-Pakistan 2016. 
51 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft .
<<<PAGE=92>>>
91 
useful of these examinations, what their purpose actually is and how then data  from the 
assessments are used to improve teaching and learning.  
 
To judge what children who are actually in school learn, one should observe large -scale 
assessments that allow to identify the impact of different factors –related to schools and related to 
student‘s backgrounds– on students‘ performance. The Learning and Numeracy Drive (LND) and the 
DFID Six Mont hly Learning Assessment data cover samples of students in grade 3 with different 
levels of representativeness and assessing different types of knowledge. These assessments show 
marginal improvements in learning outcomes between 2014 -15 and 2017, with varia tions according 
to gender, location and school type. However, the information collected does not permit a more in -
depth analysis of factors that could be associated with performance and thus inform teaching 
practices or areas in need of improvement.52 
 
There is a lack of a coherent learning assessment policy  in Punjab. Assessments are conducted by 
different agencies, are administered at different intervals of time, have varying sample sizes and 
levels of representativeness, carry varying stakes for different  stakeholders, and do not include 
enough information to be able to associate schools and students‘ characteristics to the results. It 
remains unclear how the data are used to inform improvements in teaching and learning and how 
these two aspects relate to the other.  
 
The number of teachers in public schools has increased by 25% during the last four years 
resulting in improved Student to Teacher Ratios, but there is a need for more teachers with 
adequate subject knowledge, and teacher quality needs further strengthening. 
 
There has been considerable addition to the teacher workforce over the years 2013 -2017, with the 
corpus of primary school teachers rising by 47%, and overall volume of public -school teachers 
increasing by 25%. 
 
An adequate number of teachers would only be the starting point. Teachers need to be in schools on 
a continuous basis. Teacher presence has risen steadily across primary, elementary and secondary 
grade levels since 2012. These improvements are largely attributed to improved management  and 
frequent administrators visits from a monitoring and performance evaluation perspective.  
 
The teachers would also need to have, among other things, the minimum in terms of qualifications 
and competence. There are difficulties with the supply of competent teachers with adequate subject 
knowledge, particularly with respect to Science, Math and English. This is the case despite recent 
recruitment efforts, such as focusing on science graduates in recent hiring and pro viding training to 
support English language proficiency. 
 
Teacher recruitment policies have evolved, but require adjustment to ensure that qualified and 
dedicated teachers are recruited. The revision, in 2011, of the Contract Teacher Policy demonstrates 
a recognition that working conditions, such as pay, contract duration and qualification must be 
standardized. The new 2017 Policy, though putting in place a more robust and transparent 
recruitment procedure, is not implemented across the province consistently.  
 
                                                 
52 e-Pact (2018). First Interim Evaluation Report on the Punjab Education Sector Programme. Draft .
<<<PAGE=93>>>
92 
Successive reforms raised the professional qualifications  for primary school teachers and 
elementary school teachers. As a result, one in four of these teachers have a primary teaching 
certificate or certificate of teaching, and there are many more teachers in the system with a Master‘s 
degree. However, there is considerable variance in quality at the level of academic institutions —the 
value of a degree awarded by one institution being vastly different from the same degree awarded 
by another.  At presen t, the only quality assurance mechanism is endorsement of the degree -
granting institution by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and a system of ranking presided 
over by the Commission. However, this still leaves a very wide gap in terms of ascertaining what a 
degree represents in terms of knowledge and higher order skills. 
 
This is not accorded any significance in recruitment procedures. The marks obtained in the NTS can 
only be regarded as a partial measure in terms of addressing the issue of teacher qu alifications and 
knowledge. The interview could provide valuable insight and help in the selection process, but at 
present, the interview carries only 5 marks out of a maximum of 100. The salience of the interview in 
the process was reduced in order to min imize the effects of political patronage, but the obverse of 
the situation is that it makes discerning the difference between the knowledge and capability of 
candidates with similar academic achievement but different institutional affiliation more difficult. 
 
A major incentive for teachers and a key factor in motivation would be a career path that gives 
appropriate weight to performance. Previously, promotions were largely an outcome of seniority. 
Post-2010 a number of requirements were added pertaining to qualifications, passing of 
departmental exams as well as performance in a bid to prioritize merit. In practice, however, 
implementation of a merit policy remains problematic. 
 
As some in-depth studies in Punjab have found, teachers’ basic subject knowledge and their ability 
to transfer knowledge to students are limited. On assessing teachers in three districts in Punjab, the 
TEACh project found that teachers scored on average 82.7% and 87.5% on literacy and numeracy 
tests based on the curriculum they are meant to be teaching. The gap between their own scores and 
those of their students reveals that teachers also have difficulties transferring their own level of 
knowledge to the students.53  
 
 
Figure 21: TEACh test results 
                                                 
53 REAL Centre and IDEAS (Mimeo), University of Cambridge and IDEAS  
13.1 
14.9 
16.9 18.1 18.3 18.4 
Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5
Literacy Test Marks 
Students Knowledge
Teachers' Knowledge
8.8 
13.7 
18.1 
24.3 24.4 24.5 
Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5
Numeracy Test Marks 
Students Knowledge
Teachers' Knowledge
<<<PAGE=94>>>
93 
 
Teachers have limited pre-service training on important issues relating to classroom management 
and quality of teaching and learning . The TEACh project reports that surveyed teachers did not 
receive pre-service training for: multi-lingual settings (47%), diverse classrooms (47%), working with 
poor children (44%) or children with special needs (58%). 
 
Teacher Training and Professional development has undergone reforms over the last decade , 
including focus on content and pedagogy, but the quality, duration an d organization is insufficient. 
The Continuous Professional Development (CPD) model aims at monitoring teacher performance 
and providing support in a decentralized framework. With the establishment of the Qaed -e-Azam 
Academy for Educational Development (QA ED), training was further decentralized by setting up 
Academic Development Units (ADUs) at the provincial, district, tehsil and cluster levels. QAED has 
established partnerships with other institutions to provide high quality training, has developed 
training modules for professional development, provided induction training, etc. However, the model 
cannot be fully implemented due to budgetary constraints. 
 
Another challenge exhibited by the education system in Punjab is that the various institutions 
empowered to support quality learning are often unable to properly implement their mandates. There 
is duplication of roles across different institutions.  It appears that  much of the government work in 
the area of education is being done in silos, for instance, PEC, PCTB and QAED do not have regular 
and frequent interaction with each other in order to share relevant work, information, insights and 
recommendations. A high level of input is required from all these institutions and it seems that there 
are barriers to s uch input as for instance, inadequate salaries and benefits to attract people of 
necessary calibre, qualification and experience. Similarly, even if such human resource is acquired, 
there are factors such as working environment, service rules etc that do n ot encourage retention. At 
the same time, qualified and competent subject specialists, assessment experts, psychometricians, 
data analysts and other related to the field are not easily available. 
 
While investments have been made to improve the learning en vironment, critical inputs are 
still lacking. Considerable advancement has been made in recent years with regard to school 
infrastructure and the provision of basic facilities. More than 96% of the schools have basic facilities 
(drinking water, toilets, electricity and boundary wall). More than 97% of the schools have a main 
gate, while more than 89% of the schools have sewerage facility.  However, other facilities such as 
playground and library, 61% and 24% respectively, are lacking in schools.  Computer labs, Science 
labs and ECE Classrooms are significantly lacking in schools as less than 15% of the schools have 
each of these advanced facilities. 
 
The unfinished agenda: consistent language policy, curriculum and learning materials. 
The Punjab School Educa tion Plan emphasised the need for improving language proficiency in 
English as well as Urdu and underlined the need for a comprehensive language policy that 
supported learning as well as a survey that would inform the formulation of such a policy. There ha s 
been no progress on either count. This situation is unsatisfactory as the related issues of the 
medium of Instruction and teaching English and Urdu well as subjects as well as the role of the 
mother tongue at the early stage of schooling has huge implications for teaching and learning.  
 
Punjab lacks a language policy with a judicious mix of English, Urdu and the mother tongue that 
would support rather than hinder learning, which often happens when children have to learn new 
things in a given subject while being called upon at the same time to learn a new language.
<<<PAGE=95>>>
94 
 
The Punjab Curriculum and Textbook Board Act, 2015 has empowered the PCTB to prepare 
Scheme of Studies, Curricula, Textbook Manuscripts and Supplementary Reading Materials for 
various classes. In this regard, PCTB, in consultation with key education stakeholders, has 
developed and introduced a new scheme of studies in 2017, which encompasses an updated outline 
of subjects to be taught from Early Childhood Education to Intermediate level, indicat ing core and 
elective subjects, medium of instruction for each subject and the time/marks allocation for theoretical 
and practical exams. Based on this Scheme of Studies, curriculum for each subject will be 
developed/revised in the form of a set of courses and their contents are to be offered in a systematic 
order throughout the studies. 
 
Under the new scheme of manuscripts, the textbooks now being developed are relatively well -
produced. But the PCTB staff faces capacity issues. For instance, some of the su bject specialists at 
PCTB are not recruited by following proper induction criteria. PCTB‘s textbook review process on 
seems very good on paper but there are issues related to engagement process of reviewers, 
background and capacity of reviewers, feedback l oop and more importantly the incentive structure 
prepared for reviewers. Also, PCTB has weak institutional linkages with other departments such as 
SED, PEC, QAED and PMIU. 
 
1.5 Literacy and Non-Formal Education 
 
It is generally agreed that the Non -Formal E ducation (NFE) sector in Pakistan can be the 
bridge to address the critical situation of a huge number of out -of-school children and 
dropouts, yet the NFE sector is largely neglected 
 
The Punjab Non -Formal Education Policy 2019 is the first NFE policy of the province. The Punjab 
Youth Policy 2012 under Education for Youth Development is the only other policy that commits to 
promotion of non-formal education and emphasizes public private partnership. 
 
Overall, there is a lack of coherence among scattered initiatives and the key issues pertain to lack of 
accountability and funding constraints.  Interrelated issues affecting quality also pertain to teachers‘ 
working conditions, including the contract and salary structure, wh ich can be demotivating and has 
an indirect impact on children‘s learning opportunity.  
 
The NFE sector is under -funded. It is promising to note, however, that the new NFE policy under 
review commits 5 percent of the education budget to NFE which is signif icant but would also require 
the Literacy and Non-Formal Basic Education Department (L&NFBED) to attract funds to the sector. 
 
Literacy and Non-Formal Basic Education Programmes are in large supply, but not accessible to all. 
Even though there is an NFE po licy and a Literacy and Non-Formal Basic Education Department, in 
effect the public offer is comprised of various programmes and projects. 
The L&NFBED runs more than 13,000 non -formal basic education schools and caters to more than 
450,000 NFBE learners. T he 2,160 Adult Literacy Centres are targeting 36,000 adult learners. The 
department has 15,439 teachers and 625 project staff. 
 
The lack of data makes it difficult to make evidence, based decisions, particularly to ensure that NFE 
is accessible and inclusi ve. Children are not counted by the Punjab Education Management 
Information System (PEMIS) due to weak links between the School Education Department and
<<<PAGE=96>>>
95 
LNFBED. The L&NFBED does not have data on children who have been mainstreamed into the 
formal school sy stem and at which level. The importance of consolidated, reliable and accessible 
data on efficiency of the NFE system, quality and learning outcomes can play a key role in informing 
policy. There is also a lack of qualitative analysis and documentation of lessons learned and case 
studies that can be beneficial in understanding and prioritizing issues for planning purposes. 
 
Teachers of NFE have lower qualification levels than those in the formal system. However, due to 
the need to cover the offer, the stand ards are further lowered. This has a direct impact on the ability 
of the teacher to differentiate and support students in a multi -grade environment and that need 
additional support.  This could also be influenced by the type of contracts and low salaries. 
 
Training and professional opportunities exist, but are not adequate to prepare teachers to deliver 
quality Non -Formal Education.  The L&NFBED has a dedicated Human Resources Development 
Institute, a unit in the department that is responsible for assessing training needs through classroom 
observations and exam results of children. However, there is no training plan in terms of refresher 
courses and induction of new teachers mostly the training is done as and when the funding is 
available.  
 
Short duration of  training focusing on pedagogy, conventional syllabus and mode of teaching don‘t 
provide room for self -learning and peer learning and makes it very difficult for teachers to deliver 
high quality education. 
 
1.6 Special Education 
 
Punjab, more than any othe r province, provides services for children with disabilities, but 
inequity still exists.  
 
A large number of institutes for special education are functional in Punjab, catering to thousands of 
children. Yet , the offer is still inadequate for the most popul ous province in the country, and 
furthermore, schools are mostly found in urban centres, thus not available to the majority of children 
in rural areas. 
 
An Institutional Plan for Special Education Department (SpED) 2017 -2020 has been developed, 
laying out six core sector plan priorities and institutional capacity required to address associated 
challenges. This is a positive development, but the entire  paradigm of education for children with 
disabilities is not linked to the Punjab’s school reform programme, thus as a separate and most often 
a disconnected piece education for the persons with disabilities doesn’t find a place in with the larger 
debate taking place on education. A survey in 2012 54 concluded that schools are currently 
unprepared to make inclusive education a reality due to factors such as the lack of clear admission 
policies for children with special needs, little knowledge among school administrators regarding how 
to implement inclusive education, inaccessible school infrastructure, and the absence of professional 
development opportunities for teachers to implement inclusive education.  
 
The biggest issue Pakistan faces in addressing the issue of education for children with disabilities is 
not having the right set of data on Persons with Disabili ties (PWDs).  There is no standardized 
instrument to collect data on disabilities. The discrepancies in prevalence and types of disabilities 
                                                 
54 Shaheen Pasha 2012. Readiness of Urban Primary Schools for Inclusive Education in Pakistan. Journal of 
Research and Reflections in Education. Vol.6, No.2, pp113 -128. http://ue.edu.pk/jrre/articles/62003.pdf.
<<<PAGE=97>>>
96 
show that the purpose of surveys and survey instruments used are different and the results therefore 
cannot be used appropriately for developing a comprehensive strategy on education for persons with 
disabilities. Additionally, data on drop out, retention, completion and transition rates is not available.  
 
The current policies and programmes fall short in providing adequate inclusive and services for 
children with disabilities. New interventions are project driven, the projects could eventually provide 
key learning opportunities, but are too small and not li kely to have an impact without a strong 
political commitment at the national and provincial levels on the issue of inclusive education. Due to 
lack of coordination amongst the relevant departments, many children are falling through the cracks. 
Moreover, a number of issues should be addressed with an inter -sector approach, involving health 
for early detection and psychological support, and social protection for families. However, the 
education of children with special educational needs is being looked into i n isolation without forming 
appropriate synergies. 
 
The professional capacities of special education teachers and educators are not sufficient to meet 
children‘s needs. Finding enough qualified teachers is a major challenge. There are 1,070 posts of 
teachers that are lying vacant. This gap also affects quality as the teachers must take on additional 
or large classes, even in subject areas they are not trained to teacher. Once teachers are selected, 
they are often not prepared to teach appropriately. The teacher training curriculum is theoretical with 
little if any teaching methodologies to engage children in artistic and cultural activity for social 
development. Teachers are only partially trained in specific methods for the kind of disability at hand. 
 
ASER reports indicate that learning outcomes for children with disabilities in Punjab (3-16 years) are 
lower than those for children without disabilities for both literacy and numeracy . This is because 
these children find it difficult to comprehend what is being taught in class mainly due to visual and 
hearing impairment. Assistive devices are given to children, but many needy children do not get 
these due to limitations in budgets, similarly early detection and prevention, assimilating preschool 
children, community-based approach and student centric learning is not on the agenda. 
 
Equality of opportunity for all children with disabilities requires higher -level debate and action at the 
policy level. The regular schools are not prepared to meet the physical  and psychological needs of 
students with disabilities resulting in pushing them into specialized institutes Equity strategies should 
be fully developed for children with special needs. There are costs related to children with disabilities 
that can be unsu rmountable for parents who are poor and struggle to obtain the service needed. 
Most are unable to afford assistive devices and transportation, for example. 
 
1.7 Technical Education and Vocational Training 
 
The TVET system in Punjab is filling an important gap, but requires restructuring to 
adequately transition people from education to work and promote life-long learning. 
 
Although half a million graduates emerged from the TVET system in Punjab in the year 2016, the 
weight of TVET in Punjab remains relatively low.55 Only 12% of the working age population in Punjab 
have acquired skills training. The significant trends in the province related to skills development 
include a limited access to TVET with mismatches, shortage in supply of skilled workers, a  weak 
                                                 
55 Punjab Skills Development Fund.
<<<PAGE=98>>>
97 
institutional framework, a lack of evidence-based policy making, low quality and relevance of training 
and low access to skills training.  
 
A range of diverse and assorted efforts have been made in the Pakistan to include TVET subjects at 
secondary level of education but without any significant impact. 
 
There is no provincial policy framework for introducing the technical stream in school education in 
Punjab. The Punjab School Education Sector Plan (PSESP) 2013 -2017 recommends establishment 
of a coord ination mechanism between SED and TEVTA in order to develop linkages between 
technical and vocational education and general education. The Punjab Skills Development Plan also 
emphasizes this as a crucial need in order to build human capital in the province.  
 
The TVET pathways or links with the general education system have not been developed so most of 
the concepts and plans by the school education department to train secondary school students in 
TEVT are not grounded in reality and planning for a technical stream is pre-mature 
 
There is a mismatch between what training is offered and what the labour market demands, often 
making the system very inefficient. Assessments of the TVET sector in Punjab emphasize that the 
quality and relevance of the training del ivered is not according to the demands of the job market. 
The capacity of TVET in terms of developing linkages with industry is limited, there is a shortage of 
qualified trainers and for the most part are not exposed to the industries, and the curricula is  not in 
line with the changing requirements of the markets. There is limited to no data available on the 
number of graduates who have been employed through initiatives or who have started their small 
businesses. 
 
The barriers to entry into TVET programmes are high, especially for persons with disabilities, 
women, and the less educated.  Men are more likely to complete vocational education than women 
are. The TVET institutes do not have special provisions for men and women who are less able or 
disabled. The S pecial Education Department runs some vocational courses with the support of 
TEVTA, but are very limited in the course offerings to programmes that have no proven ability to 
sustain or generate an income. 
 
 
 
1.8 Governance and Management 
 
Important steps have been taken to devolve power to local authorities and increase 
accountability in the education system in Punjab. However, the process needs to be 
streamlined, with more clearly defined roles and responsibilities, and better coordination and 
alignment of accountability mechanisms. Capacity constraints should be addressed in order 
to have a more effective educational administration and better implementation of education 
reforms. 
 
New structures at district level have been introduced, but there is a need t o review them, as there 
exists ambiguity as to reporting and coordination lines. The Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 —
latest version of the Local Government Law in the province —retains the decentralized nature of 
education governance and vests the contr ol of government schools in the district education 
authorities (DEAs). However, there is inadequate delegation of authority to the DEAs as compared
<<<PAGE=99>>>
98 
to the role envisaged by PLGA 2013. The scope of working and responsibilities assigned to DEAs in 
the PLGA 2013 and the rules notified subsequently under it do not seem to be fully aligned with each 
other. For instance, PLGA envisages the DEAs to venture into Public Private Partnerships for 
performance of its functions, but the Rules of Business limit DEAs to ha ve PPP only for Special 
Education. 
 
Staffing gaps at DEAs remain and the present capacities in some areas are weak.  There is a need 
to complete new recruitment of positions so that intended reforms can be fully implemented. A few 
members of the newly creat ed staff positions were posted whereas a majority remains unfilled. 
Those filled also seem to have been done by transfer whereas recruitment remains pending. 
Moreover, it was particularly highlighted during the key informant interviews and the focus group 
discussions that there is severe deficit of the district education officials as regards budget 
preparation and execution.  
 
The spirit of devolution and the establishment of DEAs was to strengthen and empower the service 
delivery tier to plan, coordinate a nd execute various activities towards improving the state of 
education in the districts. However, various administration levels at the service delivery tier need to 
be further empowered to address administrative and financial matters in their respective ju risdiction. 
For instance, it was mentioned in the focus group discussions that the burden of activities for routine 
administrative and operational tasks is disproportionately higher for the CEOs. These tasks could be 
delegated by empowering the District Ed ucation Officers, Deputy District Education Officers and 
Assistant Education Officers, allowing greater efficiency in meeting various demands at the service 
delivery level, and also affording more time to the CEO for planning, coordination and effective 
supervision of progress in key areas. 
 
Presently, there is no specialized education management cadre. The capacity of education 
managers at various levels as regards the planning, monitoring and implementation of various 
interventions is feeble.  What is more , this absence makes officials prone to political influence. The 
recruitment of the AEOs on a merit basis is significant, as it comes as an initiative of the School 
Education Department to introduce specialized management cadre at the service delivery tier . 
However, the efforts do not presently extend to recruit specialized personnel at higher levels of 
education administration, including Deputy District Education Officers, District Education Officers 
and other key positions.  
 
Human Resource polices have b een improved, yet traditional practices remain. Yearly performance 
appraisals are carried out in a traditional way without much regard to the performance of incumbents 
against various output related indicators. Performance evaluation and subsequent career 
progression of personnel is seldom based on their achievements against the parameters outlined by 
their official job descriptions and responsibilities. 
 
In addition, frequent transfers and postings are prevalent, particularly at senior levels, across various 
allied departments of School Education Department and at the service delivery tier. There is a need 
to ensure that staff appointed against various posts complete the minimum tenure, so that personnel 
may be allowed sufficient time to implement and conso lidate progress against various reforms 
initiatives at their respective positions and levels. 
 
Punjab has turned to a results-driven approach to decision-making with a strong focus on monitoring 
targets. However, the decision -making process is largely top -down. The target -driven approach
<<<PAGE=100>>>
99 
largely revolves around the districts as key unit of analysis. The DEAs and, subsequently, various 
levels of education administration are assigned targets against key indicators from the School 
Education Department each yea r. There is a need that targets against various indicators are set in 
consultation with the officials at respective level of governance to align these with ground realities, 
skills base and resources available at these levels. This will make the target setting more realistic as 
well as establish a broad -based ownership of these targets among the officials at the service tier. 
Local level planning should contribute in this respect, but the current capacity levels would not allow 
planning and implementation to be effectual. 
 
There are multiple monitoring streams in the education administration in Punjab with a certain 
degree of overlap. Monitoring at school level is carried out by two different streams: by the education 
administration (Assistant Education Officers) and by the monitors assigned by PMIU (Monitoring and 
Evaluation Assistants). Punjab Education Foundation also has its MEAs at the service delivery tier. 
Monitoring for special education schools is in a nascent stage. As a result of these multiple 
structures and processes, there is overlap in terms of various input, process and output related 
indicators. The MEAs and AEOs perform slightly different functions during their visits to the school, 
with different follow-up mechanisms regarding the data colle cted by the two streams. For instance, 
the MEAs collect data against a prescribed set of indicators which include teachers/non -teachers 
presence, students‘ attendance, school facility, school cleanliness, and utilization of non -salary 
budget. The visits of  AEOs revolve largely around the observation on these indicators, but not in 
such structured format, and there is no subsequent mechanism that consolidates the observations 
during the school visits into reports that are then followed up by the education ad ministrators. 
Moreover, with the accumulation of responsibilities, the AEOs are unable to perform effectively the 
mentoring role, which has recently been included as a part of their school level activities. 
 
Despite improvements in data collection, there a re shortcomings when it comes to capture 
information on school management, and dissemination and effective use of the data are limited, 
including on learning assessments. School management information would incorporate aspects of 
operational practices, monitoring processes and outcomes, and people management. However, data 
collection systems of the government departments and independent surveys do not collect any 
information at the school level on these aspects. 56 In terms of learning outcomes, several types of 
assessments are conducted but the resulting information is not being used to make evidence -based 
decisions by various stakeholders.  
 
The School Education Department has taken important steps by involving th e parents and 
community members in improving the state of quality education in their respective government 
schools, through Schools Councils. The School Councils, in addition to being responsible for 
improving various access, quality and infrastructure related indicators of schools, are also custodian 
of the Non -Salary Budget (NSB). To utilize effectively the Non -Salary Budget, School Councils are 
required to prepare a School Based Action Plan (SBAP). The plans and the use of the operational 
budget, however, have limitations, which stem from weak capacity of School Councils in planning, 
budgeting and executing the resources transferred under the Non-Salary Budget. 
 
The private sector plays a significant role in Punjab‘s education system, yet remains largely outside 
the administrative domain of the government, with important consequences on quality of education 
and equity. 
 
                                                 
56 E-pact (2018), op.cit.
<<<PAGE=101>>>
100 
Although Punjab Private Education Institution (Promotion and Regulation) (Amendment) Act57 makes 
it compulsory for all private schools to register with the District Registration Authority, a considerable 
percentage of private schools remain unregistered across all districts. Moreover, the Act or the sub -
ordinate legislation do not include standards for quality.  
 
Private education providers in focus group discussions highlighted that one of the major reasons for 
their reluctance to register is the complexity and lengthiness of the registration process. 
 
As a result, enrolment in private schools remains unaccounted in the overall district enrolment 
figures. Hence, the number of out of school children at district level may appear higher than the 
actual number of children facing the access challenge causing the over -reporting of out of school 
children in a given district.  
 
Presently there is no mechanism in place to ensure adherence to minimum standards for quality 
education and conducive learning environment in private schools at the district level. DEAs have 
limited human resources to provide over sight to public schools in assigned areas. With the existing 
structure of DEAs, it is difficult to provide strategic oversight and guidance to the private education 
institutions across the district. 
 
Punjab has a strategy of Public Private Partnerships to expand access to school.  The Punjab 
Education Foundation (PEF) has played a significant role in providing access to education to the 
children from underserved areas. However, there is limited coordination between SED and PEF at 
departmental level and, part icularly, at the service delivery tier . After registration, there is little 
subsequent interaction between the DEAs and PEF partner schools, in order to ensure minimum 
standards of education as regards access, quality or infrastructure in these schools. At  present, for 
instance, the partner schools are required to achieve the minimum quality standard by ensuring that 
certain percentage of students score the minimum passing score. However, there is no mechanism 
that locks the minimum acceptable performance f rom partner school in QATs each year and then 
gradually monitors the upward movement of partner schools in terms of student’s performance and 
learning achievements. 
 
1.9 Cost and Financing 
 
While funding for education has steadily increased over the last seven years, recent trends 
suggest that the relative weight of the education sector has dropped compared to other 
sectors, despite education being a priority in the provincial agenda 
 
The education budget in Punjab has increased significantly over the last  seven years. In 2010-11, a 
budget of Rs. 155 billion was earmarked for education sector in Punjab. 58 It has more than doubled 
since then with the allocation of Rs. 349 billion in 2017 -18. This represents an increase of 125% 
during these years in nominal terms and 43% in real terms.  
 
To a great extent, this positive trend is due to rising transfers from the Federal divisible funding pool, 
which constitute the bulk of the funding for the provincial governments in Pakistan.  The funds 
distributed to Punjab hav e increased on average by around 8% each year in real terms between 
                                                 
57 Section 3 of the Punjab Private Education Institution (Promotion and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016. 
58 Data on budget allocations as processed from Punjab Budget books of various years .
<<<PAGE=102>>>
101 
2011-12 and 2017 -18.59 In this sense, the outlook for education funding in the province in the past 
few years has been encouraging. 
 
However, while education has been a priority in the agen da for the Punjab government during these 
years, the share of resources allocated to the education sector does not reflect this . While the 
provincial resource base has increased significantly, the share of education in the government 
budget has been declin ing since 2013 -14. The share of education in Punjab‘s budget has declined 
from 26% in 2013 -14 to 17.7% in 2017 -18. Presently, Punjab allocates to education a lower portion 
of its resources than Sindh and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 
 
Figure #: Share of the educatio n budget in Punjab government’s budget (Rs. Billion and 
Percent) 
 
 
Figure 22:  Share of the education budget in Punjab government’s budget (Rs. Billion and Percent) 
 
In line with the overall trend, a higher volume of resources has been earmarked for each of the 
education-related departments in the past decade. In the case of the School Education Department, 
the allocation has significantly increased since 2008 -09. At this time, a budget of Rs. 87 billion was 
earmarked, which has increased by 242% in nominal terms to reach Rs. 298 billion in 2017 -18, and 
by 77% in real terms. 
 
The budget of L&NFBED has varied over the years . In 2011 -12, a budget of Rs. 821 million was 
earmarked. By 2017 -18 the allocations had grown by 110% in nominal terms, to reach Rs. 1.7 
billion, or 50% in real terms.  
 
The budget for SpED, in turn, has increased to Rs. 1.3 billion in 2017 -18, representing an increase 
of 59% in nominal terms since 2011-12 and 13% in real terms.  
 
Beyond the overall levels of funding, the other major difference among the three departments lies in 
the composition of the budget. While the recurrent budget constitutes the bulk of SED‘s resources, 
consistent with the size of  the teacher workforce and the corresponding wage bill, L&NFBED and 
SpED operate largely with development budget . Practically all resources for the Literacy and Non -
Formal Basic Education Department come from the development budget. In the last fiscal year  this 
allocation represented 95.8% of the total. This situation has not changed for the past six years. In 
2017-18, the development budget covered 82% of the total budget for Special Education 
                                                 
59 The total NFC has registered an increase of 6% per year on average during this period.  
898 1,095 
1,447 
1,681 
1,971 
233 260 287 296 349 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Provincial Budget Education Budget
26% 23.7% 
19.8% 
17.6% 
17.7%
<<<PAGE=103>>>
102 
Department. The weight of this component, in turn, has increase d from 61% in 2011 -12. Even for 
SED the weight of the development budget has risen, to the current 18%. In this case, the increase 
has been mostly due to the investment in missing infrastructure facilities across the province. 
 
This reliance on development  schemes introduces a high degree of uncertainty for an effective 
functioning of the departments concerned and makes planning very challenging. Hiring qualified 
teachers, who will have vulnerable working conditions, becomes close to impossible. The situati on 
also hampers any attempt at introducing medium or long -term reforms that require sustainable 
funding. This seems to go against any priorities of ensuring inclusive education and providing 
opportunities for out of school children, as should be the case g iven the large numbers of children 
excluded from education in Punjab. 
 
Figure #: Budgets Allocated to SED, SpED and L&NFBED in 2017-18 (Rs billion) 
 
Figure 23: Budgets allocated to SED, SpED, L&NFBED in 2017-18 (PKR billion) 
 
In 2013-14, the government of Punjab launched the Non -Salary Budget (NSB) scheme to enhance 
the autonomy of school management and providing better learning environments to students. By 
2015-16, the scheme included all districts with a total allocation of Rs. 14 billion. Most of the NSB 
funds are spent on building and classroom maintenance (27%) followed by ‗others‘ (16%) and 
furniture purchase (10%). The initiative still faces some challenges, such as delays in the release of 
funds and capacity constraints at the school level to plan the use and then effectively spend the 
funds. 
 
Another important feature of the investment in human capital in Punjab, is that public spending 
patterns on education are regressive. Indeed, investments are skewed towards higher leve ls of 
education. Over one-third of the resources are spent on the 10% more educated. 
 
244.40 
0.07 0.23 
53.36 
1.65 1.06 
297.76 
1.72 1.29 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
SED L&NFBED SpED
in Rs. billions 
Recurrent Development Total
<<<PAGE=104>>>
103 
 
Figure 24:Distribution of education resources in public schools 
 
As a manifestation of this unequal distribution of resources, the relative share of the budget for 
Secondary education (comprising grades 9 to 12) has surpassed the allocation for the other levels.  
A substantial increase can be noted in the relative importance of secondary education during the last 
eight years. The share of secondary education in total education budget has increased from 45% in 
2010-11 to 53% in 2017-18.  
 
Finally, there are district level disparities in terms of education finance, as some districts are 
allocated a higher share of the education budge t despite having comparatively low student and 
school densities. This calls for better district-specific planning and budgeting. 
 
Education comes at a cost to parents, even for children attending public schools.  
There are number of expenses that parents have to bear and finance out of their pockets in order to 
ensure their child’s education . Some of these expenses include tuition fee, stationary, uniform, 
transportation, after-school coaching and extra-curricular activities. Out-of-pocket expenses have an 
impact, especially for lower income families, on managing their household finances.60 
 
The Punjab government has taken equity into consideration while designing several programmes to 
subsidize auxiliary expenditures on education incurred by parents . Some o f these programmes 
include provision of student vouchers, scholarships, stipends, textbooks, lunch boxes and 
transportation. However, certain barriers, such as poverty, disability and language often inhibit 
parents to comply with the conditionalities attached to such cash transfer programmes. 
                                                 
60 Rizk and Abou Ali (2016).  “Out of Pocket Education Expenditure and Household Budget: Evidence from Arab 
Countries”. Working Paper 996. Economic Research Forum. Egypt: The Economic Research Forum (ERF).
<<<PAGE=105>>>
104
<<<PAGE=106>>>
105 
II. Projections and costing of the scalable components of the PESP 2019/20-2023/24
<<<PAGE=107>>>
106 
Table II.1. Key indicators on enrolment 
 
Gross intake rates               
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Katchi Boys   90.8% 91.1% 91.5% 91.8% 92.1% 
Girls   88.8% 89.1% 89.5% 89.9% 90.2% 
Primary Boys   82.0% 82.3% 82.6% 82.9% 83.2% 
Girls   79.4% 79.5% 79.7% 79.9% 80.2% 
Middle education Boys   52.1% 53.1% 56.2% 57.0% 57.1% 
Girls   53.6% 55.1% 58.0% 58.6% 58.7% 
Secondary education Boys   41.1% 43.9% 45.2% 47.8% 49.0% 
Girls   40.1% 43.7% 45.5% 48.5% 50.1% 
Higher secondary education Boys   3.7% 3.9% 4.2% 4.6% 4.9% 
Girls   4.7% 5.1% 5.5% 6.2% 6.6% 
Total Boys   62.6% 63.4% 64.3% 65.1% 65.5% 
Girls   62.0% 63.0% 64.0% 64.8% 65.3% 
        
Gross enrolment rates               
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Katchi Boys   90.8% 91.1% 91.5% 91.8% 92.1% 
Girls   88.8% 89.1% 89.5% 89.9% 90.2% 
Primary Boys   71.4% 72.3% 72.5% 72.6% 72.7% 
Girls   70.9% 71.6% 71.7% 71.7% 71.7% 
Middle education Boys   51.6% 53.3% 55.6% 57.3% 58.7% 
Girls   53.9% 56.2% 58.8% 60.6% 61.9% 
Secondary education Boys   35.7% 37.4% 39.1% 41.0% 42.6%
<<<PAGE=108>>>
107 
Girls   36.1% 38.6% 41.0% 43.2% 45.3% 
Higher secondary education Boys   4.1% 4.2% 4.5% 4.9% 5.4% 
Girls   5.3% 5.6% 6.0% 6.7% 7.4% 
Total Boys   58.4% 59.3% 60.2% 61.0% 61.6% 
Girls   58.6% 59.8% 60.8% 61.5% 62.2% 
        
Transition rates               
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Primary - Middle Boys   90.7% 90.8% 90.9% 91.0% 91.1% 
Girls   91.4% 91.3% 91.1% 91.0% 91.1% 
Middle - Secondary Boys   90.9% 91.2% 91.6% 92.0% 92.3% 
Girls   85.7% 86.2% 86.6% 87.0% 87.3% 
Secondary - Higher secondary Boys   11.6% 12.1% 12.5% 13.0% 13.3% 
Girls   14.6% 15.0% 15.5% 16.0% 16.4% 
        
Completion rates               
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Primary Boys   51.9% 54.9% 55.7% 55.8% 55.9% 
Girls   53.7% 56.5% 57.1% 56.9% 56.9% 
Middle education Boys   43.4% 44.7% 47.3% 48.5% 51.4% 
Girls   43.6% 45.3% 48.3% 50.0% 52.8% 
Secondary education Boys   3.8% 4.0% 4.4% 4.8% 5.1% 
Girls   5.0% 5.4% 6.1% 6.5% 7.1% 
Higher secondary education Boys   3.1% 3.1% 3.3% 3.6% 4.0% 
Girls   4.1% 4.2% 4.6% 5.0% 5.7%
<<<PAGE=109>>>
108 
Table II.2. Teaching and non-teaching staff and education resources  
 
Number of teaching staff               
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Katchi                60,473             60,886             61,278             61,650             62,242  
Primary                84,011             83,823             82,798             81,522             82,707  
Middle education                78,996             77,792             77,390             75,740             78,232  
Secondary education             120,290          124,153          127,643          130,680          138,713  
Higher secondary education                24,627             25,386             26,743             28,778             31,762  
Special education                  3,037               3,309               3,651               4,032               4,376  
Literacy programmes                16,373             17,307             18,241             19,175             19,175  
Total         387,807          392,655          397,744          401,577          417,207  
Growth rate     0.86% 1.25% 1.30% 0.96% 3.89% 
 
 
Need for construction of classrooms             
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Katchi                      433                   413                   393                   372                   592  
Primary                      470                      -                        -                        -                        -    
Middle education                         -                        -                        -                        -                        -    
Secondary education                         -                        -                     520                   650               1,720  
Higher secondary education                        36                     73                   130                   195                   286  
Special education                        84                     92                   116                   125                   119  
Literacy programmes                    664                   664                   664                   664                      -    
Total              1,687               1,241               1,822               2,006               2,716
<<<PAGE=110>>>
109 
Table II.3. Cost of scale components by economic nature 
Overall cost by economic nature, at current prices             
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
TOTAL (in million of PkRs, at current prices)           316,939          336,943          359,612          383,767          423,296  
Recurrent expenditures             315,842          335,706          358,211          382,175          421,484  
Development expenditures                  1,096               1,237               1,401               1,592               1,811  
Staff             315,842          335,706          358,211          382,175          421,484  
Teaching staff             282,503          299,498          318,734          339,240          372,829  
Non teaching staff                33,339             36,207             39,477             42,935             48,656  
Goods and services                         -                        -                        -                        -                        -    
Current transfers                         -                        -                        -                        -                        -    
Investment                  1,096               1,237               1,401               1,592               1,811  
 
 
Table II.4. Unit cost by level of education 
 
Unit costs by level of education (in PkRs, at current prices)             
   2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
   2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
1. Katchi                17,791             18,610             19,503             20,478             21,502  
2. Primary                10,341             10,840             11,390             11,995             12,625  
3. Middle education                26,794             27,330             28,027             28,785             30,396  
4. Secondary education                87,494             90,574             93,884             97,549          103,802  
5. Higher secondary education             312,458          326,460          341,623          358,356          378,362  
6. Special education             127,066          136,618          149,391          163,921          178,662  
7. Literacy programmes                  3,966               4,133               4,317               4,519               4,745
<<<PAGE=111>>>
