<<<PAGE=1>>>
The transfer of training: what
really matters
Rebecca Grossman and Eduardo Salas
Although organizations invest billions of dollars in training
every year, many trained competencies reportedly fail to trans-
fer to the workplace. Researchers have long examined the
‘transfer problem’, uncovering a wealth of information regard-
ing the transfer of training. Inconsistencies remain, however,
and organizations may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to pinpoint exactly
which factors are most critical. Using Baldwin and Ford’s
model of transfer, we identify the factors relating to trainee
characteristics (cognitive ability, self-efﬁcacy, motivation,
perceived utility of training), training design (behavioral mod-
eling, error management, realistic training environments) and
the work environment (transfer climate, support, opportunity
to perform, follow-up) that have exhibited the strongest, most
consistent relationships with the transfer of training. We
describe our reasoning for extracting such variables from the
literature and conclude by discussing potential implications
for practice and future research.
ijtd_373 103..120
Introduction
Training has long been a fundamental concern in organizational contexts. Organiza-
tions rely on learning strategies, training technology and development efforts to
prepare their workforce (Salaset al., 2006). In today’s global economy , the knowledge,
skills and abilities necessary to maintain a competitive adv antage are growing and
changing (Arguinis & Kraiger, 2009). As the nature of work changes, employees are
increasingly required to develop a wide, mutable set of skills that are essential to the
success of their organizations. Y et few workers possess the cultural competence,
interpersonal skills and technological proﬁciency required for these changing work
demands (Salas & Stagl, 2009).
In response to these issues, US organizations spend over $125 billion on employee
training and development every year (P aradise, 2007). Training can be deﬁned as the
❒ Rebecca Grossman, Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Psychology , Institute for Simulation
and Training, University of Central Florida, FL 32826, USA. Email: rgrossman@ist.ucf.edu. Eduardo
Salas, Professor, Department of Psychology , Institute for Simulation and Training, University of Central
Florida, FL 32826, USA. Email: esalas@ist.ucf.edu.
International Journal of Training and Development 15:2
ISSN 1360-3736
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
The transfer of training 103
<<<PAGE=2>>>
systematic acquisition of knowledge, skills and attitudes that together lead to
improved performance in a speciﬁc environment (Salaset al., 2006). This encompasses
what employees need to know , what they need to do and what they need to feel in
order to successfully perform their jobs. Training is focused on producing permanent
cognitive and behavioral changes, and on developing critical competencies for job
performance. Organizations make increasingly large investments in training because it
serves as a powerful tool for producing the targeted cognitive, behavioral and affective
learning outcomes essential for their surviv al (Salas & Stagl, 2009). Effective training
can yield higher productivity , improved work quality , increased motiv ation and com-
mitment, higher morale and teamwork, and fewer errors, culminating in a strong
competitive adv antage (Salaset al., 2006). On the other hand, a poorly trained work-
force can lead to errors, injuries and even legal issues, all of which can be extremely
costly . As a grave example, recent reports estimate $183.0 billion are spent on employee
injuries and deaths linked to deﬁcient training practices every year (National Safety
Council, 2010). Errors of all kinds are so prominent that entire training programs have
been developed speciﬁcally to remedy them. Error management training, for instance,
encourages trainees to make errors and learn from them throughout the training
process (Keith & Frese, 2005). Furthermore, a poorly trained workforce can cost orga-
nizations billions of dollars in legal fees (Goldman, 2000). Not surprisingly , training has
become a paramount concern of organizations and researchers alike.
Despite the emphasis on training, many organizations report a failure to effectively
develop skills and anticipate future needs (IBM, 2008). The bulk of training expendi-
tures then seemingly do not transfer to the job. Although employees may gain new
knowledge and skills through training programs, learning alone is not sufﬁcient for
training to be considered effective. Of primary importance is the positive transfer of
training, or the extent to which the learning that results from training transfers to the
job and leads to relev ant changes in work performance (Goldstein & Ford, 2002). In
addition to application, the transfer of training involves the generalization and main-
tenance of the trained knowledge and skills (Ford & W eissbein, 1997). Estimates
suggest that only 10 per cent of training expenditures transfer to the job (Georgenson,
1982), highlighting a glaring gap between training efforts and organizational out-
comes. A more recent meta-analysis of the training effectiveness literature revealed a
similar disconnect between learning and behavior. When learning criteria were
compared with subsequent behavioral criteria (that is, work behaviors), effect sizes
decreased substantially (Arthur et al., 2003). Further demonstrating the gap between
learning and behavior, v an Wijket al. (2008) conducted a meta-analysis and found a
corrected correlation of only 0.22 between organizational knowledge transfer and
performance.
Organizations and researchers have long recognized the ‘transfer problem’ (Micha-
lak, 1981). In a comprehensive review , Baldwin and Ford (1988) provided a critical
analysis of the existing transfer literature and suggested directions for future research.
Since their review , there has been an outpouring of both conceptual and empirical
research, all aiming to bridge the gap between training and workplace performance
(see Burke & Hutchins, 2007 and Hutchins & Burke, 2007). Numerous empirical
studies, reviews and meta-analyses have yielded a wealth of information regarding the
transfer of training. This v ast database of sometimes inconsistent ﬁndings, however,
could make it difﬁcult for organizations to pinpoint exactly which factors are most
critical for transfer. Although several authors have reviewed and summarized the
extant literature (for example, Baldwinet al., 2009; Blumeet al., 2010; Burke & Hutchins,
2007; Cheng & Hampson, 2008; Cheng & Ho, 2001; Merriam & Leahy , 2005), conclu-
sions regarding the key components of transfer remain somewhat ambiv alent. In an
integrative review , for example, Burke and Hutchins (2007) identiﬁed factors that have
been linked to transfer, and used the extant literature to assess the strength of each
relationship described. Of the 31 relationships reported, only 17 were described as
having a strong or moderate relationship with transfer. The remaining links were said
to show mixed support, minimal evidence or a need to clarify ﬁndings through addi-
tional research. In another review , Cheng and Hampson (2008, p. 334) remarked
104 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
that, ‘inconsistent and unexpected ﬁndings have often disappointed researchers and
training practitioners’, despite the ‘proliferation of transfer-related studies in the past
several decades’. Furthermore, Blumeet al. (2010, p. 1089) described the transfer litera-
ture as having ‘remained characterized by mixed ﬁndings and [a] lack of empirical
synthesis’.
Clearly , organizations looking to design training programs and facilitate transfer
could beneﬁt from an updated review that identiﬁes only those factors that have shown
the strongest, most consistent relationships with training transfer. Thus, the purpose of
this paper is to identify and summarize the most critical ﬁndings relating to the transfer
of training. Accordingly , our review is not meant to be comprehensive. W e recognize
that several factors that have been linked to transfer will not be covered. W e argue,
however, that although such evidence is crucial for furthering the science of training,
less consistent ﬁndings are not as essential for organizations seeking straightforward
recommendations. As mentioned, our goal is not to provide another comprehensive
review of the transfer literature but, rather, to integrate ﬁndings from existing reviews
and provide a translation for organizations seeking evidence-based guidance. W e draw
from only strong, unambiguous ﬁndings reported in empirical studies, and both quali-
tative and quantitative reviews. Because of the ﬁnancial costs and organizational
resources involved, we believe it is not practical, or perhaps even feasible, for organi-
zations to consider every single factor that has been linked to transfer when imple-
menting a training program. Instead, we feel that organizations can beneﬁt from
knowledge of the speciﬁc factors that have not only been consistently linked to transfer,
but have also exhibited the strongest relationships.
Furthermore, we feel that training researchers can also beneﬁt from our abbreviated
set of factors shown to inﬂuence transfer. Researchers, too, will ﬁnd it impractical to
incorporate every single factor into their theoretical models and research designs.
Rather than an expansion of the list of factors that can inﬂuence transfer, we feel that
the literature can beneﬁt from a shift in focus to a deeper investigation of the factors
that have already yielded solid evidence. W e echo comments made by Blume et al.
(2010, p. 1095) suggesting that the focus of research should shift from ‘the general
question, Can training transfer? – which has already been answered afﬁrmatively – to
a more targeted focus’. Similarly , we argue that the speciﬁc factors we identify in this
paper have now garnered sufﬁcient evidence to suggest that they do, in fact, inﬂuence
transfer, and that future research should begin to investigate these factors on a deeper
level (for example, is each factor most important before, during or after training?).
Other researchers have begun to carry out or call for a more detailed investigation of
the factors shown to inﬂuence transfer. In Blume et al.’s (2010) meta-analysis, for
example, the bulk of the predictor v ariables exhibited stronger relationships with
transfer when the focus of training was on open as opposed to closed skills. W e feel that
we can contribute by providing a springboard for researchers interested in expanding
our knowledge of the most prominent factors shown to inﬂuence transfer. T o be clear,
we are not suggesting that future research should not further investigate transfer
relationships that have demonstrated less consistent relationships. Rather, we propose
that our understanding of the factors we include is clear enough for researchers to
begin investigating them at a deeper level. W e hope to motiv ate future research and
provide a starting point for those interested in pursuing it. Overall, we feel that our
paper can serve as a guideline for both organizations interested in identifying the
bottom line and for researchers interested in adv ancing our understanding of the
transfer of training.
Factors inﬂuencing the transfer of training
Along with their qualitative review , Baldwin and Ford (1988) presented a model of the
transfer process which includes training inputs, training outputs and conditions of
transfer (see an adaptation of this model in Figure 1). Training inputs are thought to
inﬂuence conditions of transfer both directly , and indirectly , through their impact on
training outputs. In line with this model, our review will identify the training inputs
The transfer of training 105
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
that have proven to be highly crucial for the learning, retention, generalization and
maintenance of targeted skills, and will organize them into three main categories:
trainee characteristics (cognitive ability , self-efﬁcacy , motiv ation and perceived utility
of training), training design (behavioral modeling, error management and realistic
training environments) and work environment (transfer climate, support, opportunity
to perform and follow-up). Each input will be described in light of previous reviews
and more recent empirical ﬁndings, a summary of which can be found in T able 1. The
implications for organizations and future research will then be discussed.
Trainee characteristics
It is widely accepted that trainee characteristics play a powerful role in the transfer of
training (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Some argue that such characteristics account for
the bulk of v ariability in training outcomes (v an der Klinket al., 2001). W e will focus
on those traits that have shown the strongest, most consistent relationships with trans-
fer. These include cognitive ability , self-efﬁcacy , motiv ation and perceived utility of
training.
Cognitive ability
Trainees’ ability , particularly cognitive ability , is a strong predictor of transfer outcomes
(Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Support has long existed, for example, that ability and
Training Design 
• Behavioral 
modeling 
• Error management 
• Realistic training 
environments 
Work Environment 
Transfer climate 
••
Support 
• Opportunity to 
perform 
• Follow-up 
Generalization 
& Maintenance 
Learning & 
Retention 
Training Inputs Training Outputs Conditions of Transfer 
Trainee Characteristics 
Cognitive ability 
Self-efficacy 
Motivation 
Perceived utility of 
training
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 1: A Model of the Transfer Process. Adapted from Baldwin and Ford, 1988.
106 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Table 1: Key factors for the transfer of training
What Comments Citations
Trainee characteristics
Cognitive ability Trainees higher in cognitive
ability have more success in
processing, retaining, and
generalizing trained skills.
Baldwin & Ford, 1988;
Blume et al., 2010; Burke &
Hutchins, 2007; Colquitt
et al., 2000; Kanfer &
Ackerman, 1989; V elada
et al., 2007
Self-efﬁcacy Trainees higher in self-
efﬁcacy have more
conﬁdence in their ability to
learn and apply trained
competencies, and are more
likely to persist when
performing difﬁcult tasks.
Blume et al., 2010; Burke &
Hutchins, 2007; Chiaburu &
Lindsay , 2008; Chiaburu &
Marinov a, 2005; V elada
et al., 2007
Motiv ation Transfer is facilitated when
trainees are motiv ated to
learn and transfer
throughout the training
process.
Baldwin et al., 2009; Blume
et al., 2010; Burke &
Hutchins, 2007; Chiaburu &
Lindsay , 2008; Chiaburu &
Marinov a, 2005; Facteau
et al., 1995; Lim & Johnson,
2002; Naquin & Holton,
2002; Tziner et al., 2007
Perceived utility of
training
Trainees who perceive
training as useful and
v aluable are far more likely
to apply new competencies
in the workplace.
Burke & Hutchins, 2007;
Chiaburu & Lindsay , 2008;
Gilpin-Jackson & Bushe,
2007; V eladaet al., 2007
Training design
Behavioral
modeling
Behavioral modeling
facilitates transfer when both
positive and negative models
are used, and when
opportunities to practice are
provided.
T ayloret al., 2005
Error management Error management promotes
the transfer of training by
allowing trainees to
anticipate potential issues,
providing them with
knowledge of how to handle
such problems, and
highlighting the negative
outcomes that can occur if
training is not transferred.
Burke & Hutchins, 2007;
Heimbeck et al., 2003
Realistic training
environment
Conducting training and
practice in environments that
resemble the workplace
increases the likelihood that
trained competencies will
transfer.
Burke & Hutchins, 2007;
Kraiger, 2003; Salas et al.,
2006
The transfer of training 107
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
aptitude assessments relate to individuals’ trainability (Baldwin & Ford, 1988). Such
assessments typically measure overall intelligence, which reﬂects individuals’ ability to
understand complex ideas, adapt to their environments, learn from experiences and
engage in v arious forms of reasoning (Neisseret al., 1996), all of which can be critical to
learning and applying training content. Kanfer and Ackerman’s (1989) research sug-
gests that cognitive ability affects trainee performance through its inﬂuence on atten-
tional resource capacity . Individuals with high cognitive ability may be better equipped
to process and retain information provided during training. V eladaet al. (2007), for
instance, examined potential predictors of training transfer in a large grocery organi-
zation. Results indicated that training retention, a construct they related to cognitive
ability , was signiﬁcantly related to the transfer of training. Strong evidence of the role
of cognitive ability was found in an extensive meta-analysis based on two decades of
training research (Colquitt et al., 2000). The authors reported a corrected correlation
coefﬁcient between cognitive ability and training transfer of 0.43. More recently , Blume
et al. (2010) echoed these ﬁndings in another thorough meta-analytic review of the
transfer literature. Cognitive ability emerged as the single strongest predictor of train-
ing transfer. Overall, research suggests that cognitive ability is crucial for the transfer
of training. Those who are higher in cognitive ability are more likely to successfully
Table 1: Continued
What Comments Citations
W ork environment
Transfer climate Situational cues and
consequences largely
determine whether or not
learned competencies are
applied in the workplace.
Blume et al., 2010; Burke
et al., 2008; Colquitt et al.,
2000; Gilpin-Jackson &
Bushe, 2007;
Kontoghiorghes, 2001;
Rouiller & Goldstein, 1993;
Salas et al., 2006
Support Both supervisor and peer
support are critical for the
transfer of training.
Awoniyi et al., 2002; Blume
et al., 2010; Burke &
Hutchins, 2007; Chiaburu &
Marinov a, 2005; Cromwell
& Kolb, 2004; Gilpin-
Jackson & Bushe, 2007;
Hawley & Barnard, 2005;
Kontoghiorghes, 2001; Saks
& Belcourt, 2006; Salas &
Stagl, 2009; Salas et al.,
2006; T ayloret al., 2005
Opportunity to
perform
For training to successfully
transfer, trainees need the
resources and opportunities
to apply their new skills and
abilities to the workplace.
Burke & Hutchins, 2007;
Clarke, 2002; Cromwell &
Kolb, 2004; Gilpin-Jackson
& Bushe, 2007; Lim &
Johnson, 2002; Salas et al.,
2006
Follow-up T o facilitate transfer, the
formal training period
should be followed by
additional learning
opportunities (e.g. after
action reviews, feedback,
job aids).
Baldwin et al., 2009; Salas &
Stagl, 2009; Salas et al.,
2006; V eladaet al., 2007
108 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
acquire, utilize and maintain trained competencies. Organizations can safely assume
that trainees’ cognitive ability will play a vital role in the ultimate success of their
training programs.
Self-efﬁcacy
Self-efﬁcacy , which has also been linked to the transfer of training, can be deﬁned as a
judgment an individual makes about his or her ability to perform a given task
(Bandura, 1982). The higher the trainees’ self-efﬁcacy , the more conﬁdence they will
have in their ability to successfully acquire targeted skills and perform trained tasks. In
challenging situations, individuals with low self-efﬁcacy are more likely to lessen or
discontinue their effort, whereas those with high self-efﬁcacy are more likely to exert
additional effort in order to meet the challenge (Robbins & Judge, 2009). Clearly , this
notion has important implications for training programs that often focus on novel or
difﬁcult work behaviors. Not surprisingly , self-efﬁcacy has consistently shown positive
relationships with the transfer of training (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). One example is a
study that collected data at two points in time following training, and found that
performance self-efﬁcacy signiﬁcantly related to training transfer (V eladaet al., 2007).
Research suggests that self-efﬁcacy partially contributes to transfer through its inﬂu-
ence on motiv ation (which is further discussed below). Colquitt et al. (2000), for
example, identiﬁed self-efﬁcacy as a signiﬁcant predictor of both training motiv ation
and training outcomes based on a meta-analytic review of the relev ant literature.
Individual studies following their review continue to yield similar results. A study by
Chiaburu and Marinov a (2005) indicates that self-efﬁcacy positively relates to pretrain-
ing motiv ation, which, in turn, signiﬁcantly predicts transfer. Chiaburu and Lindsay
(2008) drew similar conclusions after investigating the role of self-efﬁcacy in transfer
outcomes. Several other studies have also demonstrated a positive relationship
between self-efﬁcacy and transfer, either directly or indirectly , through trainee moti-
v ation (e.g. Fordet al., 1998; Holladay & Quiñones, 2003).
It is important to note, however, that high self-efﬁcacy might not unconditionally
result in positive transfer outcomes. Recent work has identiﬁed circumstances in
which self-efﬁcacy did not correlate with v alued performance outcomes. In a meta-
analytic review , for instance, self-efﬁcacy predicted performance in jobs or tasks of low
complexity , but not those of medium or high complexity (Judgeet al., 2007). Interest-
ingly , a study by V ancouver and Kendall (2006) found that self-efﬁcacy actually nega-
tively related to motiv ation and performance when it was examined at the individual
level. The authors suggested that high self-efﬁcacy could cause individuals to feel they
are adequately prepared for a challenge, and could thus reduce their motiv ation to
prepare or put forth sufﬁcient effort. Although these studies do not examine transfer
speciﬁcally , they have implications for performance in general that might extend to the
training domain. The training literature could certainly beneﬁt from future research
examining this possibility .
Nevertheless, existing research continues to demonstrate the signiﬁcance of self-
efﬁcacy in the transfer of training. Consistent with previous ﬁndings, a recent meta-
analysis (Blume et al., 2010) showed a positive relationship between self-efﬁcacy and
transfer. In sum, the extant literature suggests that trainees must believe in their ability
to perform certain skills before they can be transferred to the workplace. Individuals
higher in self-efﬁcacy will be more conﬁdent in their ability to learn and apply new
things, and thus will likely be more motiv ated to transfer training. Although self-
efﬁcacy may not be an obvious component of training programs, organizations could
greatly beneﬁt from understanding its signiﬁcant role in the transfer of training.
Motivation
In more recent years, trainee motiv ation has emerged as a signiﬁcant contributor to the
transfer of training (Baldwinet al., 2009). Motiv ation refers to the processes that account
for an individual’s intensity , direction and persistence of effort toward attaining a goal
(Robbins & Judge, 2009). For transfer to occur, trainees must believe that they are
capable of learning, that their effort to learn will change their performance and that a
The transfer of training 109
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
change in their performance will lead to v alued outcomes (Facteau et al., 1995). In
relation to transfer, motiv ation has been conceptualized and studied in v arious ways.
Speciﬁcally , pretraining motiv ation, motiv ation to learn and motiv ation to transfer have
all exhibited important relationships with training outcomes (Burke & Hutchins, 2007).
Naquin and Holton (2002), for example, developed a construct termed motiv ation to
improve work through learning (MTIWL) that encompasses both motiv ation to learn
and motiv ation to transfer. The authors found that MTIWL predicted transfer signiﬁ-
cantly greater than other relev ant v ariables in their study . In an investigation of the
effects of trainee characteristics on training effectiveness, Tzineret al. (2007) found that
motiv ation to learn was the strongest contributor to training outcomes. Lim and
Johnson (2002) explored factors that were thought to facilitate or hinder transfer, and
identiﬁed motiv ation to transfer as a primary supporting v ariable. Other studies have
also demonstrated the impact of motiv ation to transfer and pretraining motiv ation on
the transfer of training (e.g. Chiaburu & Lindsay , 2008; Chiaburu & Marinov a, 2005).
Blume et al.’s (2010) meta-analysis provides additional evidence of a positive relation-
ship between motiv ation and transfer.
Whereas few studies have compared the different types of motiv ation in relation to
transfer, limited empirical ﬁndings suggest that motiv ation to transfer may play the
most signiﬁcant role. Speciﬁcally , Chiaburu and Lindsay (2008) examined both moti-
v ation to learn and motiv ation to transfer and found that motiv ation to transfer exhib-
ited a markedly stronger relationship with transfer (0.43) than did motiv ation to learn
(0.07). Interestingly , however, they also found a positive relationship between motiv a-
tion to learn and motiv ation to transfer (0.26), suggesting that motiv ation to transfer
may still play an important, albeit indirect role. The authors proposed that motiv ation
to learn might inﬂuence trainees’ performance in the instructional environment, yet
motiv ation to transfer is more likely to trigger the proactive behaviors necessary for
actual transfer. T aken together, these ﬁndings indicate that it is critical that trainees
remain motiv ated during multiple stages of the training process for transfer to occur.
Trainees must believe that it is possible to learn and increase performance, and that
such improvements will beneﬁt them. Although trainee motiv ation is another factor
that is often overlooked, it undoubtedly plays a crucial role before, during and after
training.
Perceived utility/instrumentality
Transfer can also be inﬂuenced by the perceived utility or v alue associated with par-
ticipating in training (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Training has high utility or instru-
mentality when trainees perceive a clear link between required performance and
outcomes that they v alue (Chiaburu & Lindsay , 2008). Burke and Hutchins (2007)
summarized factors that inﬂuence perceptions of training utility . These include train-
ees’ ev aluation of the credibility of the new skills for improving performance, their
recognition of a need to improve job performance, their belief that applying new
learning will improve performance and their perception of the practicality of the new
skills for ease of transfer. V elada et al. (2007) showed that trainees’ assessments of
how applicable the training was to the job, or the degree to which training instruc-
tions matched job requirements, signiﬁcantly related to training transfer. Similarly ,
Gilpin-Jackson and Bushe (2007) emphasized the importance of trainees’ judgments
about the v alue of the training. Finally , Chiaburu and Lindsay (2008) surveyed
employees from a large service organization in the United States and found a strong
relationship between training instrumentality and transfer. Instrumentality was also
related to motiv ation to transfer, the primary predictor of training transfer in this
study . In general, trainees who perceive training as useful and v aluable are far more
likely to apply new competencies to the workplace than those who do not. Trainees
who are not assured of the importance of training will lack the motiv ation to learn
and apply targeted skills. Organizations would be well advised to devote a portion
of their training programs to communicating the necessity and utility of their train-
ing efforts.
110 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Training design
The design and delivery of training programs signiﬁcantly impact learning and, ulti-
mately , transfer outcomes. Learning principles have been used to facilitate the learning,
retention and generalization of targeted skills. W e focus on the use of behavioral
modeling, error management and realistic training environments, all of which have
shown strong relationships with the transfer of training.
Behavior modeling
Behavior modeling has emerged as an effective training strategy , perhaps because it
incorporates several different learning principles. Based on Bandura’s (1977) social
learning theory , this approach includes clearly deﬁned explanations of behaviors to be
learned, models displaying the effective use of these behaviors, opportunities for
trainees to practice learned skills and the provision of feedback and social reinforce-
ment following practice (T aylor et al., 2005). In a meta-analytic review , T ayloret al.
(2005) concluded that behavioral modeling facilitated transfer the most when mixed
(both positive and negative) models were provided, when trainees generated their own
scenarios during practice, when trainees were prompted to set goals, when trainees’
supervisors also underwent training and when rewards and sanctions were instituted
in the work environment. Behavioral modeling thus appears to be an effective strategy
for promoting the transfer of training. Providing opportunities for trainees to observe
and practice targeted behaviors enhances their ability to learn and retain new infor-
mation. Of the array of learning strategies to choose from when designing training
programs, research suggests that behavior modeling is of particular importance for the
transfer of training.
Error management
Error management is a related training strategy that has also proven to effectively
promote transfer (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Allowing trainees to make errors and
providing error management instructions have emerged as effective ways to facilitate
the proper use of targeted knowledge and skills in the workplace. Heimbeck et al.
(2003), for example, found that training transfer was greater for trainees who were
provided with error training and error management instructions as compared to train-
ees who received error training alone or those who were prevented from making errors
during the training process. Error-based training allows trainees to anticipate what can
go wrong, and equips them with the knowledge of how to handle potential problems.
Furthermore, such training can enhance the perceived utility of training by exempli-
fying negative outcomes that can occur without the acquisition of trained skills (Burke
& Hutchins, 2007). Additional support was found in a recent meta-analysis in which
error management training yielded greater transfer outcomes than error-avoidant
training methods (Keith & Frese, 2008). Error management training was especially
effective for post-training, rather than within training performance, and for novel,
rather than similar tasks, two critical components of training transfer. In sum, transfer
is facilitated when training incorporates information regarding potential errors and
how they should be dealt with. Providing information about incorrect behaviors
appears to be equally as important as communicating target behaviors. Organizations
can beneﬁt from recognizing error management as an effective strategy for promoting
the transfer of training.
Realistic training environment
A recurring theme in the literature is the importance of authentic training and practice
settings. Aspects of training should mirror the environment in which trained compe-
tencies will be applied as closely as possible. Many organizations go as far as conduct-
ing on-the-job training, which takes place in the actual physical and social environment
where the tasks being trained will be performed (Salaset al., 2006). Trained skills are
more likely to transfer to the job following training in this case because they were
learned and practiced in the work environment. Training settings that closely resemble
The transfer of training 111
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
multiple aspects of the workplace, however, can also be effective. Kraiger (2003), for
example, summarized training techniques that have been shown to enhance transfer.
These include the use of identical elements, stimulus v ariability and v arying conditions
of practice. Such strategies allow trainees to gain experience with multiple conditions
that can occur on the job. Similarly , practice scenarios should encompass characteristics
of the actual work environment (Salas et al., 2006). Accordingly , many training pro-
grams now incorporate the use of simulations. Interestingly , both low-ﬁdelity (e.g.
role-playing) and high-ﬁdelity (e.g. full-motion simulators) simulations have shown to
be equally effective training strategies. Realistic practice scenarios also help promote
active learning, a technique thought to maintain trainees’ attention and contribute to
transfer (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Overall, conducting training and practice in envi-
ronments that resemble the workplace increases the likelihood that trained competen-
cies will transfer. Providing a relev ant training context essentially allows trainees to
gain experience implementing targeted behaviors in the appropriate environment.
Realistic training environments are thus signiﬁcant contributors to the transfer of
training.
Work environment
The work environment following training has a signiﬁcant impact on transfer out-
comes. The effectiveness of a training program is largely dependent on the trainees’
ability to use their newly acquired competencies on the job (Salas et al., 2006). Envi-
ronmental factors help determine whether or not trainees exhibit learned behaviors
once they return to the work setting. Even programs that are designed and delivered
effectively will fail to yield positive transfer outcomes when the subsequent work
environment does not encourage the use of targeted behaviors. The most critical com-
ponents of the work environment include transfer climate, support, opportunity and
follow-up.
Transfer climate
Transfer climate has been conceptualized as observ able or perceived situations in
organizations that inhibit or facilitate the use of learned skills (Rouiller & Goldstein,
1993). When trainees perceive a positive transfer climate, they tend to apply learned
competencies more readily on the job (Salaset al., 2006). Characteristics of a positive
transfer climate include cues that prompt trainees to use new skills, consequences for
the correct use of skills and remediation for the incorrect or lack of use, and social
support from supervisors and peers through the use of incentives and feedback.
Furthermore, Rouiller and Goldstein (1993) classify these characteristics into two cat-
egories: situational cues and consequences. Situational cues include things such as
manager goals, peer support, equipment av ailability and opportunity to practice
trained skills. Consequences consist of punishment and positive and negative feedback
following the application of trained skills. The combination of such characteristics can
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the degree to which trained skills are transferred to the work-
place. In a longitudinal study examining technology training, for example, the rela-
tionship between training and intentions to use new skills on the job was mediated by
employees’ perceptions of av ailable resources (Marler et al., 2006). Perceptions of
resources were based on beliefs about whether or not sufﬁcient time to practice new
skills would be provided, whether or not supervisors would support the learning
process and whether or not documentation and expert help would be av ailable.
Whereas several important factors contribute to climate (as discussed in more detail in
the following sections), transfer climate as a whole has shown important relationships
with transfer outcomes. Colquittet al. (2000) reported a corrected correlation coefﬁcient
of 0.37 between climate and transfer. A recent meta-analysis showed similar results,
with transfer climate showing the highest relationship with transfer as compared to
other components of the work environment (Blumeet al., 2010). In a qualitative explor-
atory study , trainees identiﬁed an unsupportive transfer climate as the greatest inhibi-
tor to the transfer of training (Gilpin-Jackson & Bushe, 2007). Trainees were reportedly
112 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
hesitant to apply new skills to the workplace when they feared breaking organizational
norms. Burke et al. (2008) analysed data from 68 organizations around the world and
showed that a strong organizational safety climate signiﬁcantly impacted the transfer of
safety training. Finally , Kontoghiorghes (2001) found evidence that transfer climate,
speciﬁcally task cues that prompt the use of new skills and knowledge acquired in
training, was among the most inﬂuential v ariables for the transfer of training. Overall,
a positive transfer climate is critical for the application and maintenance of new skills
on the job. Organizations that do not take transfer climate into account could seriously
hamper their training efforts.
Support
Perhaps through its impact on transfer climate, support is one of the most salient
aspects of the work environment related to transfer. Both supervisor and peer support
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the propensity for trainees to utilize trained competencies in the
workplace. Supervisors can provide support in v arious ways and at multiple stages in
the training process. Although Baldwin and Ford (1988) reported some ambiguity
regarding what constitutes support, subsequent research identiﬁes several broad
behaviors that are generally included in this dimension (Salaset al., 2006). Goal setting,
for example, can have a signiﬁcant impact on transfer outcomes. Prior to training,
supervisors should communicate goals regarding the desired performance, the condi-
tions under which the performance will be expected to occur on the job and the
criterion of acceptable performance (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Following training,
trainees should be prompted by their supervisors to set proximal and distal goals for
applying newly acquired competencies in the workplace (T ayloret al., 2005). Research
indicates that speciﬁc and difﬁcult goals, in combination with feedback, can greatly
enhance motiv ation and, in turn, performance (Robbins & Judge, 2009). Importantly ,
goal setting can facilitate transfer by directing attention, stimulating action, increasing
persistence and prompting trainees to utilize newly acquired knowledge and abilities
(Locke & Latham, 2002). It is worth noting, however, that the beneﬁts of goal setting are
not without their limitations. Some scholars have argued that when particularly speciﬁc
or difﬁcult, goals can actually be detrimental due to their potential to narrow one’s
focus, shift risk attitudes and precipitate the psychological costs associated with goal
failure (Ordoñez et al., 2009). Furthermore, the same goals may not prove beneﬁcial
when applied to different people, as individuals differ in their abilities and the degrees
to which they identify with certain goals. Nevertheless, research generally indicates a
positive relationship between goal setting and transfer (e.g. Burke & Hutchins, 2007).
Supervisors can likely facilitate optimal transfer outcomes by implementing goal
setting while remaining cognizant of its potential limitations.
Supervisors can also support trainees by providing recognition, encouragement and
rewards, and modeling trained behaviors (Salas & Stagl, 2009; Salaset al., 2006). Fur-
thermore, Lim and Johnson (2002) identiﬁed supervisors’ participation in discussions
of new learning, involvement in training and provision of positive feedback as forms of
support most recognized by trainees as positively inﬂuencing their transfer. Cromwell
and Kolb (2004) showed that trainees who received high levels of supervisor support
transferred more knowledge and skills 1 year after participating in a training program
than those who reported lower levels of support. Likewise, trainees cited lack of
management support as a signiﬁcant barrier to the transfer of training. Other studies
have emphasized the importance of supervisor involvement or participation in training
for transfer outcomes (e.g. Gilpin-Jackson & Bushe, 2007; Saks & Belcourt, 2006).
Supervisory support in the form of encouragement for the application of new skills
(Kontoghiorghes, 2001), information sharing, direct feedback and the provision of
resources (Awoniyiet al., 2002) has also shown strong relationships with the transfer of
training. Finally , supervisor support emerged as one of the strongest predictors
of transfer in a recent meta-analysis by Blumeet al. (2010).
Support from peers has also shown consistent relationships with transfer. Chiaburu
and Marinov a (2005), for instance, reported that peer support showed a strong, direct
relationship with transfer, as well as an indirect inﬂuence through its impact on
The transfer of training 113
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
motiv ation. Trainees in Gilpin-Jackson and Bushe’s (2007) study indicated that observ-
ing others using trained skills and being able to coach one another greatly facilitated
training transfer. Cromwell and Kolb (2004) showed that high levels of peer support
related to the transfer of knowledge and skills 1 year after training. Another study
demonstrated that transfer is facilitated when trainees network with peers and share
ideas about course content (Hawley & Barnard, 2005). A meta-analytic review of the
transfer literature also established a positive relationship between peer support and the
transfer of training (Blumeet al., 2010).
Little evidence exists suggesting that one type of support exerts a stronger inﬂuence
on transfer than does the other (i.e. supervisor versus peer support). A recent study
found no difference when feedback, a form of support, was provided by peers versus
when it was provided by supervisors (V an den Bosscheet al., 2010). More important in
this case was the number of people providing feedback and the helpfulness of the
feedback, both of which positively related to motiv ation to transfer and, in turn, actual
transfer. Results of the aforementioned meta-analysis (Blumeet al., 2010), however, do
indicate a stronger relationship between supervisor support and transfer (0.31) than
between peer support and transfer (0.14), although the authors were quick to point out
the small sample sizes on which these ﬁndings were based. In sum, the transfer of
training is facilitated through the provision of both supervisor and peer support. Of all
of the work environment v ariables, support has garnered perhaps the strongest evi-
dence for its role in the transfer of training. Organizations should have little doubt that
support, from both supervisors and peers, does matter.
Opportunity to perform
Employees need ample opportunities to apply their new skills to the workplace for
positive transfer to occur (Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Research consistently shows that a
lack of such opportunities can seriously inhibit the use of trained competencies on the
job. Clarke (2002), for example, identiﬁed limited opportunity to perform skills on the
job as the strongest barrier to successful training transfer. A study by Lim and Johnson
(2002) demonstrated that the provision of opportunities can also be conceptualized as
a form of support. Trainees rated opportunity to use trained skills as the highest form
of support, and conversely , the lack of opportunity to use training as the biggest
obstacle to transfer. After conducting interviews with trainees, Gilpin-Jackson and
Bushe (2007) concluded that having time to use new skills is critical for training
transfer. Similarly , Cromwell and Kolb (2004) showed that lack of time was a signiﬁcant
barrier to transfer. T o provide opportunities, managers should modify recent trainees’
workloads to allow them to practice new skills on the job (Clarke, 2002). Furthermore,
delay between training and opportunity for trainees to use their learned skills should
be minimized for optimal transfer outcomes (Salaset al., 2006). For training to success-
fully transfer, trainees need the resources and opportunities to apply their new skills
and abilities to the workplace.
Follow-up
The completion of formal training should not mark the end of the learning experience.
The period immediately following the ofﬁcial training program holds v arious oppor-
tunities for enhancing learning and maintenance (Salas & Stagl, 2009). After action
reviews, for example, can serve to debrief trainees and provide further education.
Trainees should reﬂect on their training experience and follow up with practice and
discussion. Training instructors and supervisors should also provide post-training
follow-up and feedback (Baldwinet al., 2009). V eladaet al. (2007), for example, found
that feedback regarding trainees’ post-training performance signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
transfer. Furthermore, Salas et al. (2006) emphasize the use of job aids, tools that are
designed to assist with job performance and further facilitate the transfer of training.
There are v arious job aids that can be utilized including informational aids, procedural
aids and decision-making and coaching aids. Job aids facilitate transfer by providing
important instructions and other reference materials, thereby reducing the mental
workload required to apply new skills to the workplace. In an updated review of the
114 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
transfer literature, Baldwin et al. (2009) concluded that post-training interventions
such as relapse prevention, self-management, goal setting, training in self-talk and
post-training instructor follow-ups generally show positive effects on the transfer of
training. Organizations should therefore continue to facilitate the learning process
following the completion of training to promote positive transfer.
Discussion
The global economy and technological adv ances of today require organizations to
make constant adjustments in order to maintain a competitive adv antage (Arguinis &
Kraiger, 2009). One such change is the set of knowledge, skills and abilities that are
now critical for success. Most employees do not inherently possess the qualities needed
to meet these changing work demands, however. As a result, organizations invest
billions of dollars in training interventions every year (P aradise, 2007). Despite these
efforts, many of them reportedly fail to develop the skills and abilities they target (IBM,
2008). Although employees might learn from their training experiences, trained com-
petencies are generally not applied or transferred to the workplace. Training transfer
refers to the application, generalization and maintenance of trained skills on the job
(Ford & W eissbein, 1997). The apparent transfer problem has long been a paramount
concern of organizations and researchers alike (Michalak, 1981). The large expanse of
training literature that has thus accumulated is highly useful but could create difﬁculty
for organizations trying to identify key ﬁndings. Accordingly , the purpose of this paper
was to identify factors that have shown the strongest, most consistent relationships
with the transfer of training. Based on Baldwin and Ford’s (1988) model of transfer, we
presented the trainee characteristics, features of the work design and elements of the
work environment that have largely shown signiﬁcant relationships with training
transfer. W e will discuss the implications of these ﬁndings below .
Trainee characteristics
Research has demonstrated a strong relationship between trainees’ cognitive ability
and the transfer of training (for example, Baldwin & Ford, 1988; Colquittet al., 2000).
Although this is not a characteristic that organizations can necessarily control, they can
consider these ﬁndings when determining which employees will participate in train-
ing. Furthermore, the use of job aids might lessen the gap between trainees with higher
and lower cognitive ability by decreasing the cognitive load that is required to apply
training to the workplace.
Self-efﬁcacy has also continually been linked to transfer outcomes (for example,
Burke & Hutchins, 2007; Colquitt et al., 2000). Before trainees can transfer new com-
petencies to the job, they must believe that they are capable of successfully acquiring
and performing them. Encouragingly , interventions designed to increase learner self-
efﬁcacy have been shown to effectively improve training performance (Burke &
Hutchins, 2007). Unlike other trainee characteristics, such as intelligence or person-
ality , this implies that self-efﬁcacy is susceptible to interventions. When implementing
interventions or selecting trainees on the basis of self-efﬁcacy , however, organizations
should be cognizant of research suggesting the possibility of having too much self-
efﬁcacy (V ancouver & Kendall, 2006). If trainees are overly conﬁdent in their abilities,
they might experience reduced motiv ation to learn and decrease the amount of effort
they exert during training. These propositions have not yet been empirically sup-
ported in relation to transfer, however, and the current training literature generally
suggests that at least a moderate level of self-efﬁcacy is essential for the transfer of
training.
Motiv ation relates to trainees’ intensity , direction and persistence toward attaining a
goal (Robbins & Judge, 2009). Pretraining motiv ation, motiv ation to learn and motiv a-
tion to transfer have all demonstrated important relationships with training transfer
(Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Motiv ation has also proven to be susceptible to interven-
tions. Goal setting, in particular, is a well-established method for increasing motiv ation
The transfer of training 115
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
(Robbins & Judge, 2009). Goals serve as a source of motiv ation by directing attention,
energizing, increasing persistence and prompting the utilization of existing knowledge
or strategies, or the search for new information required to carry out the goal (Locke &
Latham, 2002). Goals do have potential limitations, however (e.g. overly narrowed
focus), which should be carefully considered in the event that they are implemented
(Ordoñez et al., 2009). Ultimately , training transfer can potentially be increased when
interventions designed to improve motiv ation are implemented.
Transfer is facilitated when trainees perceive clear links from training to performance
required on the job, and outcomes they consider v aluable (Chiaburu & Lindsay , 2008).
Organizations can potentially increase trainees’ perceptions of training utility by
ensuring that the relev ance of training programs are clearly communicated to those
who participate in them.
Aligning human resource practices to promote transfer
The determinants of training transfer clearly extend far beyond the characteristics of the
training program itself. Perhaps the most basic factors to consider are those that
characterize the individuals being trained. The results of this and other reviews suggest
that organizations can promote transfer by carefully considering the individual-level
factors shown to inﬂuence transfer (i.e. cognitive ability , self-efﬁcacy , motiv ation and
perceived utility) when recruiting and selecting trainees. Speciﬁcally , organizations can
beneﬁt from aligning their recruitment and selection practices with the goals of their
training programs. Other researchers have emphasized the importance of integrating
v arious organizational practices (e.g. Pfeffer, 1998). Arguably , implementing practices
in a piecemeal, isolated fashion might be ineffective or, in some instances, even coun-
terproductive. Organizations can thus enhance transfer by aligning training efforts
with related human resource practices. Because cognitive ability has exhibited strong,
consistent relationships with transfer, for example, only individuals high in cognitive
ability should be selected to participate in training that is particularly important or
difﬁcult. This notion is in line with other ﬁndings in the human resource literature
showing that businesses that reportedly have aligned practices, in some instances,
outperform those who do not (e.g. V erburget al., 2007).
Training design
Research also suggests that behavior modeling, error management and realistic train-
ing environments are aspects of training design that are critical for the transfer of
training (e.g. Keith & Frese, 2008; Kraiger, 2003; T ayloret al., 2005). Clearly , each of
these factors can be manipulated to promote transfer. Organizations should consider
these strategies when implementing training programs.
Work environment
Transfer climate has also emerged as signiﬁcant predictor of transfer outcomes (Salas
et al., 2006). Fortunately , this is another factor that can be largely inﬂuenced by the
organization. T o facilitate transfer, the workplace should contain cues that prompt the
use of new skills, and trainees should be provided with such things as opportunities to
practice, goals and incentives and performance feedback (Rouiller & Goldstein, 1993).
Similarly , efforts should be made to increase supervisor and peer support, other impor-
tant contributors to the transfer of training (e.g. Blume et al., 2010; V an den Bossche
et al., 2010).
Not surprisingly , trainees need opportunities to apply new competencies in order for
them to transfer to the job (e.g. Burke & Hutchins, 2007). Organizations can provide
opportunities by designating time and resources for the application of new skills.
Supervisors, for example, can modify recent trainees’ workloads to increase their
opportunities to practice what they learned in the workplace.
Finally , research shows that organizations should not consider the completion of
formal training the end of the learning process (Salas & Stagl, 2009). Training should
116 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
be followed up with after action reviews, discussions, practice and feedback in order
to promote transfer (e.g. Baldwinet al., 2009). Job aids are also a relatively simple way
to increase the probability that trained skills will be applied to the job (Salas et al.,
2006).
Implications for research and practice
Baldwin and Ford’s (1988) early call for additional research did not fall on deaf ears.
Since their review , an explosion of conceptual and empirical research has greatly
expanded our understanding of transfer and has adv anced the science of training.
Although great progress has been made, a number of ﬁndings remain inconsistent or
ambiguous. Even in recent years, scholars have described the transfer literature as
having ‘mixed ﬁndings’ and a lack of ‘synthesis’ (Blumeet al., 2010, p. 1089). Thus, the
goal of this paper was to extract the strongest, most consistent ﬁndings from the
literature in order to help organizations, and even researchers, identify the ‘bottom
line’. W e argue that organizations cannot feasibly incorporate every factor that has
been linked to transfer into their training programs. Rather, they could beneﬁt from
a set of best practices or guidelines identifying only those factors which are most
likely to make a signiﬁcant impact on their transfer outcomes. W e are not the ﬁrst
researchers to recognize the need for a uniﬁed set of transfer guidelines. In their
recent investigation of best practices, Burke and Hutchins (2008, p. 109) stated that,
‘best practice reports in training, or speciﬁcally for the transfer of training, are limited,
lacking in practicality , dated, or often anecdotal in nature’. Although their research is
certainly v aluable, the authors’ focus was on identifying best practices used by expe-
rienced training professionals rather than on those supported in the literature. W e
believe that our identiﬁcation of the strongest, most consistent ﬁndings reported in
the literature can serve as a v aluable compliment to Burke and Hutchins’s (2008)
practice-based paper.
In addition to providing a succinct guide for organizations, we believe that our
paper can also serve a purpose for training researchers. The factors included in our
review , we argue, have now garnered sufﬁcient evidence suggesting that they do, in
fact, reliably exhibit strong relationships with the transfer of training. Instead of inves-
tigating whether or not these factors inﬂuence transfer, attention should now be
shifted to examining the conditions under which the factors are most important.
Consistent with other researchers (for example, Blume et al., 2010), we encourage
future researchers to take a closer look at the v ariables that we extracted. Of particular
interest, for example, is identifying when each factor is most important – before,
during or after training. As previously mentioned, incorporating multiple factors into
training programs might not be ﬁnancially or logistically practical for many organi-
zations. Future research examining when it is most important to focus on each
factor could prove v aluable for organizations with fewer resources. W e hope our
paper can serve as a springboard for researchers interested in examining these and
similar questions.
Conclusions
Organizations that seek guidance when developing training programs and promoting
the transfer of training can rely on a v ast database of literature that has resulted from
decades of research. Such resources, however, contain numerous, sometimes inconsis-
tent, ﬁndings that can make it difﬁcult for organizations to pinpoint exactly which
factors are most critical for training transfer. W e identiﬁed v ariables related to trainees,
training design and the work environment that have shown the strongest, most con-
sistent relationships with transfer. This simpliﬁed review can serve as a basic guideline
for those interested in determining what really matters in regard to the transfer of
training.
The transfer of training 117
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
References
Arguinis, H. and Kraiger, K. (2009), ‘Beneﬁts of training and development for individuals and
teams, organizations, and society’,Annual Review of Psychology,60, 451–74.
Arthur, W ., Bennett, W ., Edens, P . S. and Bell, S. T. (2003), ‘Effectiveness of training in organiza-
tions: a meta-analysis of design and ev aluation features’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
234–45.
Awoniyi, E. A., Griego, O. V . and Morgan, G. A. (2002), ‘Person-environment ﬁt and transfer
of training’, International Journal of Training and Development,6, 25–35.
Baldwin, T. T. and Ford, J. K. (1988), ‘Transfer of training: a review and directions for future
research’, Personnel Psychology, 41, 63–105.
Baldwin, T. T., Ford, K. J. and Blume, B. D. (2009), ‘Transfer of training 1988–2008: an updated
review and agenda for future research’, International Review of Industrial and Organizational
Psychology, 24, 41–70.
Bandura, A. (1977), Social Learning Theory(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).
Bandura, A. (1982), ‘Self-efﬁcacy mechanism in human agency’,American Psychologist,37, 122–47.
Blume, B. D., Ford, J. K., Baldwin, T. T. and Huang, J. L. (2010), ‘Transfer of training: a
meta-analytic review’, Journal of Management,39, 1065–105.
Burke, L. A. and Hutchins, H. M. (2007), ‘Training transfer: an integrative literature review’,
Human Resource Development Review,6, 263–96.
Burke, L. and Hutchins, H. (2008), ‘A study of best practices in training transfer and proposed
model of transfer’, Human Resource Development Quarterly,19, 107–28.
Burke, M. J., Chan-Seraﬁn, S., Salv ador, R., Smith, A. and Sarpy, S. A. (2008), ‘The role of national
culture and organizational climate in safety training effectiveness’,European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 17, 133–52.
Cheng, E. W . L. and Hampson, I. (2008), ‘Transfer of training: a review and new insights’,
International Journal of Management Reviews,10, 327–41.
Cheng, E. and Ho, D. (2001), ‘A review of transfer of training studies in the past decade’,Personnel
Review, 30, 102–18.
Chiaburu, D. S. and Lindsay, D. R. (2008), ‘Can do or will do? The importance of self-efﬁcacy and
instrumentality for training transfer’,Human Resource Development International,11, 199–206.
Chiaburu, D. S. and Marinov a, S. V . (2005), ‘What predicts skill transfer? An exploratory study of
goal orientation, training self-efﬁcacy and organizational supports’, International Journal of
Training and Development,9, 110–23.
Clarke, N. (2002), ‘Job/work environment factors inﬂuencing training effectiveness within a
human service agency: some indicative support for Baldwin and Ford’s transfer climate
construct’, International Journal of Training and Development,6, 146–62.
Colquitt, J. A., LePine, J. A. and Noe, R. A. (2000), ‘T oward an integrative theory of training
motiv ation: a meta-analytic path analysis of 20 years of research’,Journal of Applied Psychology,
85, 678–707.
Cromwell, S. E. and Kolb, J. A. (2004), ‘An examination of work-environment support factors
affecting transfer of supervisory skills training to the workplace’,Human Resource Development
Quarterly, 15, 449–71.
Facteau, J. D., Dobbins, G. H., Russel, J. E. A., Ladd, R. T., Kudisch, J. D. (1995), ‘The inﬂuence of
general perceptions of the training environment on pretraining motiv ation and perceived
training transfer’, Journal of Management,21, 1–25.
Ford, J. K. and W eissbein, D. (1997), ‘Transfer of training: an updated review’,Performance and
Instruction Quarterly, 10, 22–41.
Ford, J., Smith, E., W eissbein, D., Gully, S. and Salas, E. (1998), ‘Relationships of goal orientation,
metacognitive activity , and practice strategies with learning outcomes and transfer’,Journal of
Applied Psychology, 8, 218–33.
Georgenson, D. L. (1982), ‘The problem of transfer calls for partnership’,Training and Development
Journal, 36, 75–8.
Gilpin-Jackson, Y . and Bushe, G. R. (2007), ‘Leadership development training transfer:
a case study of post-training determinants’, Journal of Management Development, 26, 980–
1004.
Goldman, D. (2000), Legal Landmines to Avoid in Employment Training. Retrieved from http://
www .ihrnet.com (accessed 17 February 2010).
Goldstein, I. L. and Ford, J. K. (2002),Training in Organizations, 4th edn (Belmont, CA: W adsworth
Thompson Learning).
Hawley, J. D. and Barnard, J. K. (2005), ‘W ork environment characteristics and implications for
training transfer: a case study of the nuclear power industry’, Human Resource Development
International, 8, 65–80.
118 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Heimbeck, D., Frese, M., Sonnentag, S. and Keith, N. (2003), ‘Integrating errors into the training
process: the function of error management instructions and the role of goal orientation’,
Personnel Psychology, 56, 333–61.
Holladay, C. and Quiñones, M. (2003), ‘Practice v ariability and transfer of training: the role
of self-efﬁcacy generality’, Journal of Applied Psychology,88, 1094–103.
Hutchins, H. M. and Burke, L. A. (2007), ‘Identifying trainers’ knowledge of training transfer
research ﬁndings – closing the gap between research and practice’, International Journal of
Training and Development,11, 236–64.
IBM (2008), Unlocking the DNA of the Adaptable Workforce, the IBM Global Human Capital Study
(Milwaukee, WI: IBM).
Judge, T. A., Jackson, C. L., Shaw, J. C., Scott, B. A. and Rich, B. L. (2007), ‘Self-efﬁcacy and
work-related performance: the integral role of individual differences’,Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 92, 107–27.
Kanfer, R. and Ackerman, P . L. (1989), ‘Motiv ation and cognitive abilities: an integrative/
-aptitude-treatment interaction approach to skill acquisition’,Journal of Applied Psychology,74,
657–90.
Keith, N. and Frese, M. (2005), ‘Self-regulation in error management training: emotion control
and metacognition as mediators of performance effects’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 90,
677–91.
Keith, N. and Frese, M. (2008), ‘Effectiveness of error management training: a meta-analysis’,
Journal of Applied Psychology,93, 59–69.
Kontoghiorghes, C. (2001), ‘Factors affecting training effectiveness in the context of the introduc-
tion of a new technology – A US case study .’,International Journal of Training and Development,
5, 248–60.
Kraiger, K. (2003), Perspectives on Training and Development. Handbook of Psychology: Volume
12, Industrial and Organizational Psychology(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley), pp. 171–92.
Lim, D. H. and Johnson, S. D. (2002), ‘Trainee perceptions of factors that inﬂuence learning
transfer’, International Journal of Training and Development,6, 36–48.
Locke, E. and Latham, G. (2002), ‘Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and
task motiv ation: a 35-year odyssey’,American Psychologist, 57, 705–17.
Marler, J. H., Liang, X. Y . and Dulebohn, J. H. (2006), ‘Training and effective employee informa-
tion technology use’, Journal of Management,32, 721–43.
Merriam, S. B. and Leahy, B. (2005), ‘Learning transfer: a review of the research in adult education
and training’, PAACE Journal of Lifelong Learning,14, 1–24.
Michalak, D. F . (1981), ‘The neglected half of training’, Training and Development Journal, 35,
22–8.
Naquin, S. S. and Holton, E. F . III (2002), ‘The effects of personality , affectivity , and work
commitment on motiv ation to improve work through learning’,Human Resource Development
Quarterly, 13, 357–76.
National Safety Council (2010),Summary from Injury Facts, 2010 Edition.
Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T. J., Boykin, W . A., Brody, N., Ceci, S. J.et al. (1996), ‘Intelli-
gence: known and unknowns’,American Psychologist, 51, 77–101.
Ordoñez, L., Schweitzer, M. E., Galinsky, A. D. and Bazerman, M. H. (2009), ‘Goals gone wild:
how goals systematically harm individuals and organizations’,Academy of Management Perspec-
tives, 23, 6–16.
P aradise, A. (2007),State of the Industry: ASTD’s Annual Review of Trends in Workplace Learning and
Performance (Alexandria, V A: ASTD).
Pfeffer, J. (1998), ‘Seven practices of successful organizations’,
California Management Review,40,
96–124.
Robbins, S. P . and Judge, T. A. (2009),Organizational Behavior (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Prentice Hall).
Rouiller, J. Z. and Goldstein, I. L. (1993), ‘The relationship between organizational transfer climate
and positive transfer of training’,Human Resources Development Quarterly,4, 377–90.
Saks, A. M. and Belcourt, M. (2006), ‘An investigation of training activities and transfer of training
in organizations’, Human Resource Management,45, 629–48.
Salas, E. and Stagl, K. C. (2009), ‘Design Training Systematically and Follow the Science of
Training’, in E. Locke (ed.),Handbook of Principles of Organizational Behavior: Indispensible Knowl-
edge for Evidence-Based Management, 2nd edn (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons), pp. 59–84.
Salas, E., Wilson, K., Priest, H. and Guthrie, J. (2006), ‘Design, Delivery , and Ev aluation of Training
Systems’, in G. Salvendy (ed.),Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics, 3rd edn (Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons), pp. 472–512.
T aylor, P . J., Russ-Eft, D. F . and Chan, D. W . L. (2005), ‘A meta-analytic review of behavior
modeling training’, Journal of Applied Psychology,90, 692–709.
The transfer of training 119
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Tziner, A., Fisher, M., Senior, T. and W eisberg, J. (2007), ‘Effects of trainee characteristics on
training effectiveness’, International Journal of Selection & Assessment,15, 2, 167–74.
V an den Bossche, P ., Segers, M. and Jansen, N. (2010), ‘Transfer of training: the role of feedback
in supportive social networks’,International Journal of Training & Development,14, 81–94.
v an der Klink, M., Gielen, E. and Nauta, C. (2001), ‘Supervisory support as a major condition to
enhance transfer’, International Journal of Training and Development,5, 52–63.
v an Wijk, R., Jansen, J. J. P . and Lyles, M. A. (2008), ‘Inter- and intra-organizational knowledge
transfer: a meta-analytic review and assessment of its antecedents and consequences’,Journal
of Management Studies,45, 830–53.
V ancouver, J. B. and Kendall, L. N. (2006), ‘When self-efﬁcacy negatively relates to motiv ation and
performance in a learning context’,Journal of Applied Psychology,91, 1146–53.
V elada, R., Caetano, A., Michel, J. W ., Lyons, B. D. and Kav anagh, M. J. (2007), ‘The effects of
training design, individual characteristics and work environment on transfer of training’,
International Journal of Training and Development,11, 282–94.
V erburg, R., Den Hartog, D. N. and Koopman, P . L. (2007), ‘Conﬁgurations of human resource
management practices: a model and test of internal ﬁt’,International Journal of Human Resource
Management, 18, 184–208.
120 International Journal of Training and Development
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.