<<<PAGE=1>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
Evaluation for equitable development results
UNICEF Evaluation Office
3 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017, USA 
http://www.unicef.org/evaluation/index.html
2012 
In partnership with:
It is high time to put equity at the center of efforts to promote development. 
Addressing a high level meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in Tokyo 
last year, UNICEF’s Executive Director, Tony Lake, put the point eloquently.  
He declared: “There can be no true progress in human development unless its 
benefits are shared – and to some degree driven – by the most vulnerable among 
us... the equity approach is not only right in principle. It is right in practice”.
In the same vein, it is an appropriate moment to ask whether evaluation as a 
discipline and evaluators as a profession are addressing equity issues in ways 
which are indeed right in principle and right in practice. Some of the answers 
can be found in the present volume, which brings together a tremendous richness 
and diversity of evaluation thinking and experience. While a number of the papers 
included in the collection touch on approaches and methods already familiar 
to evaluators, the challenge of addressing the question of equity has helped to 
demonstrate renewed relevance and establish fresh perspectives. Several essays 
showcase examples of evaluations addressing equity issues, providing a valuable 
source of inspiration.
<<<PAGE=2>>>

<<<PAGE=3>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
<<<PAGE=4>>>
The Evaluation Working Papers (EWP) are documents that present strategic evaluation 
findings, lessons learned and innovative approaches and methodologies. We would like to 
encourage proposals for relevant papers which could be published in the next EWP issues. 
Papers can be prepared by UN staff and by partners.
For additional information and details please contact Marco Segone, Systemic strengthening, 
UNICEF Evaluation Office, msegone@unicef.org 
ISSUE # 1:  N ew trends in development evaluation. Published by UNICEF and IPEN, 2006.
ISSUE # 2:
 B
ridging the gap: The role of monitoring and evaluation in evidence-based policy 
making. Published by UNICEF in partnership with the World Bank, IDEAS,  
DevInfo and MICS, 2008.
ISSUE # 3:
 C
ountry-led monitoring and evaluation systems. Better evidence, better policies, 
better development results. Published by UNICEF in partnership with the World 
Bank, IDEAS, IOCE, UNECE, DevInfo and MICS, 2009.
ISSUE # 4: 
 C
ountry-led monitoring and evaluation systems. Watch and listen international 
keynote speakers. DVD published by UNICEF in partnership with IDEAS, IOCE, 
WFP, OECD/DAC Network on development evaluation and DevInfo, 2009. 
ISSUE #5:
 F
rom policies to results: Developing capacities for country monitoring and evaluation 
systems. Published by UNICEF in partnership with DevInfo, IDEAS, ILO, IOCE,  
The World Bank, UNDP, UNIFEM, WFP, 2010.
ISSUE #6:
 H
ow to design and manage Equity-focused evaluations. UNICEF, 2011.
Disclaimer:
The opinions expressed are the personal thinking of the contributors and do not necessarily reflect the policies 
or views of UNICEF or any other organization involved or named in this publication. The text has not been edited 
to official publication standards and UNICEF and partner organizations accept no responsibility for errors.
Extracts from this publication may be freely reproduced with due acknowledgement.
Design by
Photo Credits: UNICEF/NYHQ2006-1470/Giacomo Pirozzi
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
Editor
Marco Segone
Authors
Michael Bamberger
Katrina Bledsoe
Thania de la Garza
Soma de Silva
Janie Eriksen
Oscar Garcia
Jennifer Greene
Francisco Guzman
Katherine Hay
Gonzalo Hernández
Rodney Hopson
Richard Hummelbrunner
Saville Kushner
Karen Kirkhart
Donna Mertens
Janice Muir
María Fernanda Paredes
Michael Quinn Patton
Shravanti Reddy
Martin Reynolds
Patricia Rogers
Jim Rugh
Marco Segone
Juha Uitto
Brenda Valdez
Bob Williams
This book complements the following material available at www.mymande.org
•	 Manual on “How to design and manage Equity-focused evaluations” ,  
available free of charge at: http://www.mymande.org/?q=virtual
•	 Resource center  available, free of charge, at:  
http://www.mymande.org/?q=equity_focused_evaluations_intro 
•	 Webinar series  with world-level experts available, free of charge, at:  
http://www.mymande.org/?q=equity_focused_evaluation&x=cl
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Contents
Preface  
Colin Kirk, Director, UNICEF Evaluation Office,  
Soma de Silva and Jim Rugh, President and Vice President, IOCE,  
Ray Rist, President, IDEAS
 
........................................................................... VIII
Editorial   
by Marco Segone, UNICEF Evaluation Office; Co-chair, UNEG Taskforce  
on National Evaluation Capacities; and former IOCE Vice President
 
............. XIII
Acknowledgement  
..................................................................................... XIX
Part 1  
Evaluation and equity
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity, social justice  
and human rights
by Marco Segone, UNICEF Evaluation Office; Co-chair,  
UNEG Taskforce on National Evaluation Capacities;  
and former IOCE Vice President  
............................................................ 2
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
by Janie Eriksen, UNICEF Evaluation Office, Shravanti Reddy, 
UNWomen Evaluation Office, and Janice Muir, OIOS;  
and members of UNEG Taskforce on Human Rights and  
Gender Equality  
................................................................................... 13
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation 
by Donna Mertens, Department of Educational Foundations  
and Research, Gallaudet University  
..................................................... 25
Strengthening Equity- focused evaluations through insights from feminist 
theory and approaches 
by Katherine Hay, Senior Specialist, Evaluation, International 
Development Research Centre, Regional Office for South Asia  
and China
 
............................................................................................ 39
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and  
cautions for Equity-focused evaluations
by Rodney K. Hopson, Duquesne University, Karen E. Kirkhart,  
Syracuse University and Katrina L. Bledsoe, Education  
Development Center, Inc. .................................................................... 59
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
Part 2  
Methodological implications for Equity-focused evaluations 1
Methodological issues to design and implement equity-focused  
evaluations
by Michael Bamberger, Independent consultant  
................................. 86
Developmental evaluation for Equity-focused evaluations
by Michael Quinn Patton, Founder and Director, Utilization-focused 
evaluation  
.......................................................................................... 102
Systems thinking and Equity-focused evaluations
by Martin Reynolds, independent consultant  
and Bob Williams, independent consultant  
....................................... 115
Methodological challenges in using programme theory to evaluate  
pro-poor and equity-focused programmes 
by Patricia Rogers, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology  
University and Richard Hummelbrunner, Independent consultant  
..... 142
Case Study and equity in Evaluation
by Saville Kushner, University of the West of England
 
....................... 172
Values-Engaged Evaluations
by Jennifer Greene, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  
........ 192
Part 3  
Examples of Equity-focused evaluations
Evaluating the contribution of UNDP to equity-focused public policies  
in Brazil and China
by Juha Uitto, Deputy Director, UNDP Evaluation Office and  
Oscar Garcia, Senior Evaluation Adviser, UNDP Evaluation Office
 .... 2
10
Using a human rights approach to evaluate ILO’s discrimination strategy
by Francisco Guzman, Senior Evaluation Specialist,  
ILO Evaluation Office
 
......................................................................... 222
CONEVAL experience in evaluating interventions for Indigenous 
populations in Mexico
by Gonzalo Hernández, Thania de la Garza, María Fernanda Paredes  
and Brenda Valdez Meneses, Consejo Nacional de Evaluación  
de la Política de Desarrollo Social
 
...................................................... 244
UNICEF supported evaluations with elements  
of equity-focused evaluations  
................................................................. 258
Annexes
Authors Vitae  
.......................................................................................... 264
Abbreviations  
.......................................................................................... 275
1 F or additional details on methodological implications, please see Bamberger and 
Segone, 2011, How to design and manage Equity-focused evaluations , UNICEF
<<<PAGE=8>>>

<<<PAGE=9>>>
Preface, Editorial  
& Acknowledgements
Preface  
Colin Kirk, Director, UNICEF Evaluation Office,  
Soma de Silva and Jim Rugh, President and Vice President, IOCE,  
Ray Rist, President, IDEAS
 
........................................................................... VIII
Editorial   
by Marco Segone, UNICEF Evaluation Office; Co-chair, UNEG Taskforce  
on National Evaluation Capacities; and former IOCE Vice President
 
............. XIII
Acknowledgement  
..................................................................................... XIX
Preface, Editorial & Acknowledgement
VII
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
VIII
PR E f ACE
by the Director of Evaluation, UNICE f
Despite the economic downturn of 2008 and its lingering effects, 
spectacular headway has been made in reducing global poverty 
over the past two decades. Progress towards meeting the Millen -
nium Development Goal of halving the proportion of people living in 
poverty is on track, with the global poverty rate expected to drop 
below 15% by 2015, far below the target of 23%. Each year, more 
people escape extreme poverty, and more countries “graduate” to 
middle or high income status.
Yet despite the rapid progress in reducing poverty, inequalities are 
increasing both between countries and within countries. A recent 
UNICEF report on global inequality noted that the richest popula -
tion quintile enjoys 83 percent of global income, with just a single 
percentage point going to those in the poorest quintile. As the UN’s 
Secretary-General has written, introducing The Millennium Devel -
opment Goals Report 2011 , “Progress tends to bypass those who 
are lowest on the economic ladder or are otherwise disadvantaged 
because of their sex, age, disability or ethnicity”. A growing body of 
research confirms that high levels of inequality in the distribution of 
income, power and resources can slow poverty reduction, exacer -
bate social exclusion and provoke political and economic instability. 
Even in rich countries, inequality is dysfunctional, as Richard Wilkin -
son and Kate Pickett so convincingly demonstrated with the mass 
of evidence presented in their influential book, The Spirit Level . 
It is therefore high time to put equity at the center of efforts to 
promote development. Addressing a high level meeting on the Mil -
lennium Development Goals in Tokyo last year, UNICEF’s Executive 
Director, Tony Lake, put the point eloquently. He declared: “There 
can be no true progress in human development unless its benefits 
are shared – and to some degree driven – by the most vulnerable 
among us ... the equity approach is not only right in principle. It is 
right in practice”.
In the same vein, it is an appropriate moment to ask whether evalu -
ation as a discipline and evaluators as a profession are addressing 
equity issues in ways which are indeed right in principle and right in 
practice. Some of the answers can be found in the present volume, 
which brings together a tremendous richness and diversity of evalua -
tion thinking and experience. While a number of the papers included
<<<PAGE=11>>>
IX
Preface
in the collection touch on approaches and methods already familiar 
to evaluators, the challenge of addressing the question of equity 
has helped to demonstrate renewed relevance and establish fresh 
perspectives. Several essays showcase examples of evaluations 
addressing equity issues, providing a valuable source of inspiration. 
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to express my grati -
tude to all the contributors to this volume, which I believe is a land -
mark publication on a topic of central importance. I would especially 
like to express my appreciation of the fruitful contribution made by 
my colleague, Marco Segone, in pulling together the present vol -
ume, and in organizing the companion series of webinars, which 
has already provided so much in the way of ideas and illumination 
for a worldwide community of participants.
In the end, the vital test is whether evaluation can truly help the 
international community to achieve equitable development results. 
At the meeting in Tokyo, Mr Lake called for “better monitoring and 
evaluation of results, to see what is working and where further 
resources should be focused”. Evaluation can indeed help to guide 
investment towards equitable outcomes. But perhaps even more 
importantly, the equity approach renews the challenge to evalua -
tors to ensure that the voices of the poorest and most marginal 
people in society are heard and that their views count in decisions 
affecting their future. This is perhaps the simplest challenge facing 
evaluation for equitable development results – but it is probably also 
the hardest to achieve. I hope the essays in this collection will help 
evaluators and others rise to meet this test.
  C
olin Kirk,
  D irector, UNICEF Evaluation Office
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
X
PREf ACE
by the President and Vice-President of  
the International Organization for 
Cooperation in Evaluation (IOCE)
Achieving greater social equity is increasingly becoming a common 
goal of governments, civil society organisations and development 
partners alike. Making development benefits reach the marginalized 
and the disadvantaged is becoming an integral strategy of national 
development plans as well as programmes of cooperation of the 
United Nations Agencies and multilateral and bilateral organizations. 
Groups of people have been marginalized and disadvantaged for rea -
sons that are historical, cultural and political, among others. These 
reasons are deep rooted and intricately intertwined with power 
structures, knowledge levels, belief systems, attitudes and values of 
societies. They have been barriers to equitable social development. 
Development programmes and projects have typically tended to be 
designed with insufficient understanding of these issues. Conse -
quently, development results have often benefited the most advan -
taged and the better able while only percolating in drops to those 
who are deprived, thereby perpetuating the inequities. 
To penetrate the barriers to social equity, UNICEF is reorienting its 
programmes of cooperation with governments to achieve greater 
equity for the most deprived and marginalized children who are 
a highly vulnerable segment of the population. To achieve suc -
cessful development results from such programmes, evaluation 
is as important as are appropriate designs and good implementa -
tion. Equity-focused evaluations face certain methodological chal -
lenges to address issues related to inequities and their deep rooted 
causes. In this context, the International Organisation for Coop -
eration in Evaluation (IOCE) is glad to see the publication of this 
volume which brings together reflections on the linkages between 
evaluation and equity as well as diverse methodological approaches 
to evaluating programmes that promote equity. It brings together a 
range of methodological approaches of evaluations covering design 
elements, process elements such as transformative approaches 
and overall approaches such as systems approaches. It also 
includes evaluations of a range of interventions such as governance 
and international development, national development programmes, 
community based programmes and public policies from widely dif -
fering contexts and communities.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
XI
Preface
It is the mission of IOCE to promote the development of theories 
and strengthening of evaluation practices that are socially relevant 
and respect the diversity of cultures, norms and needs. IOCE 
encourages advancement of theories to address emerging needs 
such as the approaches to evaluating social equity programmes. 
Such theoretical advances also enable evaluation associations to 
better facilitate professional development activities in evaluation 
that are relevant to the national development contexts.
 S
oma de Silva
 J
im Rugh
 P resident, IOCE  V ice President, IOCE
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
XII
PR E f ACE 
by the President of the International 
Development Evaluation Association (IDEAS) 
As President of IDEAS, I am especially pleased to be able to endorse 
this book and to recommend it to the development community. The 
issue of equitable development results is increasingly on the radar-
screen of policymakers, program managers, and donors. And while 
the conventional understanding of equitable development is asso -
ciated with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), there are 
broader implications that are addressed in this volume. Equitable 
development is not just working to achieve the eight goals of the 
Millennium Declaration in 2015, but conceptually and politically it 
carries us into the arenas of structural inequity, regional inequity, 
and the inequity that emerges from unfair trade practices, unfair 
currency manipulation, authoritarian regimes, and non-democratic 
governance. This book opens up the conversation to such issues 
and for this it is to be commended.
I wish to thank UNICEF for their initiative and perseverance in  
bringing this book to fruition. It is a contribution to the evaluation 
community and for this, we all own UNICEF a strong thank you.
  R
ay C. Rist
  P resident, IDEAS
<<<PAGE=15>>>
XIII
Editorial
ED I tO RIA l
This publication aims to stimulate the international debate on how 
the evaluation function can contribute to achieving equitable devel -
opment results by conceptualizing, designing, implementing and 
using evaluations focused on human rights and equity. 
It does so by offering a number of strong contributions from senior 
officers in institutions dealing with international development and 
evaluation. These are: UNICEF, UNDP, UNWomen, ILO, IDRC, the 
International Development Evaluation Association (IDEAS) and the 
International Organisation for Cooperation in Evaluation (IOCE); as 
well as senior Government representatives responsible for evalua -
tion systems in their country, such as CONEVAL in Mexico. 
The book is divided into three parts. Part I presents the relationship 
between evaluation and human rights and equity. Part II focuses on 
the methodological implications in design, implement and use of 
Equity-focused evaluations; and part III presents few examples of 
Equity-focused evaluations. 
In Part I, Segone  introduces Equity-focused evaluations by explain -
ing what equity is and why equity matters. He continues by defin -
ing Equity-focused evaluations, what’s the purpose and positioning 
equity-focused evaluations as a pro-equity intervention. He argues 
that, while Equity-focused evaluations pose new challenges, they 
also constitute an opportunity to make evaluation an action for 
change to achieve development results with an equity focus.
Reddy, Eriksen  and Muir explain why it is important to integrated 
human rights and gender equality in evaluation, and the implications 
in doing so at each of stage of the evaluation process. They also 
present the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) – a profes -
sional network that brings together the units responsible for evalu -
ation in the UN system – response to a gap in the integration of 
these important dimensions in evaluation of the UN’s work: a hand -
book containing practical guidance for evaluators.
Mertens addresses the challenges of planning, implementing and 
using evaluations that emerge when human rights is the starting 
point for policymakers, funders, programme developers and evalua -
tors. She explains that situating oneself as an evaluator in a human 
rights position requires re-thinking how evaluation is conceptual -
ized, practiced, and used in international development. Finally, she 
makes the argument that re-framing of evaluation from this starting
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
XIV
point, based on human rights, provides fertile ground for obtaining 
meaningful answers to questions about the efficacy of international 
development interventions. 
Hay examines how principles drawn from feminist and other 
research traditions and theories, can be used in practice to inform the 
understanding of programme theory; shape evaluation design and 
methods; negotiate judgment of success; guide practice; and, guide 
choices and opportunities for influence. She suggests that principles 
generated from feminist theory can help evaluation to play a stronger 
role in understanding how societies change and which policies and 
programmes show promise in shifting norms and achieving equity. 
Hopson, Kirkhart and Bledsoe suggest that the good intentions 
of Equity-focused evaluations must be tempered by cautions. 
This concern flows from a legacy of research and evaluation 
that has exerted colonizing influences over Indigenous and 
minoritized populations. The opening section covers the context of 
development, evaluation, and culture. The second section argues 
that efforts to decolonize evaluation must begin with epistemology. 
A third section examines the implications of decolonization for 
evaluation method. Within the paper, a scenario is provided based 
on a development project in southern Africa. The authors close with 
implications and cautions for how evaluation generally, and more 
specifically, Equity-focused evaluations may perpetuate colonizing 
assumptions and aims.
In part II, Bamberger discusses strategies and methods for evaluat-
ing how well development interventions address and achieve equity 
objectives. He starts by highlighting the importance of distinguish -
ing between simple  equity-focused projects, and complex  equity-
focused policies and other national level interventions as these 
affect Equity-focused evaluation design options. He then presents 
different approaches and tools to evaluate equity-focused impact 
at policy level and at project level, highlighting the importance of 
mixed-methods. 
Patton  explains that Developmental evaluation supports innova -
tive intervention development  to guide adaptation to emergent 
and dynamic realities in complex environments. He suggests that 
evaluation for equity and the fostering of human rights, as part of 
achieving meaningful development results, often occurs in complex 
adaptive systems. In such situations, informed by systems think -
ing and sensitivity to complex nonlinear dynamics, Developmental 
evaluation supports increased effectiveness of interventions, social
<<<PAGE=17>>>
XV
Editorial
innovation, adaptive management, and ongoing learning. 
Reynolds  and Williams  argue that Equity-focused evaluations 
should be instrumental in redressing prevailing inequities of 
resource-access. In this context, they explain that it is often difficult 
to appreciate the wider picture of issues relating to resource 
access, including different perspectives on inequities from different 
stakeholders. A systems approach to Equity-focused evaluation 
prompts, firstly, a greater awareness of the interrelated issues of 
inequities; secondly, an appreciation of different perspectives 
on inequities, and; thirdly, a reflection on boundaries used to 
circumscribe our awareness and appreciation of inequities. 
Rogers  and Hummelbrunner discuss some of the key features 
of equity-focused programmes that programme theory needs to 
address – in particular, the need to support poor and marginalized 
people to be agents of their own development, and to address 
complicated and complex aspects of programmes. They then 
present the implications of these for developing, representing and 
using programme theory, arguing that programme theory needs 
to acknowledge the other factors needed to produce intended 
outcomes and impacts; support appropriate translation of effective 
interventions to other contexts, by distinguishing between theories 
of change and theories of action; highlight differential effects of 
interventions, and in particular the distribution of benefits; and, 
support adaptive management of emergent programmes. 
Kushner contributes an approach to evaluation that makes it an 
equitable process. Its focus is methodological, and he suggests 
that the methodological solution of Equity-focused evaluation is 
case study. He argues that case study gives us a more systemic/
dynamic view of policy and public value, as describing, analysing 
and understanding the implications of policy- shaping  is a key task 
for the case study evaluator who needs to understand the sources 
and consequences of unequal access to information and power 
asymmetries in setting the criteria against which interventions will 
be judged.
Greene presents the character of, and rationale for, in explicit naming 
and claiming of values in evaluation, including in Equity-focused eval -
uation. Greene argues that values are present in virtually all aspects 
of evaluation. The term “values-engagement” is intended to signal 
explicit attention to values as part of the evaluation process and to 
the central role that values play in our evaluation practice. From the 
framing of evaluation questions to the development of an evalua -
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
XVI
tion design and methods, and from the interactions of stakeholders 
in the evaluation process to the especially important task of making 
judgments of programme quality, values are a central feature in this 
approach. Engagement thereby suggests a kind of quiet insistence 
that questions of value be addressed throughout the evaluation, at 
every turn and every decision point – so values become interlaced 
with, knitted and knotted within evaluative thinking and judging. 
In part III, Uitto and Garcia  attempt to extract lessons from evalua -
tive evidence gathered from the Assessment of Development Results 
conducted by the UNDP Evaluation Office in China and Brazil. They 
focus on the role played by international cooperation, particularly by 
UNDP and other international partners, in support of equity-focused 
public policies. After providing a brief overview of historical trends in 
inequity in Brazil and China, Uitto and Garcia outline the main findings 
of the evaluations regarding UNDP contributions towards policies 
that address inequities in the two countries. Finally, they end with a 
brief section on lessons learned and conclusions.
Guzman  summarizes the challenges and lessons learned in includ -
ing the transformative paradigm in the methodology used for high-
level evaluation of the International Labour Organization’s (ILO) 
discrimination strategy. In line with the Human rights and Gender 
equality approach to offer diverse perspectives to the evaluation, 
and to promote participation of different groups of stakeholders, 
the evaluation required setting-up an appropriate mix of qualitative 
and quantitative methods to gather and analyse data. The evalua -
tion used a mixed-method approach including (but not limited to) 
desk reviews, interviews, focus groups, surveys, etc. In addition, 
the evaluation team took into account not only the policy and nor -
mative framework but also carefully discerned power relationships, 
and identified the structural causes of discrimination in employment 
and occupation. 
Hernández 
li
cona, de la Garza, Paredes and Valdez explain that 
Mexico is a country with prevailing challenges in various dimensions 
with regard to social inequities. One of the harshest manifestations 
of the social gaps that persist in Mexico is the lack of opportunities 
for the indigenous population, which leads to serious limitations for 
the exercise of their rights and provides evidence of the social ineq -
uities that prevail among the population. 
 I
n their article, the authors 
present an assessment of the adequacy and results of social poli -
cies in order to analyze the situation of the indigenous people and 
the government response through public policies.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
XVII
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
This book is part of a continuous effort led by UNICEF, in part -
nership with several key stakeholders, to stimulate the debate on 
how evaluation can contribute to equitable development results, 
as well as the sharpening of methodological approaches to ensure 
that interventions designed to enhance equity can be evaluated in 
a meaningful manner. This book complements the manual “How 
to design and manage Equity-focused evaluations” published 
by UNICEF in 2011; the electronic resource centre managed by 
UNICEF and UNWomen, available at www.mymande.org ; and, the 
series of webinars with international keynote speakers. 
We hope this stream of work will enhance the capacity of the evalu -
ation community to strengthen the relevance and quality of evalu -
ations so as to better inform equitable interventions. I wish you an 
interesting and inspiring read. 
  M
arco Segone
  E ditor
<<<PAGE=20>>>

<<<PAGE=21>>>
XIX
Acknowledgement
ACKNOWlE DGEMEN t
The editor would like to thank the 27 authors for their excellent con -
tributions to this publication, and their engagement in the series 
of live webinars available at www.mymande.org . In sharing their 
wisdom and experience, and good practices and lessons learned, 
they have shown how to conceptualize and manage Equity-focused 
evaluations. 
The richness of partners in this publication, which includes  
CONEVAL, IDRC, ILO, UNDP and UN Women, testifies to the 
importance and commitment of international organizations to the 
theme of this book. The partnership with the International Orga -
nization for Cooperation in Evaluation (IOCE) and the International 
Development Evaluation Association (IDEAS), the two global eval -
uation professional associations, as well as the prefaces by the 
respective Presidents, are especially appreciated. 
The editor would like to thank Colin Kirk, Director, UNICEF Evalua -
tion Office, for his continuous support in making this publication, as 
well as the resource center available at www.mymande.org , pos -
sible.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Part 1 
Evaluation and equity
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity, social justice  
and human rights
by Marco Segone, UNICEF Evaluation Office; Co-chair,  
UNEG Taskforce on National Evaluation Capacities;  
and former IOCE Vice President  
............................................................ 2
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
by Janie Eriksen, UNICEF Evaluation Office, Shravanti Reddy, 
UNWomen Evaluation Office, and Janice Muir, OIOS;  
and members of UNEG Taskforce on Human Rights and  
Gender Equality  
................................................................................... 13
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation 
by Donna Mertens, Department of Educational Foundations  
and Research, Gallaudet University  
..................................................... 25
Strengthening Equity- focused evaluations through insights from feminist 
theory and approaches 
by Katherine Hay, Senior Specialist, Evaluation, International 
Development Research Centre, Regional Office for South Asia  
and China
 
............................................................................................ 39
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and  
cautions for Equity-focused evaluations
by Rodney K. Hopson, Duquesne University, Karen E. Kirkhart, S  
yracuse University and Katrina L. Bledsoe, Education  
Development Center, Inc. .................................................................... 59
Evaluation and equity
1
<<<PAGE=24>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
2
EV A lU A tI ON  tO ACCElE RA tE 
P
ROGRESS  tO
WARDS 
EqUI
ty,  
S
OCIAl jU
StI
CE
 
AND
 
HUMAN
 
RIGHtS1
Marco Segone, UNICEF Evaluation Office;  
Co-chair, UNEG Taskforce on National Evaluation Capacities;  
and former IOCE Vice President
What is equity and why does it matter?
The challenge of achieving equitable development 
results for children
When world leaders adopted the Millennium Declaration in 2000, 
they produced an unprecedented international compact, a historic 
pledge to create a more peaceful, tolerant and equitable world in 
which the special needs of children, women and those who are 
worst-off can be met. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
are a practical manifestation of the Declaration’s aspiration to 
reduce inequity in human development among nations and peo -
ples by 2015. The past decade has witnessed considerable pro -
gress towards the goals of reducing poverty and hunger, combating  
disease and child mortality, promoting gender equality, expanding 
education, ensuring safe drinking water and basic sanitation, and 
building a global partnership for development. But with the MDG 
deadline only a few years away, it is becoming ever clearer that 
reaching the poorest and most marginalized communities within 
countries is pivotal to the realization of the goals (UNICEF, 2010c). 
Since 1990, significant progress has been made on several MDGs. 
However, the gains made in realizing the MDGs are largely based on 
improvements in national averages. A growing concern is that pro -
gress based on national averages can conceal broad and even wid -
ening disparities in poverty and child development among regions 
and within countries. In child survival and most other measures of 
progress towards the MDGs, sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and 
the least developed countries have fallen far behind other devel -
oping regions and industrialized countries. Within many countries, 
falling national averages for child mortality conceal widening inequi -
1 B ased upon Bamberger M. and Segone M. (2011). How to design and manage 
Equity-focused Evaluation, UNICEF.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
3
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity,  
social justice and human rights
ties. The same is true for several other indicators, including early 
childhood development, education, HIV/AIDS and child protection 
(UNICEF, 2010d). Disparities hamper development not only in low 
income countries, but also in middle income countries. A UNICEF 
study conducted in Brazil (UNICEF Brazil, 2003) showed that com -
pared to rich children, poor children were 21 times more likely to 
be illiterate. But poverty is not the only cause of inequity. Accord -
ing to the same study, compared with white children, black children 
were twice as likely not to attend school, and children with disabili -
ties were four times more likely to be illiterate compared to children 
without disabilities. 
These marked disparities in child survival, development and protec -
tion point to a simple truth. The MDGs and other international com -
mitments to children can only be fully realized, both to the letter and 
in the spirit of the Millennium Declaration, through greater emphasis 
on equity among and within regions and countries (UNICEF, 2010c).
What is equity?
For UNICEF “equity means that all children have an opportunity to 
survive, develop, and reach their full potential, without discrimina -
tion, bias or favoritism” (UNICEF, 2010a). This interpretation is con -
sistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which 
guarantees the fundamental rights of every child, regardless of gen -
der, race, religious beliefs, income, physical attributes, geographical 
location, or other status. 
This means that pro-equity interventions should prioritize worst-off 
groups
2 with the aim of achieving universal rights for all children. 
This could be done through interventions addressing the causes 
of inequity and aimed at improving the well-being of all children, 
focusing especially on accelerating the rate of progress in improving 
the well-being of the worst-off children. 
Equity is distinguished from equality. The aim of equity-focused 
policies is not to eliminate all differences so that everyone has the 
same level of income, health, and education. Rather, the goal is to 
eliminate the unfair and avoidable circumstances that deprive chil -
dren of their rights. Therefore, inequities generally arise when cer -
tain population groups are unfairly deprived of basic resources that 
are available to other groups. A disparity is ‘unfair’ or ‘unjust’ when 
2 A s different countries and different organizations use different terminology such 
as excluded, disadvantaged, marginalized or vulnerable populations, here the term 
“worst-off groups” is used to refer to those population groups suffering the most 
due to inequity.
<<<PAGE=26>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
4
its cause is due to the social context, rather than the biological fac -
tors. 
While the concept of equity is universal, the causes and conse -
quences of inequity vary across cultures, countries, and communi -
ties. Inequity is rooted in a complex range of political, social, and 
economic factors. 
An equity-focused intervention must therefore begin with an analy -
sis of the context in which inequity operates. This analysis informs 
the design of programme and interventions that are tailored to 
address the local causes and consequences of inequity. These ini -
tiatives must be developed in collaboration with national partners 
who can help identify culturally appropriate strategies for promoting 
equity. 
Why does equity matter?
Achieving equitable development results…
As explained above, UNICEF states that the MDGs and other inter -
national commitments to children can only be fully realized through 
greater emphasis on equity among and within regions and coun -
tries, for the following reasons (UNICEF, 2010c). Firstly, several key 
international goals for children require universality. One of the most 
prominent is MDG 2, which seeks universal access to primary edu -
cation. Logically, this objective can only be met if the children cur -
rently excluded, who are the poorest and the most marginalized, are 
brought into the school system. Similarly, it will be impossible for 
global campaigns seeking the eradication of polio, or virtual elimi -
nation of measles and maternal and neonatal tetanus, to succeed 
without addressing the poorest communities within countries. Sec -
ondly, having reduced the global under-five mortality rate by one 
third since 1990, countries now have few years to do so again to 
meet the conditions of MDG 4. Since most child deaths occur in 
the most deprived communities and households within develop -
ing countries, achieving this goal is only possible by extending to 
them the fight against childhood illness and under-nutrition. Thirdly, 
breaking the cycle of poverty, discrimination, educational disadvan -
tage and violence experienced by many girls and young women 
is only possible through equity-focused approaches that eliminate 
gender-based barriers to essential services, protection and girls’ 
knowledge of their rights. Fourthly, new technologies and interven -
tions can contribute to faster gains for the poor if applied equitably 
and at scale.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
5
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity,  
social justice and human rights
…for socially fair, politically stable and economically 
strong societies 
In The Spirit Level , Picket and Wilkinson (2009) show that in richer 
countries inequity is associated with a wide range of social prob -
lems including: levels of trust; mental illnesses; life expectancy; 
infant mortality; obesity; educational performance; drug use; teen -
age births; homicides; and, imprisonment rates. In most cases 
these indicators are not closely related to the per capita income or 
rate of growth of a country, and so higher rates of growth tend not 
to be associated with reducing social problems. Also, available evi -
dence for both developed and developing countries does not sug -
gest that inequity is reduced over time by high rates of economic 
growth. In addition, equity is important for the following reasons 
(Segone, 2003):
•	 Inequity constitutes a violation of human rights. Inequity 
remains among the most important human rights challenges 
facing the world community. A human rights-based approach 
means that, in the light of the principle of universality and 
non-discrimination, all children, from birth to childhood and 
adolescence, boys and girls, of whatever color, race, language 
or religion and wherever they may live, need to be considered 
(Santos Pais, 1999). It means that the situation of poor people 
is viewed not only in terms of welfare outcomes but also in 
terms of the obligation to prevent and respond to human rights 
violations. The High Commissioner for Human Rights stated that 
human rights are about ensuring dignity, equity and security for 
all human beings everywhere. (UN NGLS, 2002).
•	 Inequity is one of the major obstacles in taking advantage 
of the richness of diversity . If human beings do not all have the 
same opportunity, some groups are discriminated against and 
excluded from society. Inequity means that society is not giving 
these individuals and groups equal opportunity to contribute 
to the development of the country. It means that it is focusing 
mainly on one “cultural model” and is not taking advantage of 
diverse “cultural models”, which can foster societal innovation 
and creativity. 
•	 Equity has a significant positive impact in reducing 
monetary poverty . Monetary poverty is very sensitive to 
distribution changes, and small changes in income distribution 
can have a large effect on poverty. For a given level of average 
income, education, land ownership etc., an increase in monetary
<<<PAGE=28>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
6
inequity will almost always imply higher levels of both absolute 
and relative deprivation and vice versa (Maxwell and Hanmer, 
1999).
•	 Equity has a positive impact in the construction of a 
democratic society . Equity facilitates citizen participation in 
political and civil life. A citizen’s capacity to participate in political 
and civil life and to influence public policies is linked to his/her 
income and education. In a political system based on citizen’s 
income, significant income inequity means significant inequity 
in the political system. This leads to higher inequity in the 
educational system, due to lower investment in quality education. 
This means poor children attend lower quality schools and 
therefore a wider gap is created between education and capacity 
(the “human capital”) acquired by the poor children attending 
low quality public schools, and the rich children attending high 
quality private schools. This vicious cycle closes with the inequity 
in education impacting negatively on income inequity, as income 
is directly linked to the level of education.
•	 Prolonged inequity may lead to the “naturalization” of 
inequity . In several countries institutional and historical origins of 
inequity are multiple, but its persistence, or worsening, over the 
decades makes inequity something “natural”. When inequity is 
perceived as a natural phenomenon (the so called “naturalization 
of inequity”), societies develop theoretical, political and 
ideological resistances to identifying and fighting inequity as a 
priority. Along the same lines, inequity may even create self-
fulfilling expectation and acceptance of lower growth. If workers 
are paid according to social class, gender or race/ethnicity, rather 
than by what they achieve, this reduces the incentive to work/
earn more. 
•	 Inequity may lead to political conflict and instability . Last 
but not least, unequal opportunities for social groups in society 
– and perhaps more importantly, inequities as perceived by 
these groups – are often also a significant factor behind social 
unrest. This may lead to crime or even violent conflict, as well as 
lower investment and more waste of resources from bargaining 
over short-term distribution of rents. Highly polarised societies 
are unlikely to pursue policies that have long-term benefits for 
all, since each social group will be reluctant to make long-term 
commitment, dedicated as they are to secure their own wealth. 
Along the same line of argument, this instability also reduces
<<<PAGE=29>>>
7
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity,  
social justice and human rights
government’s ability to react to shocks. The economic costs 
of external shocks are magnified by the distributional conflicts 
they trigger, and this diminishes the productivity with which a 
society’s resources are utilised. This is largely because social 
polarisation makes it more difficult to build consensus about 
policy changes in response to crisis.
What are the implications for the evaluation 
function?
The renewed focus on equity poses important challenges – and 
opportunities – to the evaluation function: What are the methodo -
logical implications in designing, conducting, managing and using 
Equity-focused evaluations? What are the questions an Equity-
focused evaluation should address? What are the potential chal -
lenges in managing Equity-focused evaluations? This document, 
together with the manual on “How to design and manage Equity-
focused Evaluations”, the webinars and electronic resources avail -
able at www.mymande.org, represents a first attempt to address 
these challenges.
Defining Equity-focused evaluations
What is an Equity-focused evaluation? 
An Equity-focused evaluation is a judgment made of the relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability – and, in human -
itarian settings, coverage, connectedness and coherence – of poli -
cies, programmes and projects concerned with achieving equitable 
development results. It involves a rigorous, systematic and objec -
tive process in the design, analysis and interpretation of information 
in order to answer specific questions, including those of concern to 
worst-off groups. It provides assessments of what works and what 
does not work to reduce inequity, and it highlights intended and 
unintended results for worst-off groups as well as the gap between 
best-off and worst-off groups. It provides strategic lessons to guide 
decision-makers and to inform stakeholders. Equity-focused evalu -
ations provide evidence-based information that is credible, reliable 
and useful, enabling the timely incorporation of findings, recom -
mendations and lessons into the decision-making process. 
Why are Equity-focused evaluations needed? 
Equity-focused evaluations look explicitly at the equity dimensions of 
interventions, going beyond conventional quantitative data to the anal -
<<<PAGE=30>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
8
ysis of behavioral change, complex social processes and attitudes, 
and collecting information on difficult-to-reach socially marginalized 
groups. In addition, Equity-focused evaluations constitute a pro-equity 
intervention by empowering worst-off groups, as described below.
It is however important to highlight that while some new analytical 
tools are introduced (particularly the bottleneck supply and demand 
framework, and systems approaches to evaluate equity interventions 
in complex environments), most of the Equity-focused evaluation 
approaches, as well as data collection and analysis techniques, are 
built on methods which are already familiar to many practitioners in 
development evaluation. So the emphasis is on refining and refocusing 
existing approaches and techniques – and enhancing national capaci -
ties to use them – rather than starting with completely new ones.
Purposes of Equity-focused evaluations
Equity-focused evaluation contributes to good governance of 
equity-focused policies, programmes and projects for the purposes 
explained below. These will vary according to context, interventions 
content and partner interests, among other factors. 
Accountability.  Equity-focused evaluation ensures that reporting 
on relevance, impact, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of 
pro-equity interventions is evidence-based. 
Organizational learning and improvement.  Knowledge gener -
ated through Equity-focused evaluations provides critical input into 
major decisions to be taken to improve equity-focused interven -
tions. 
Evidence-based policy advocacy.  Knowledge generated through 
an Equity-focused evaluation provides evidence to influence major 
policy decisions to ensure that existing and future policies will 
enhance equity and improve the well-being of worst-off groups. 
Equity-focused evaluation provides information that has the poten -
tial to leverage major partner resources – and political commitment 
– for pro-equity programmes/policies. 
Contribute to Knowledge Management.  Understanding what 
works and what does not work in pro-equity interventions and 
ensuring that lessons learned are disseminated to national and 
global knowledge networks helps accelerate learning, avoid error 
and improve efficiency and effectiveness. It is important to harvest 
the evidence-base, particularly resulting from innovative program -
<<<PAGE=31>>>
9
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity,  
social justice and human rights
ming to foster equity, to demonstrate what works in diverse coun -
try contexts. 
Empowerment of worst-off groups. If Equity-focused evaluation 
is to be truly relevant to interventions whose objective is to improve 
the well-being of worst-off groups, the Equity-focused evaluation 
processes must be used to foster wider participation of worst-off 
groups, facilitate dialogue between policymakers and representa -
tives of worst-off groups, build consensus, and create “buy-in” to 
recommendations. In addition, involving these groups in Equity-
focused evaluation can be empowering. It imparts skills, informa -
tion and self-confidence and so enhances the “evaluative thinking”. 
It can also strengthen the capacity of worst-off groups to be effec -
tive evidence-based advocates. Employing Equity-focused evalua -
tion as a programming strategy to achieve empowerment can be 
very effective, and it can reinforce the other purposes of evaluation. 
National Capacity development for equity-focused M&E sys -
tems.  Countries (central and local authorities, governmental and 
civil society organizations) should own and lead their own national 
equity-focused M&E systems. International organizations should 
support national equity-focused monitoring and evaluation capacity 
development to ensure that it is sustainable and that the informa -
tion and data produced are relevant to local contexts, while being in 
compliance with M&E standards (Segone, 2009 and 2010). 
Equity-focused evaluations  
as pro-equity interventions 
As already seen above, Equity-focused evaluation processes should 
be used to empower worst-off groups to the maximum extent pos -
sible, as well as to ensure that evaluation questions are relevant to 
the situation of these groups. This has two major implications.
First, equity-focused evaluation should be culturally sensitive and 
pay high attention to ethics. Evaluators should be sensitive to local 
beliefs, manners and customs and act with integrity and honesty in 
their relationships with all stakeholders, including worst-off groups, 
as stated in the standards for evaluation in the UN System (UNEG 
2005). In line with the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
and other human rights conventions, evaluators undertaking Equity-
focused evaluation should operate in accordance with interna -
tional values. Evaluators should be aware of differences in culture; 
local customs; religious beliefs and practices; personal interaction
<<<PAGE=32>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
10
and gender roles; disability; age and ethnicity; and, be mindful of 
the potential implications of these differences when planning, car -
rying out and reporting on evaluations. In addition, the evaluators 
should ensure that their contacts with individuals are character -
ized by respect. Evaluators should avoid offending the dignity and 
self-respect of those persons with whom they come in contact in 
the course of the evaluation. Knowing that evaluation might often 
negatively affect the interests of some stakeholders, the evaluators 
should conduct the evaluation and communicate its purpose and 
results in a way that clearly respects the dignity and self-worth of 
the worst-off groups. 
Secondly, equity-focused evaluation should use participatory and/or 
empowerment evaluation processes to ensure worst-off groups are 
involved and/or co-leading the Equity-focused evaluation process 
starting at the design phase. Participatory Equity-focused evalua -
tion processes should pay particular attention to existing imbal -
ances in power relationships between worst-off groups and other 
groups in society. This is to avoid worst-off groups participating in 
the Equity-focused evaluation being merely “providers” of informa -
tion or even of being manipulated or excluded. Selection of stake -
holders in Equity-focused evaluation processes should ensure that 
the processes and methods used serve to correct, not reinforce, 
patterns of inequity and exclusion. In addition, Equity-focused 
evaluations must also be aware of power relations within worst-off 
groups. In many ethnic minorities and disadvantaged groups, cer -
tain sectors are further marginalized on the basis of factors such 
as age, gender, land ownership, relative wealth or region of origin. 
Great cultural sensitivity is required to respect cultural norms while 
ensuring that marginalized groups are able to participate and have 
access to services.
Equity-focused evaluations should also involve young people and 
children as appropriate, since young people and children are often 
among the worst-off groups. The Convention on the Right of the 
Child provides clear initial guidance for the participation of children 
in evaluation, when it states that the views of children must be con -
sidered and taken into account in all matters that affect them. They 
should not be used merely as data providers or subjects of investi -
gation (CRC, 1990). Article 13 of the CRC states that children have 
the right to freedom of expression, which includes seeking, receiv -
ing and giving information and ideas through speaking, writing or in 
print, through art or any other media of the child’s choice. Their par -
ticipation is not a mere formality; children must be fully informed and
<<<PAGE=33>>>
11
Evaluation to accelerate progress towards equity,  
social justice and human rights
must understand the consequences and impact of expressing their 
opinions. The corollary is that children are free not to participate, and 
should not be pressured. Participation is a right, not an obligation. 
Conclusion
While Equity-focused evaluations pose new challenges, they also 
constitute an opportunity to make evaluation an action for change 
to achieve development results with an equity focus. The resources 
and material UNICEF and partners are making available constitute 
an important contribution to enhance national capacities in equity-
focused evaluations. 
References
Bamberger, M., Rugh, J. & Mabry, L. (2006). Real World Evaluation . Sage Publications.
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (1990).
DFID (2008). Reducing poverty by tacking social exclusion: A DFID policy paper.
Hart, R. (1992). Children’s Participation: from Tokenism to Citizenship. Innocenti Essays 
No. 4. New York: UNICEF.
Henriques, R. (2001). Desigualdade Racial no Brasil: evolução das condições de vida  
na década de 90. Texto para discussão nº. 807. Rio de Janeiro: IPEA.
Hills, J.,Le Grand, J. & Piachaud, D. (Eds) (2001). Understanding social exclusion .  
Oxford University Press.
Kahn, S. (2009). Topic Guide on Social Exclusion . Governance and Social Development 
Resource Centre, International Development Centre. University of Birmingham.
Naudeau, S. et al. (2011). Investing in young children: An early childhood development 
guide for policy dialogue and project preparation. The World Bank.
NGLS (2002). Go between , 92. Geneva, Switzerland.
Paes de Barros, R., Henriques, R., & Mendonça R. (2002). Pelo fim das décadas perdidas: 
educação e desenvolvimento sustentado no Brasil. Texto para discussão nº. 857.  
Rio de Janiero: IPEA.
Picciotto, R. (2002). International trends and development evaluation: the need for ideas.  
American Journal of Evaluation. 24 (2): 227-34
Picket, R. & Wilkinson, K. (2009). The Spirit Level: Why equality is better for everyone. 
Penguin Books
Rajani, R. (1999). Promoting Strategic Adolescent Participation: a discussion paper  
for UNICEF. New York: UNICEF.
Rieper, O Leeuw, F & Ling, T (2010). The evidence book: concepts, generation and  
use of evidence. Transaction Publishers.
<<<PAGE=34>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
12
Salmen, L. (1987). Listen to the People: Evaluation of Development Projects. New York. 
Oxfor University Press.
Santos, P. (1999). A human rights conceptual framework for UNICEF.  
Innocenti essay n º. 9. Florencia, Italia: UNICEF Innocent Research Centre.
Segone, M. (1998). Democratic Evaluation: A proposal for strengthening the evaluation 
function in International Development Organizations. UNICEF TACRO.
Segone, M. (2001). Child poverty in Niger. Longitudinal, gender, spatial and wealth 
analysis based on MICS and DHS data, UNICEF Niger.
Segone, M. (2003). Equity and diversity in Brazilian childhood and adolescence.   
UNICEF Brazil.
Segone, M. (2004). How to achieve the Millennium Development Goals? Reducing 
inequity through the celebration of diversity, UNICEF Global Policy Section.
Segone , M. (Ed.), (2006). New Trends in Development Evaluation . UNICEF Regional 
Office for CEE/CIS and IPEN. Available at http://www.mymande.org/?q=virtual
Segone, M. (Ed.), (2008). Bridging the gap: The role of monitoring and evaluation  
in evidence-based policy making. UNICEF, DevInfo, IDEAS, MICS, The World Bank. 
Available at http://www.mymande.org/?q=virtual
Segone, M. (Ed), (2009). Country-led M&E systems.  UNICEF, UNDP, WFP, UNWomen, 
IDEAS, IOCE. Available at http://www.mymande.org/?q=content/policies-results
Segone, M. (Ed), (2010). From policies to results: Developing capacities for country 
monitoring and evaluation systems.  UNICEF, DevInfo, IDEAS, ILO, IOCE, The World Bank, 
UNDP, UNIFEM, WFP. Available at http://www.mymande.org/?q=content/policies-results  
Segone, M. & Bamberger, M. (2011). How to design and manage Equity-focused 
evaluations . UNICEF. Available at http://www.mymande.org/?q=content/policies-results
UNDP. Human development Report (2010). T he real wealth of nations:  
Pathways to Human Development.
UNEG (2011).  Integrating human rights and gender equality in evaluation.
UNICEF (2003). Report on the Situation of Children and Adolescents in Brazil.
UNICEF (2010a). Re-focusing on Equity: Questions and Answers . 
UNICEF (2010b). Seven contributions of the evaluation function to the equity approach.
UNICEF (2010c). Narrowing the gaps to meet the goals . 
UNICEF (2010d).  Progress for Children: Achieving the MDGs with Equity. 
UNICEF (2011a). Equity and reaching the most marginalized:  Selected innovations  
and lessons from UNICEF programmes.
UNICEF (2011b). Guidance Note. Equity Marker: Resource tracking for equity-focused 
programme ming. Division of Policy and Practice & Programme Division. New York.
United Nations News Centre (2001). UN and Oxford University unveil new index to 
measure poverty , http://www.un.org/apps/news/story .
<<<PAGE=35>>>
13
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
HUM AN  RI GHtS  AND  GE NDER 
E
qUAlIt
y 
IN EV
AlUAtI
ON1
Shravanti Reddy, Evaluation Office, UN Women;  
Janie Eriksen, Evaluation Office, UNICEF, and Janice Muir,  
Evaluation Office, OIOS; And Members of the UNEG task force on 
Human rights & gender equality
Human rights and gender equality (HR & GE) are the fundamen -
tal dimensions that guide the work of the United Nations (UN). 
However, in 2007, the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG), a 
professional network that brings together the units responsible for 
evaluation in the UN system, recognized a gap in the integration 
of these important dimensions in evaluations of the UN’s work. In 
response, it set up an HR & GE Taskforce to develop guidance on 
this issue. This year, the Taskforce has released a handbook con -
taining practical guidance for evaluators that it hopes will serve as 
a step towards addressing this gap. The handbook is entitled: Inte -
grating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation – Towards 
UNEG Guidance.
2
What are human rights and gender equality? 
Human rights (HR)  are the civil, cultural, economic, political and 
social rights inherent to all human beings, whatever their national -
ity; place of residence; sex; national or ethnic origin; colour; religion; 
language; or any other status. All human beings are entitled to these 
rights without discrimination. They are universal; inalienable; interde -
pendent; indivisible; equal and non-discriminatory; and expressed in, 
and guaranteed by, normative frameworks and laws that lay down 
the obligations of States to act in order to respect, protect and ful -
fil the human rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals or 
groups. The term ’duty-bearers’ reflects the obligations of the State 
towards ‘rights-holders’ which represent all individuals in the con -
cerned State.
3 In addition to the Universal Declaration of Human 
1 T his article is based on: Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation 
– Towards UNEG Guidance , UNEG, 2011
2
 T
he handbook can be found at the following site: http://www.unevaluation.org/
HRGE_Guidance .
3
 I
ntegrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation – Towards UNEG 
Guidance, p 12
<<<PAGE=36>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
14
Rights (UDHR) – the overarch -
ing document that formally 
recognizes universally agreed 
human rights – there are nine 
core international human rights 
treaties that further delineate 
and codify the rights contained 
in the UDHR
4. The strategy for 
implementing human rights in 
UN programming is called the 
Human Rights-Based Approach 
to programming. 
Gender equality (GE) refers 
to the equal rights, responsi -
bilities and opportunities of 
women and men, girls and 
boys. It implies that the inter -
ests, needs and priorities of 
both women and men are 
taken into consideration, rec -
ognizing the diversity of dif -
ferent groups of women and 
men. Gender equality is not a 
’women’s issue’, but concerns, 
and should fully engage, men 
as well as women. Equality 
between women and men, 
girls and boys is seen both as 
a human rights’ issue and as 
a precondition for, and indica -
tor of, sustainable people-cen -
tred development. It is also an 
essential component for the realization of all human rights. Progress 
toward gender equality requires changes within the family, culture, 
politics and the economy, in addition to changes in laws and their 
application. The 1979 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Beijing Platform 
for Action (BPA) and the Millennium Declaration commit the UN to 
4 S ee http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/index.htm#core
UN common understanding 
of the Human Rights-Based 
Approach to Programming
1. All programmes of development 
cooperation, policies and technical 
assistance should further the 
realization of human rights 
as laid down in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and 
other international human rights 
instruments.
2. Human rights standards contained 
in, and principles derived from, the 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and other international 
human rights instruments guide 
all development cooperation and 
programming in all sectors and 
in all phases of the programme 
process.
3. Development cooperation 
contributes to the development of 
the capacities of “duty-bearers” 
to meet their obligations and/or 
of “rights-holders” to claim their 
rights.
Source: http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publica -
tions/FAQen.pdf
<<<PAGE=37>>>
15
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
promoting GE in its work. 5 Gender mainstreaming is the strategy 
adopted by the UN for integrating gender equality in programming.
Why is it important to integrate human rights 
and gender equality in evaluation? 
Evaluations play a crucial role in examining to what extent UN inter -
ventions benefit rights-holders (particularly those most likely to 
have their rights violated), and how they strengthen the capacity of 
duty-bearers or other actors to fulfil obligations and responsibilities, 
and strengthen accountability mechanisms and monitor and advo -
cate for compliance with international standards on HR & GE. Evalu -
ation can also shed light on how these processes occur and can call 
attention to the exclusion of certain groups. 
An evaluation that neglects or omits consideration of HR & GE 
deprives the UN system of evidence about who does (and does 
not) benefit from its interventions, risks perpetuating discrimina -
tory structures and practices where interventions do not follow UN 
policy in these areas. It may therefore miss opportunities for dem -
onstrating how effective interventions are carried out.
What does it mean to integrate human rights 
and gender equality in evaluation? 
An evaluation that is HR & GE responsive addresses the program -
ming principles required by a human rights based approach and 
5 See h ttp://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/conceptsandefinitions.htm ) and UN 
(2008), Report on indicators for promoting and monitoring the implementation of 
human rights, pp. 4-10, paras 5 and 12, http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/icm-
mc/docs/HRI.MC.2008.3EN.pdf
1997 UN ECOSOC Resolution on Gender Mainstreaming
Gender mainstreaming is defined as “the process of assessing the implications for wo -
men and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programmes, in 
all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s concerns 
and experiences an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and societal spheres, 
so that women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ultimate 
goal is gender equality.”
Source: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/GMS.PDF, Chap IV A Para 4 I A.
<<<PAGE=38>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
16
gender mainstreaming strategy. It contributes to the social and 
economic change process that is at the heart of most development 
programming by identifying and analysing the inequalities, discrimi -
natory practices and unjust power relations that are central to devel -
opment problems. HR & GE responsive evaluations can lead to 
more effective interventions and better, more sustainable results.
Given the mandate to support and incorporate HR & GE in all UN 
work, these dimensions need to be paid special attention when 
evaluating UN interventions. This requires attention to the interre -
lated principles of inclusion, participation and fair power relations. 
•	 Inclusion.  Evaluating HR & GE requires attention to be paid to 
the beneficiary groups in the intervention under review. Some 
groups may be negatively affected by an intervention. An 
evaluation must acknowledge who these stakeholders are, how 
they are affected, and how to minimize these negative effects. 
•	 Participation.  Evaluating HR & GE must be participatory. 
Stakeholders in the intervention have a right to be consulted and 
to participate in decisions about what will be evaluated and how 
the evaluation will be done. In addition, the evaluation will assess 
whether the stakeholders have been able to participate in the 
design, implementation and monitoring of the intervention. It is 
important to measure the participation of stakeholder groups in 
the process as well as how they benefit from the results. 
•	
fa
ir Power Relations. Both HR & GE seek, inter alia, to balance 
power relations between or within advantaged and disadvantaged 
groups. In addition, evaluators should be aware of the power of 
their own position, which can influence responses to queries 
through their interactions with stakeholders. There is a need to 
be sensitive to these dynamics. 
Additionally, evaluators should preferably make use of mixed evalu -
ation methods. Information from mixed methods can assist in the 
triangulation of data and increase reliability and validity, as well 
as being useful for exploring whether/why different stakeholder 
groups were affected differently by the intervention.
<<<PAGE=39>>>
17
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
How are human rights and gender equality 
taken into account when preparing for  
an evaluation? 
Before embarking on an evaluation, it may be worthwhile consider -
ing the evaluability of the HR & GE dimensions of the intervention. 
The process of assessing evaluability may entail the review of key 
documents and consultations with key stakeholders to capture the 
extent to which the HR & GE dimensions were incorporated in the 
design and implementation of the intervention. 
Evaluators will often find different levels of evaluability in terms 
of HR & GE dimensions in the interventions to be evaluated. The 
UNEG handbook provides guidance on how to integrate these 
elements, regardless of whether evaluability is found to be low, 
medium or high. 
•	 When
	 e
valuability
	 i
s
	 h
igh,
	 the
	 H
R
	 &
	 G
E
	 i
ssues
	 h
ave
	 b
een	
c
onsidered and are visible in all features of the intervention 
design, including in the contextualized intervention theory 
and intervention logic (log frame, indicators, activities, M&E 
systems). The design has benefited from HR &GE analyses and 
active stakeholder participation. When evaluability is high the 
role of evaluators/evaluation managers may be to ensure that the 
HR & GE dimensions are fully reflected in the evaluation terms 
of reference. It may also entail determining, with stakeholders, 
whether all areas are adequately covered and whether new 
methods and tools need to be introduced to capture any changes 
in intervention context and circumstances. 
•	 Medium
	 e
valuability
	 s
ignifies
	 c
ertain
	 c
overage
	 o
f
	 H
R
	 &
	 G
E	
i
ssues. It may be mentioned in various aspects of the design and 
intervention logic, but may not be fully articulated, or inclusion 
may be limited to a few disaggregated indicators (such as number 
of men and women). Important stakeholder groups may not have 
been included and there may be limited data on HR & GE issues 
in implementation and activity records. In addressing medium 
evaluability the evaluators/managers may seek to understand 
the reasons for such limitations, and the consequences for the 
programme implementation and results, highlight them in the 
evaluation terms of reference and include tools and methods in 
the evaluation design that would generate new information on 
HR & GE issues, and strengthen stakeholder participation.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
18
•	 Low	e valuability 	i s 	i ndicative 	o f 	s cenarios 	w here 	the 	i ntervention	
the
ory failed to consider the HR & GE dimensions in its design, 
implementation, monitoring and reporting. It entails an absence of 
disaggregated data and the participation of relevant stakeholder 
groups. When evaluability is low, evaluators/managers may 
reconsider all essential design features for the inclusion of the 
HR & GE dimensions, including why they were not covered, how 
this can be addressed in the evaluation terms of reference, how 
a relevant stakeholder analysis can be included and what the key 
data sources would be. The evaluation may focus on how lack of 
HR & GE perspective can compromise results. Provision should 
also be made for assertive recommendations, addressing the HR 
& GE dimensions, to be included in the final evaluation report.
An evaluability assessment may be a distinct exercise that is con -
ducted well ahead of the evaluation, in which case it may also con -
tribute to improving the design of an intervention in terms of its 
integration of HR & GE dimensions. Alternatively, it may be con -
ducted in closer proximity to the evaluation and thus be a lighter 
process. The actual type of assessment would depend on the con -
text. The UNEG handbook will serve to help evaluators/managers 
to make this judgement. 
How are human rights and gender  
equality integrated into the evaluation  
terms of reference?
Once the evaluability assessment has been completed, the evalu -
ation terms of reference can be prepared. A number of processes 
are typically involved, and HR & GE dimensions should be applied in 
each of them:
•	 including
	the
	H
R
	&
	G
E
	d
imension
	a
s
	an
	e
xplicit
	p
urpose/objective 	
o
f the evaluation;
•	 identifying
	an
d
	e
ngaging
	the
	s
takeholders
	w
ho
	w
ill
	p
articipate,	
an
d determining how they will participate;
•	 including
	
the
	
HR
	
&
	
GE
	
dimension
	
in
	
standard
	
evaluation
	
criteria;
•	 framing
	
the
	
evaluation
	
questions;
•	 selecting
	
the
	
indicators
	
that
	
will
	
be
	
used;
	
and
•	 selecting
	
the
	
evaluation
	
team.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
19
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
Stakeholders
Stakeholders who are duty-bearers or rights-holders have special 
interests or responsibilities in the intervention. Evaluations should 
strive for the participation of both groups to ensure inclusion of bal -
anced and diverse perspectives. 
Duty-bearers may include government entities; officials; leaders; 
funding agencies; and those responsible for planning, funding or 
implementing the intervention being evaluated. Rights-holders 
may include groups and individuals ultimately affected or excluded 
by the intervention, disaggregated by age, sex and other relevant 
parameters; and other organizations with interests in the interven -
tion or its outcomes, including women’s organizations and other 
civil society organizations.
It is important to consider the role that each group of stakeholders 
might play in the evaluation, the gains from their involvement, the 
stage of the evaluation at which they can most usefully be engaged, 
and the ways in which they might be able to participate and their 
needs assessed in order to inform the evaluation. The principle of 
inclusion should guide the analysis. The UNEG handbook provides 
a useful HR & GE Stakeholder Analysis Matrix to guide evaluators/
managers in making such decisions. Examples of questions in rela -
tion to stakeholder participation are:
•	 Beneficiaries,
	 i
mplementers,
	 r
ights-holders
	 an
d
	 d
uty-bearers 	
c
an be involved in the process with varying degrees of intensity. 
What will be the implications in terms of effort, time-line and 
budget?
•	 Is
	the
re
	a
	c
lear
	c
ommunication
	s
trategy
	w
ith
	al
l
	s
takeholders	
r
egarding who will participate, who will be consulted and who 
will make decisions when there are differences of opinion?
•	 Have
	 the
	 g
ains
	 i
n
	 c
redibility
	 o
f
	 the
	 e
valuation
	 r
esults
	 f
rom
	 a	
p
articular level of participation been considered?
Evaluation criteria
The evaluation criteria commonly used in the UN are those developed 
by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD-DAC) – relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability. The UNEG hand -
book provides examples of the ways in which HR & GE dimensions 
can be integrated into each of these criteria. For example, under the 
relevance criterion the evaluator might consider the extent to which
<<<PAGE=42>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
20
the intervention complies with and contributes to the relevant inter -
national and regional conventions, declarations and international 
agreements, and the extent to which it was informed by analyses of 
human rights and gender issues and/or the needs and interests of 
diverse groups of stakeholders. 
Evaluators might also consider whether criteria derived directly from 
HR & GE principles can be applied in the evaluation. These princi -
ples include equality, participation, social transformation, inclusive -
ness and empowerment.
Evaluation questions
The questions to be answered from the evaluation must be aligned 
with the evaluation criteria and must relate to each stage of the 
intervention, from design and planning, through implementation to 
results achieved. Different interventions and different evaluations 
will obviously require different questions, but a matrix in the UNEG 
handbook suggests some basic questions that may be a good start -
ing point for the evaluator seeking to ensure that HR & GE dimen -
sions are integrated meaningfully into his or her work. For example, 
under the effectiveness criterion, the evaluator might ask:
•	 Design
	an
d
	p
lanning:
	D
id
	the
	i
ntervention’s
	the
ory
	o
f
	c
hange	
i
ncorporate HR & GE dimensions?
•	 Implementation:
	D
uring
	i
mplementation,
	w
ere
	the
re
	sys
tematic	
an
d appropriate efforts to include various groups of stakeholders, 
including those who are most likely to have their rights violated?
•	 Results:
	W
hat
	w
ere
	the
	m
ain
	r
esults
	a
chieved
	b
y
	the
	i
ntervention	
t
owards the realization of HR & GE?
Specifying these questions in some detail will also enable evalua -
tors to identify the type of information that will be needed in order 
to answer them. 
Indicators
Formulating indicators of HR & GE will assist the evaluator to 
assess the progress made on those dimensions as a result of the 
intervention and to identify the beneficiaries. The handbook offers 
advice for formulating both qualitative and quantitative indicators in 
the context of a particular intervention, and includes a number of 
examples drawn from specific types of interventions. A quantita -
tive indicator of empowerment, for example, is the proportion of 
women and men in different stakeholder groups in decision-making
<<<PAGE=43>>>
21
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
positions in local, national and sub-national government. A qualita -
tive indicator is the change in access to information about claims 
and decisions related to human rights violations. More detailed 
examples are included in an Annex to the UNEG handbook.
Evaluation team
If the evaluation is to address HR & GE in an effective way, then 
the evaluation team must have the knowledge and commitment to 
apply these perspectives. While specialist expertise will be invalu -
able if it can be accessed, every member of the team should under -
stand the UN mandates on HR & GE, and their application, and be 
committed to their inclusion in the evaluation. The UNEG Ethical 
Guidelines  and Code of Conduct for Evaluators in the UN System
6 
provide guidelines on ethics and behaviours for evaluators that are 
aligned with these approaches and are a further means of ensur -
ing inclusiveness. They are reproduced in the UNEG handbook for 
the benefit of evaluators, along with desirable attributes for com -
petence to integrate HR & GE within an evaluation team. Consider 
how diversity in the evaluation team can ensure a multiplicity of 
viewpoints and inclusivity.
How are human rights and gender equality 
integrated during the evaluation itself?
Integrating HR & GE dimensions is just as important throughout the 
conduct of the evaluation – the heart of the evaluation process – as 
it is in the planning phase. The UNEG handbook therefore suggests 
careful consideration when:
•	 selecting
	
the
	
evaluation
	
methodology;
•	 collecting
	
and
	
analysing
	
data;
•	 preparing
	
the
	
evaluation
	
report;
	
and
•	 disseminating
	 the
	 e
valuation
	 fi
ndings
	 an
d
	 d
eveloping
	 a	
m
anagement response.
Selecting appropriate methodology
While all evaluation methodological designs are conducive to the 
integration of HR & GE dimensions, the use of a mixed methods 
approach is more likely to generate robust and accurate data on 
6 See h ttp://www.unevaluation.org/ethicalguidelines  and http://www.unevaluation.
org/unegcodeofconduct
<<<PAGE=44>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
22
the extent to which HR & GE were integrated in an intervention by 
allowing different perspectives to be heard, including those usually 
marginalized. For example, an HR & GE stakeholder analysis con -
ducted in the preparation stage can help evaluators to select appro -
priate tools to maximize the participation of traditionally vulnerable 
and/or marginalized groups who may not normally be consulted dur -
ing evaluation processes. 
Other aspects to be considered in developing an HR & GE respon -
sive methodology include ensuring an adequate sample that is 
inclusive of both women and men from diverse stakeholder groups; 
ensuring that data collection instruments allow for collection of dis -
aggregated data; and, ensuring triangulation of data by collecting 
information from both rights-holders and duty-bearers. 
Collecting and analysing data
HR & GE dimensions can be integrated in commonly used data col -
lection and analysis methods by including HR & GE questions in 
the data collection tools and conducting an HR & GE analysis of the 
data collected. However, it also involves considering these dimen -
sions in the process of collecting the data. 
For example, evaluators organizing a focus group discussion (FGD) 
should consider in advance any barriers to participation when mak -
ing decisions about the timing and location of the FGD and the 
composition of the group itself. Questions that evaluations might 
ask themselves include: What are the power dynamics within the 
group? Will women feel comfortable to speak freely if men are also 
present in the room? Evaluators can also ensure that other com -
mon tools, such as surveys, are in the format and language most 
appropriate for each stakeholder group. In some cases, surveys 
may need to be modified specifically for each group. 
Preparing the evaluation report
Reports give evaluators the opportunity to highlight the importance 
of integrating HR & GE dimensions in an intervention, and the short -
comings derived from not doing so, and to illuminate the challenges 
and lessons learned and provide a clear explanation of the limita -
tions or obstacles faced in integrating HR & GE in the design and 
implementation of the intervention, and in the evaluation process 
itself. This can help to stimulate future improvements and encour -
age actions to address limitations. Including specific recommenda -
tions on HR & GE dimensions will highlight specific areas for action 
by management.
<<<PAGE=45>>>
23
Human rights and gender equality in evaluation
Integrating HR & GE in evaluation reporting involves not only the 
inclusion of substantive elements in the report, but also thoughtful 
decisions on the most suitable forms of reporting. Reporting can 
move beyond the traditional written form and involve consideration 
of the different audiences for the findings and their specific infor -
mation needs. Evaluators should ask themselves: 
•	 How
	 c
an
	 e
valuation
	 fi
ndings
	 b
e
	 m
ade
	 a
ccessible
	 an
d	
un
derstandable to both duty-bearers and rights-holders? 
•	 Will
	d
ifferent
	p
roducts
	ne
ed
	t
o
	b
e
	d
eveloped
	t
o
	e
nsure
	a
ccess
	t
o	
in
formation? 
•	 Has
	 a
ttention
	 b
een
	 p
aid
	 t
o
	 l
anguage
	 an
d
	 i
mages
	 t
o
	 a
void	
st
ereotyping?
It may be necessary to make use of alternative forms of reporting, 
such as video, or to translate the report into relevant languages to 
ensure access to the relevant groups in order to avoid further mar -
ginalizing or disadvantaging them. Key findings may also be high -
lighted for evidence-based advocacy.
Dissemination and management response
Agency policies normally guide evaluation managers in the UN in 
developing dissemination strategies for evaluations. The integration 
of HR & GE in the process requires efforts to provide barrier-free 
access to the findings through translation, printing of hard copies 
and making use of relevant dissemination channels, among others, 
to reach both duty-bearers and rights-holders and direct and indi -
rect users of the evaluation. These include human rights or gender 
organizations that may not have been involved in the intervention 
but for whom the findings would be of interest and use. 
A management response which addresses the HR & GE recom -
mendations, and provides action points in response, is crucial for 
enhancing the use of evaluation findings related to HR & GE issues, 
and to ensuring that the learning on HR & GE is incorporated into 
future practice. While normally developed by management, diverse 
stakeholder participation (including duty-bearers and rights-holders) 
in the process of developing the management response is one way 
of incorporating HR & GE dimensions into this last phase of the 
evaluation.
<<<PAGE=46>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
24
Conclusion
The development of guidance on the integration of HR & GE in eval -
uation fills a gap identified by UNEG. It enables evaluators to meet 
the expectations of the UN system to incorporate these dimensions 
into their work. This in turn will contribute to ensuring that HR & 
GE dimensions inform all aspects of the UN’s activities from policy 
analysis to programme planning, implementation and monitoring 
and evaluation. The UNEG handbook constitutes an authoritative 
reference for UN evaluative work and is of relevance for the wider 
evaluation community. The handbook will be further refined on the 
basis of user feedback.
References
OHCHR, UN common understanding of the Human Rights Based Approach to 
Programming.
UN (2008), Report on indicators for promoting and monitoring the implementation of 
human rights.
UN ECOSOC (1997), Resolution on Gender Mainstreaming.
UNEG (2011), Integrating Human Rights and Gender Equality in Evaluation – Towards 
UNEG Guidance.
<<<PAGE=47>>>
25
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
WHE N  HUMAN  RIGHtS  IS  
tHE
 
StA
RtI
NG
 
POINt fO
R
 
EVAlU
AtI
ON
Donna M. Mertens, Department of Educational Foundations  
and Research, Gallaudet University
“Citizens of former colonial powers are often baffled as to why 
indigenous or colonized peoples seem to suffer disproportionately 
from alcoholism, homelessness, mental illness, disease, lethargy, 
fatalism, or dependency. They cannot fathom… why many of their 
children cannot stay in school, or why many do not thrive in the con -
temporary, industrialized world of big cities and corporate capital -
ism. They are surprised that their development programmes don’t 
produce the desired results and their attempts to alleviate the con -
ditions under which so many indigenous or colonized peoples suf -
fer may meet with passivity, indifference, resistance, or sometimes 
hostility.”
Nobel Peace Prize winner  
Wangari Maathai (2010, p. 172)
The United Nation’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) 
stands as testament that the pursuit of human rights and the further -
ance of social justice are the life-blood of this international organi -
zation. This declaration established that all people have a right to 
life; liberty; security of the person; equal protection under the law; 
freedom of movement; marriage with the free and full consent of 
the intending spouses; ownership of property; freedom of thought 
and religion; freedom of opinion and expression; peaceful assembly; 
participation in governance; work in just and favorable working con -
ditions and education. Two points of tension are immediately appar -
ent when considering this universal declaration of rights. Firstly, all 
people do not live in conditions in which these rights are afforded to 
them, as witnessed by world-wide events of resistance to repres -
sion and discrimination. Secondly, throughout the years since 1948, 
the UN has recognized that a universal declaration did not result in 
universal access to rights. Their recognition of the continued need for 
attention to human rights reflects awareness that specific groups of 
people suffer the denial of their rights more than others.
To remedy these disparities between people of privilege and those 
who are marginalized, the UN passed additional conventions and
<<<PAGE=48>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
26
declarations aimed at recognizing the most marginalized groups, 
including racial groups who are discriminated against (UN, 1969); 
people with disabilities (UN, 2006a); women (UN, 1979); children 
(UN, 1990a); migrant workers and their families (UN, 1990b); and, 
indigenous peoples (UN, 2006b). These declarations and conven -
tions provide a partial list of the bases for discrimination and oppres -
sion that require focused attention if we are indeed to have universal 
human rights. The adoption of the Millennium Development Goals, 
and a review of progress toward meeting those goals, reinforces the 
need to attend to the poorest and most marginalized populations, 
including those who live in remote areas or urban slums, those 
who represent ethnic or racial minorities, and members of religious 
groups that experience discrimination (UNICEF, 2010). 
The broader international development community has responded 
by calling for programmes that explicitly address the needs of the 
poorest and most marginalized communities, with conscious atten -
tion to the full spectrum of their diversity (Mertens, 2009; 2010; 
Mertens & Wilson, in press). This is evident in UNICEF’s call for 
equity focused approaches in programme decisions (UN, 2010b), 
and a human rights approach to evaluation (Segone, 2009). On 
UNwomen (formerly UNIFEM) also supports the need to integrate 
human rights approaches with evaluation strategies, which focus 
on gender equity (Sanz, 2009). The UNDP Evaluation Policy was 
revised in 2011 to reflect a human rights focus: 
“Evaluation is guided by the people-centred approach of UNDP to 
development, which enhances capabilities, choices and rights for 
all men and women. Evaluation abides by universally shared values 
of equity, justice, gender equality and respect for diversity” (p. 3).
This chapter addresses the challenges of planning, implement -
ing and using evaluations that emerge when human rights is the 
starting point for policymakers, funders, programme developers 
and evaluators. It also takes on the difficult territory associated 
with gathering wisdom across small-scale evaluations to provide 
a human rights grounding for national level policymaking. Situating 
oneself as an evaluator in a human rights position requires re-think -
ing how evaluation is conceptualized, practiced, and used in inter -
national development. I make the argument that this re-framing of 
evaluation from this starting point based on human rights provides 
fertile ground for obtaining meaningful answers to questions about 
the efficacy of international development interventions.
<<<PAGE=49>>>
27
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
tr ansformative paradigm
The transformative paradigm provides one philosophical framework 
that provides guidance for practical methods in evaluation, which 
align the human rights mission of international development organi -
zations with a human rights approach to evaluation. The transform -
ative paradigm provides a metaphysical umbrella to guide evalua -
tors, which is applicable to people who experience discrimination 
and oppression on whatever basis, including (but not limited to): 
race/ethnicity; disability; immigrant status; political conflicts; sexual 
orientation; poverty; gender; age; or the multitude of other char -
acteristics that are associated with less access to social justice. In 
addition the transformative paradigm is applicable to the study of 
the power structures that perpetuate social inequities. Finally, indig -
enous peoples and scholars from marginalized communities have 
much to teach us about respect for culture and the generation of 
knowledge for social change. Hence, there is not a single context 
of social inquiry in which the transformative paradigm would not 
have the potential to raise issues of social justice and human rights 
(Mertens, 2009, p. 4). Thus, the philosophical assumptions of the 
transformative paradigm serve to address the interests of not only 
the most deprived groups, but also to interrogate the power struc -
tures that can either support the attainment of human rights or can 
serve to sustain an oppressive status quo. 
The transformative paradigm builds on the early work of Guba and 
Lincoln (2005), in defining the philosophical belief systems that 
constitute a paradigm in the evaluation context. They proposed that 
a paradigm was made up of four categories of philosophical beliefs:
1.
 T
he axiological assumption  concerns the nature of ethics.
2. T
he ontological assumption  concerns the nature of reality.
3.
 T
he epistemological assumption  concerns the nature of knowl -
edge and the relationship between the knower and that which 
would be known.
4.
 T
he methodological assumption concerns the nature of system -
atic inquiry.
The philosophical assumptions associated with the transformative 
paradigm provide a framework for exploring the use of a human 
rights lens in evaluation (see Figure 1).
<<<PAGE=50>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
28
figur e 1. tr ansformative philosophical beliefs
Axiological Assumption: 
•	 Identification
	
and
	
respect
	
for
	
cultural
	
norms
	
that
	
support
	
human
	
rights	 
an
d social justice; 
•	 Identification
	
and
	
challenge
	
of
	
cultural
	
norms
	
that
	
sustain
	
an
	
oppressive
	
system;
•	 Reciprocity
	
–
	
what
	
evaluators
	
give
	
back
	
to
	
the
	
community; 	
•	
Resilience
	
–
	
recognition
	
and
	
validation
	
of
	
the
	
knowledge,
	
expertise,
	
and
	
strengths 	 
i
n the community; 
•	 Sustainability
	
–
	
facilitating
	
conditions
	
such
	
that
	
actions
	
to
	
continue
	
to
	
enhance	
s
ocial justice and human rights are feasible once the evaluator leaves  
the community;
•	 Recognition
	
of
	
limitations:
	
Not
	
over-stepping
	
the
	
evaluator’s
	
boundaries
	
or	 
o
ver- promising. 
Ontological Assumption: 
•	 Recognizes
	
that
	
different
	
versions
	
of
	
reality
	
exist;	
•	
All
	
versions
	
of
	
reality
	
are
	
not
	
equal;	
•	
Recognizes
	
privilege
	
given
	
to
	
what
	
is
	
perceived
	
to
	
be
	
real,
	
based
	
on:
	
social,	
p
olitical, cultural, economic, ethnic, gender, religion, and disability perspectives; 
•	 Interrogates
	
versions
	
of
	
reality
	
that
	
sustain
	
oppressive
	
systems;	
•	
Makes
	
visible
	
versions
	
of
	
reality
	
that
	
have
	
the
	
potential
	
to
	
further
	
human
	
rights.
Epistemological Assumption: 
•	 Establishment
	
of
	
an
	
interactive
	
link
	
between
	
the
	
evaluator
	
and
	
stakeholders; 	
•	
Acknowledges
	
that
	
knowledge
	
is
	
socially
	
and
	
historically
	
located;
•	 Explicit
	
acknowledgement
	
of
	
power
	
inequities;
	
and
•	 Development
	
of
	
a
	
trusting
	
relationship. 	
M
ethodological Assumption: 
•	 Evaluators
	
need
	
qualitative
	
assessment
	
and
	
dialogue
	
time
	
in
	
the
	
beginning
	
of	
t
heir planning in order to ascertain the cultural context in which they are working; 
•	 Qualitative
	
and
	
quantitative
	
data
	
facilitate
	
responsiveness
	
to
	
different 	
st
akeholders and issues; 
•	 Methods
	
used
	
need
	
to
	
capture
	
the
	
contextual
	
complexity
	
and
	
be
	
appropriate
	
to	 
the
 cultural groups in the evaluation; 
•	 A
	
cyclical
	
design
	
can
	
be
	
used
	
to
	
make
	
use
	
of
	
interim
	
findings
	
throughout 	 
the
 evaluation study; and 
•	 Follow-up
	
is
	
needed
	
to
	
facilitate
	
use
	
to
	
enhance
	
the
	
potential
	
to
	
achieve	 
the
 strengthening of human rights.
Based on Mertens (2011)
<<<PAGE=51>>>
29
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
tr ansformative axiological assumption
The transformative axiological assumption is discussed first 
because it provides the foundation for the subsequent assump -
tions. As evaluators reflect upon their beliefs about the nature of 
ethics, they first need to identify those ethical principles that guide 
their work. If they determine that the furtherance of human rights 
and the pursuit of social justice are the underlying ethical princi -
ples, then their beliefs are reflective of the transformative axiologi -
cal assumption. Adopting such a position brings with it the need to 
consider differences of power and culture also as ethical issues. 
The questions then become: How can this evaluation contribute to 
social justice and human rights? The corollary being: What do I do 
differently in the evaluation in order to act upon these ethical prin -
ciples?
A first methodological implication that emanates from this ethical 
stance is the need to identify the cultural norms and beliefs that are 
present in the targeted communities. In order to engage in cultur -
ally respectful ways, we need to include mechanisms for entering 
communities that permit identification of these norms and beliefs, 
and to understand the implications of those norms, either to sup -
port the pursuit of human rights or to sustain an oppressive system. 
For example, the African tradition related to “cleansing” a woman 
when her husband or child dies by bringing in a man from another 
village to have sexual relations with her is a practice that sus -
tains an oppressive system and results in the continued spread of  
HIV/AIDS. This is a tradition that needs to be understood and chal -
lenged as sustaining an oppressive and dangerous practice. On the 
other hand, the African belief in Ubuntu (“I am because we are”) 
serves as a belief that can support this challenge and lead to the 
Africans resolving the conflict between their beliefs in favor of that 
which is more humane. 
What is the role of the evaluator in such a context? The transforma -
tive evaluator will identify, through respectful interactions, those 
cultural norms, that are supportive of human rights and those that 
support an oppressive system. The evaluator can engage with com -
munities by arranging for culturally appropriate opportunities to 
address those norms and beliefs that conflict with the pursuit of 
human rights. They can insure that all stakeholder groups, espe -
cially those who are poorest or most marginalized, have a platform 
for authentic engagement with the evaluator. They can clarify that 
part of the conducting of an ethical evaluation is inclusion of the goal
<<<PAGE=52>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
30
to leave the community better off than before the evaluation was 
undertaken. This means that the evaluator proactively addresses 
issues of reciprocity, sustainability and how the evaluation can con -
tribute to the possibility of taking action to enhance social justice 
and human rights after the evaluator leaves the community. 
As Maathai (2010, p. 130) noted: 
“Poor people need to be engaged in their own development, and, 
by extension, in expanding the democratic space that many African 
societies desperately need. Just as communities should be mobi -
lized to combat malaria, or HIV/AIDS, for instance, so they must 
work together to fight the scourges of failed leadership, corruption, 
and moral blindness. However, because the poor are more likely 
to be uneducated, illiterate, and ignored, and to feel powerless, 
this requires both political and economic commitment, as well as 
patience and persistence, since change does not occur overnight”.
Although Maathi’s comments are situated in the African context, 
they have relevance for the broader communities of poor and mar -
ginalized peoples. In such communities, the people may have lost 
sight of their strengths as a community. The evaluator can work 
with the people to explore their strengths and to validate their 
knowledge as having value because it is rooted in an experience 
that few evaluators and policymakers have had. This axiological 
assumption has specific implications for the transformative onto -
logical assumptions.
tr ansformative ontological assumption
As alluded to in the previous paragraph, people with different 
experience-bases will often have different perceptions of reality. 
Thus, the transformative ontological assumption leads the evalua -
tor to recognize that different versions of reality exist and that all 
versions of reality are not equal. The transformative evaluator has 
the responsibility of uncovering the different versions of reality that 
exist and to interrogate the basis for privileging one version of real -
ity over another on the grounds of different social; political; cultural; 
socio-economic; gender; age; religion; geographic; and, disability 
perspectives. Just as different beliefs and norms are associated 
with either support for, or inhibiting human rights, the versions of 
reality need to be examined on the same basis. For example, if peo -
ple in power perceive that it is too expensive to try to address the 
needs of the poorest and most marginalized people, then it is not
<<<PAGE=53>>>
31
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
likely that the poor people will receive the support they need for a 
good quality of life. However, a version of reality that holds that on 
moral grounds alone (and perhaps on economic grounds as well, 
see UNICEF, 2010) we have an obligation to address the needs of 
the poor and marginalized, holds the potential to actually further the 
human rights agenda. 
From the transformative ontological stance, the evaluator needs to 
ask questions about the quality of the evaluation that focus on the 
extent to which the evaluation reveals the different versions of real -
ity, and the consequences of accepting one version of reality over 
another in terms of furthering human rights. The evaluator needs to 
document the fact that different versions of reality were explored, 
and that the consequences of those versions were considered in 
terms of the evaluation’s contribution to the needed social changes. 
tr ansformative epistemological assumption
In evaluation, the epistemological assumption can be thought of in 
terms of the nature of the relationship between the evaluator and 
the stakeholders (rather than the philosophical language about the 
relationship between the knower and that which would be known). 
In order to act in line with the transformative axiological and onto -
logical beliefs, the evaluator needs to build a relationship with the 
stakeholders, which is based on cultural respect, acknowledges 
power differences, is inclusive of marginalized voices, and provides 
a safe environment for everyone to express themselves. The evalu -
ator should provide evidence that they have considered issues of 
power and that they have included the voices of the less power -
ful in an accurate way, which leads to appropriate social action. In 
order to do this, the evaluator needs to address issues of power and 
language and to build trusting relationships with the stakeholders. 
The nature of those relationships will be contextually dependent, as 
the cultural norms that dictate what will engender trust in one set -
ting will differ in another setting. 
Evaluators have resources at their disposal to ensure that they are 
aware of the relevant dimensions of diversity within a particular 
geographic area, as well as to become informed about the cultural 
beliefs and norms that have implications for the development of 
the relationships with stakeholder groups. In addition to the main -
stream evaluation literature, members of marginalized communi -
ties have increasingly published documents that give insights into 
appropriate entry into and means to establish relationships with
<<<PAGE=54>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
32
members of their communities. Harris, Holmes and Mertens (2009) 
provide terms of reference for conducting evaluations in the Deaf 
Sign Language community. Chilisa (2009) and Ntseane (2009) pro -
vide guidance for the ethical conduct of evaluations in Africa. Cram 
(2009) describes the protocol for entering and engaging with Maori 
communities in New Zealand. 
The common thread in these culturally specific examples is that 
evaluators, especially those who are not working in their native lan -
guage or in their native culture, need to consciously address the 
challenge of entering the targeted community. If feasible, the evalu -
ator can establish lengthy relationships with community members 
who demonstrate their willingness to understand the culture. How -
ever, with shorter term evaluations, evaluators need to:
“present themselves and their backgrounds in ways that make clear 
their strengths and limitations in terms of their knowledge and life 
experience. This positioning allows the evaluator to acknowledge 
the need to work together with the people from the community, 
who have a stronger understanding of cultural and social issues 
(Mertens, 2011, p. 6).”
Engagement with communities is key to the conduct of transforma -
tive evaluations. Additional strategies include hiring evaluators from 
the home communities, and establishing teams of evaluators who 
have expertise in evaluation and awareness of the culture of the 
community. This might entail capacity building activities for those 
who lack evaluation skills or for those who lack cultural skills. Evalu -
ators can also form relationships with important community gate -
keepers who can vouch for the evaluators’ credibility. However, this 
strategy comes with a cautionary note: the evaluator must be cog -
nizant of the dangers associated with accepting one or a few peo -
ple as representatives of the voices of the larger group. They should 
also avoid token representation of stakeholders; the invitation for 
participation must be authentic. In keeping with the international 
community’s movement toward country-led evaluations (Segone, 
2009), the transformative approach to evaluation supports those 
relationships between evaluators and community members that 
acknowledge the power differences and that value the expertise 
brought-in by each team member.
<<<PAGE=55>>>
33
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
tr ansformative methodological assumption
No single method is dictated by situating oneself in the transforma -
tive paradigm. Rather, the methodological assumption flows from 
the axiological, ontological, and epistemological assumptions in that 
the focus is on developing methods that facilitate the support for 
human rights, uncover competing versions of reality and the conse -
quences of accepting one over the other, and establishing trusting 
relationships with stakeholders. The model of transformative meth -
ods that encompasses these principles is a cyclical design some -
what akin to Patton’s Developmental Evaluation (Patton, 2011). 
However, Patton does not situate his work within a transforma -
tive philosophical belief system. Hence, differences between his 
approach and a transformative approach emerge because the latter 
starts with the principle of furthering human rights.
The transformative methodological assumption calls for a re-think -
ing of the conceptualization of evaluation currently operating in the 
international development community. The definition of evaluation 
within the international development community tends to focus on 
measuring the outcomes of projects. The international community 
distinguishes between monitoring (the continuous function that 
provides managers and stakeholders with regular feedback), and 
evaluation. The United Nations Development Programme (2011, 
p.4) defines evaluation as follows:
“Evaluation is a judgment made of the relevance, appropriate -
ness, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability of 
development efforts, based on agreed criteria and benchmarks 
among key partners and stakeholders. It involves a rigorous, sys -
tematic and objective process in the design, analysis and inter -
pretation of information to answer specific questions. It provides 
assessments of what works and why, highlights intended and 
unintended results, and provides strategic lessons to guide deci -
sion-makers and inform stakeholders.”
This definition, and others found throughout the international com -
munity, focuses primarily on evaluation as an act that occurs after a 
programme is implemented. However, the broader evaluation com -
munity sees evaluation as a strategy that has the potential to inform 
the development of programmes, provide feedback about the pro -
cesses that are implemented, and document the intended and unin -
tended outcomes and impacts of a programme. In order to address 
the human rights mission of international development organiza -
<<<PAGE=56>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
34
tions through a human rights evaluation approach, evaluators need 
to be involved in international development projects throughout the 
life of the project, from the moment of inception. 
Thus, the transformative methodological assumption supports 
the use of a cyclical model that provides opportunities for com -
munity participation throughout the project’s lifetime (Mertens, 
2009; 2010). If evaluators are called to do their work only after a 
programme is implemented, and to focus their efforts on out-
comes and impacts, then they have missed the many opportuni -
ties afforded by a cyclical evaluation approach: to contribute to the 
quality of a project; to allow for on-going adjustments needed to 
correct or enhance the project; to gather wisdom from the commu -
nity in order to support this effort; and to document outcomes and 
impacts with validity. 
Before there is a programme, or when changes in an existing pro -
gramme are warranted, members of the community can be con -
sulted about the need for a programme or for changes in an exist-
ing programme, and on what that new or revised programme might 
look like in order to be culturally responsive. This stage of the pro -
cess can involve the review of documents; meetings with various 
stakeholder groups; review or development of culturally appropri -
ate protocols for interaction; focus groups; ‘town hall’ meetings or 
indigenous equivalents; and/or surveys. In evaluation, this period 
of the evaluation would be termed a needs assessment or context 
evaluation. The results of this first round of data gathering need 
to be analyzed in conjunction with community members in order 
to provide culturally appropriate interpretations of the data, and to 
determine the next steps in the process. This use of information, to 
inform decision-making, has been present in the broader evaluation 
community for decades. If this approach is to be applied in interna -
tional development, it would expand the conceptualization of evalu -
ation as it currently stands, in that context.
Based on information from the first stage of the evaluation activi -
ties, the evaluators would then work with programme develop -
ers and community-based stakeholders to determine the nature 
of the intervention, as well as to specify the contextual variables 
that require attention in its implementation. This might include the 
development of a pilot version of the intervention, which is imple -
mented on a smaller scale in order to examine the appropriateness 
of the intervention, the process of implementation, and possible 
measures of outcomes. Data from this phase of the evaluation can
<<<PAGE=57>>>
35
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
be used to inform decisions about the intervention and its imple -
mentation, as well as to make adjustments to the evaluation meas -
ures, as needed. These data should be brought to the programme 
developers and community stakeholders on a continuous basis so 
that adjustments can be made as needed.
Based on the information from the second stage, the evaluators 
can then work with the programme developers, implementers, and 
community stakeholders to explore the process of scaling-up the 
intervention, still maintaining a focus on process evaluation (how 
is the programme being implemented?) and on the outcomes and 
impacts, with an awareness that adjustments may need to be made 
on the basis of heterogeneity in marginalized communities. For 
example, if an HIV/AIDS prevention programme is implemented in 
the hearing community, what needs to change to have a quality pro -
gramme in the deaf community? This transfer of the programme 
to a different marginalized group, who may live in the same geo -
graphic area as the hearing community, requires involvement of a 
different group of community stakeholders. 
Follow-up of the use of the evaluation findings for programme 
changes and for policy decisions is a crucial part of the transforma -
tive methodological assumption. An evaluator’s work is not finished 
by the provision of a final report to the funder. Rather, they need 
to work with appropriate constituencies to facilitate the use of the 
information by engaging in conversations, focus groups, ‘town hall’ 
meetings or indigenous equivalents, and/or interviews with appro -
priate stakeholders to determine how they can use the information. 
This should be viewed as part of the evaluator’s responsibility and 
comes under the concept of meta-evaluation. If the goal of the eval -
uation is to address human rights, then the follow-up to facilitate 
and document use needs to be included in the definition of evalu -
ation. Such follow-up is in keeping with the spirit of the interna -
tional community’s desire to make sense of the multiple evaluations 
that are conducted in order to gather wisdom from them for the 
purpose of policymaking decisions at a broader level. Quality local 
evaluations are needed so that the tension between the attention 
to diversity and the need for broader evidence-supported policies 
is addressed. 
Evaluators who situate themselves in the transformative paradigm 
use methods that allow them to capture the “contextual complexity 
and provide pluralistic avenues for engaging appropriately with diverse 
cultural groups in the evaluation” (Mertens, 2011, p. 7). Hence, many
<<<PAGE=58>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
36
transformative evaluators choose to use mixed-method approaches 
that allow for the combination of both quantitative and qualitative 
data in a cyclical manner, to inform decision-making throughout the 
lifetime of the intervention. Transformative mixed-method designs 
reflect the cyclical approach described earlier, and support the use 
of mixed-methods as a mechanism for engaging with the full range 
of stakeholders and providing the needed evidence of programme 
effectiveness. 
At the beginning of the evaluation, evaluators begin with qualita -
tive assessment and dialogue time, in order to ascertain the cultural 
context in which they are working. They also benefit from the col -
lecting of quantitative data that allows for a broader sense of com -
munity strengths and challenges, as well as for documentation of 
the effectiveness of earlier interventions. During the pilot stage, 
case study approaches can be combined with counterfactual com -
parisons. During the implementation and possible scaling-up stage, 
both qualitative and quantitative measures can be used, along with 
designs that provide counterfactual comparisons, as long as the eth -
ical considerations of denial of treatment are addressed adequately.
Conclusions
The international development community has been a strong sup -
porter of human rights for decades, especially for the poorest and 
most marginalized populations. The international development eval -
uation community has taken the stand that their evaluations should 
align with this support for human rights. If evaluators take the pro -
motion of human rights as their starting point, then they need a 
framework for thinking about the implications of this stance. The 
transformative paradigm offers such a framework through its exam -
ination of ethics and reality, and through the relationships between 
evaluators and stakeholders, together with evaluation methods that 
are rooted in the pursuit of social justice and the furtherance of 
human rights. The thinking of feminists; indigenous peoples; critical 
theorists and critical race theorists; disability rights advocates; and 
deafness rights advocates are commensurate with the transforma -
tive paradigm’s philosophical assumptions. Practical implications for 
evaluators derived from these assumptions, provide guidance for 
evaluators who align their work with the international community’s 
mission to address human rights issues. The international develop -
ment evaluation community stands to benefit by accepting a trans -
formative cyclical approach in order to reflect the complexities that
<<<PAGE=59>>>
37
When human rights is the starting point for evaluation
challenge programme effectiveness and, which provide a platform 
for informing policies that can enhance the possibility of achieving 
the desired end – a better quality of life for those who suffer dis -
crimination and oppression.
References
Chilisa, B. (2009). Indigenous African-centered ethics: Contesting and complementing 
dominant models. In D.M. Mertens & P.E. Ginsberg, (Eds.), Handbook of social research 
ethics (pp. 407-425). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Cram, F. (2009).Maintaining indigenous voices. In D.M. Mertens & P.E. Ginsberg (Eds.), 
Handbook of social research ethics (pp. 308-322). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions,  
and emerging confluence. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Sage handbook  
of qualitative research (3rd ed., pp. 191–215). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Harris, R., Holmes, H., & Mertens, D. M. (2009). Research ethics in sign language 
communities. Sign Language Studies, 9 (2).
Maathai, W. (2010). The challenge for Africa. London: Arrow Books.
Mertens, D.M. (2009). Transformative research and evaluation. NY: Guilford.
Mertens, D.M. (2010). Research and evaluation in education & psychology: Integrating 
diversity with quantitative, qualitative, & mixed methods (3
rd ed.), Thousand Oaks,  
CA: Sage.
Mertens, D.M. (2011). Social transformation and evaluation. Evaluation Journal  
of Australasia . 10(2), 3-10.
Mertens, D.M. & Wilson, A.T. (in press). Program evaluation from theory to practice:  
A comprehensive approach. NY: Guilford.
Ntseane, P.G. (2009). The ethics of the researcher-subject relationship: Experiences from 
the field. In D.M. Mertens & P.E. Ginsberg (Eds.) Handbook of Social Research Ethics ,  
pp. 295-307, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Patton, M.Q. (2011). Developmental evaluation. NY: Guilford.
Sanz, B. (2009). Gender equality and human rights responsive evaluations: Rethinking 
approaches. In M. Segone (Ed.), From policies to results, pp. 125-146. NY: UNICEF.
Segone, M. (Ed.) (2009). Country led monitoring and evaluation systems. NY: UNICEF.
UN Evaluation Group. (2005). Norms for evaluation in the UN system. NY.
United Nations Development Programme. (2011). The evaluation policy of UNDP. NY: 
Author.
UNICEF. (2010). Narrowing the gaps to meet the goals. NY.
UNICEF. (2010). Progress for children: Achieving the millennium development goals  
with equity. NY: Author.
<<<PAGE=60>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
38
United Nations. (1948). Universal declaration of human rights. Retrieved February 11, 
2008, from www.un.org/Overview/rights.html .
United Nations. (1969). The international convention on the elimination of all forms  
of racial discrimination . New York: Author. Retrieved February 11, 2008,  
from www.ohchr.org/english/law/pdf/cerd.pdf .
United Nations. (1979). The convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination 
against women (CEDAW) . Retrieved February 11, 2008, from www.un.org/womenwatch/
daw/cedaw/text/econvention.htm .
United Nations. (1990a). Convention on the rights of the child. Retrieved February 11, 
2008, from www.ohchr.org/english/law/pdf/crc.pdf .
United Nations. (1990b). International convention on the protection of the rights of all 
migrant workers and members of their families . Retrieved February 11, 2008,  
from www.un.org/millennium/law/iv-13.htm .
United Nations. (2006a). Declaration of ad hoc committee on a comprehensive and 
integral international convention on the protection and promotion of the rights and dignity 
of persons with disabilities . Retrieved May 10, 2008, from www.un.org/disabilities .
United Nations. (2006b). Declaration of rights of indigenous peoples . Retrieved March 21, 
2007 from http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/declaration.html
<<<PAGE=61>>>
39
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
StR ENG tH ENING E qUI ty-fO CUSED 
E
VAlU
AtI
ONS tH
ROUGH 
INSIGH
tS 
f
ROM
 fE
MINISt tHE
ORy 
AND 
A
PPROACHES1
Katherine Hay, Senior Evaluation Specialist,  
International Development Research Centre,  
Regional Office for South Asia and China
Introduction
Given the persistence of inequities globally, evaluation must play a 
stronger role in understanding how societies change and what poli -
cies and programmes show promise in shifting norms and inequi -
ties. This section examines how an equity lens and transformation-
oriented practice can influence the framing, methods, and conduct 
of evaluation. The chapter draws on a set of evaluation efforts and 
experiences in India, and explores how a rights and equity lens can 
play out in evaluation practice. Most of the cases that are explored 
in this section focus on gender based inequities, a persistent site of 
exclusion that shapes the experience of all policies and programmes 
in India. However, ideas from these cases can be extended to other 
types of inequities. The section attempts to document and analyze 
experiences, perspectives, and ideas from practice and to connect 
them to emerging developments in Equity-focused evaluation.
The past decade has seen renewed enthusiasm and interest in eval -
uation in international development. Donors are putting out calls for 
demonstrating ‘impact’ and governments, including in India, have 
articulated interest in strengthening evaluation systems and capac -
ity (Hay, 2010). Recently, India has announced plans to strengthen 
their evaluation system and to set up an independent evaluation 
office. With the expanding space in India for evidence, critique, 
and debate on development programming and policies, it is timely 
to explore the extent to which equity-focused approaches could 
inform evaluation questions, design, practice, and use. 
1 B ased upon and building on a paper in the Indian Journal of Gender Studies by the 
author (forthcoming).
<<<PAGE=62>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
40
This section argues that central ideas from feminist theory and 
research can strengthen and inform Equity-focused evaluation. The 
section starts from an understanding of inequities as manifest and 
systemic in social institutions. Equity-focused evaluation is pre -
sented as a way of understanding how intersecting social cleavages 
(such as gender, race, class, sexuality, caste, and religion) define 
and shape the experience and the exercise of power in different 
contexts. These ideas draw on work by Sudarshan, Ramachandran, 
Khanna, Jandhyala, and Murthy (forthcoming). Together with other 
social scientists and evaluators, between 2010 and 2011, they exam -
ined and reflected on their evaluation practice through a series of 
workshops and writing. Examining their evaluation experiences and 
reflections, this chapter explores how an equity-focused stance can 
influence the framing, methods, and practice of evaluation in India.
Conceptual framework
The definition of Equity-focused evaluations suggested by Segone in 
the introductory chapter of this book is consistent with recent defi -
nitions provided by Podems (2010) on feminist evaluation. Podems 
describes feminist evaluation as flexible and as being a ‘way of 
thinking about evaluation.’ Podems (2010) gives examples of practi -
cal aspects of feminist evaluations including their interest in multi -
ple factors and structures influencing inequities, of which gender is 
only one. This can be compared to Segone’s introduction: “inequity 
is rooted in a complex range of political, social, and economic factors 
that include, but are by no means limited to: gender discrimination” 
(Segone, 2011). Feminist theory offers deep and rich literature on the 
intersecting nature of exclusions (MacKinnon 2006, Mohanty 2003, 
Narayan 1997), which can inform evaluation practice. 
Understandings of feminist evaluation, and of Equity-focused evalu -
ation provided in this volume, are clear that documenting inequi -
ties is inadequate; quality evaluations using either approach should 
also seek to reduce those inequities. In doing so, both approaches 
implicitly recognize that evaluation can serve to reinforce or to chal -
lenge existing inequities. For example, Podems notes that while 
some evaluations might identify or record the differences between 
men and women, feminist evaluations would explore why these dif -
ferences exist and challenge ‘women’s subordinate position‘ (p. 8). 
Though implicit, in both definitions it is recognition that for evalu -
ations to change and challenge inequities they need to be used. 
This section makes that use explicit for Equity-focused evalua -
<<<PAGE=63>>>
41
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
tion, as without use of evaluation, the purpose of equity cannot be 
achieved. 
Drawing from the work of a range of evaluation theorists, Podems 
(2010) lays out 6 tenants of feminist evaluation (Box 1). It has as 
a central focus on gender inequities; it recognizes discrimination 
based on gender is systemic and structural; evaluation is political; 
knowledge has power; knowledge should be a resource of and for 
the people who create, hold, and share it; and there are multiple 
ways of knowing and some are privileged over others. If the focus 
on gender is expanded to include all sites of inequity, these ten -
ants can arguably also be equally and usefully applied to all sites of 
inequity. In the case of UNICEF for example, the first tenant might 
include a central focus on inequities facing children marginalized 
by gender, disability, ethnicity or other sites of exclusion. Keeping 
the other tenants the same, and adding ‘use’ as a separate explicit 
tenant discussed above, what does this set of principles bring to 
equity-focused evaluation? 
Box 1: Six Tenants of Feminist Evaluation defined by Sielbeck-
Bowent et al (2002) and compiled in Podems (2010):
•	 Feminist
	e
valuation
	h
as
	a
s
	a
	c
entral
	f
ocus
	t
he
	g
ender
	i
nequities
	t
hat
	l
ead
	t
o
	s
ocial	
in
justice.
•	 Discrimination
	
or
	
inequality
	
based
	
on
	
gender
	
is
	
systemic
	
and
	
structural.
•	 Evaluation
	i
s
	a
	p
olitical
	a
ctivity;
	t
he
	c
ontexts
	i
n
	w
hich
	e
valuation
	o
perates
	a
re	
p
oliticized;
	a
nd
	t
he
	p
ersonal
	e
xperiences,
	p
erspectives,
	a
nd
	c
haracteristics
	e
valuators	
b
ring to evaluations …lead to a particular political stance.
•	 Knowledge
	
is
	
a
	
powerful
	
resource
	
that
	
serves
	
an
	
explicit
	
or
	
implicit
	
purpose.
•	 Knowledge
	s
hould
	b
e
	a
	r
esource
	o
f
	a
nd
	f
or
	t
he
	p
eople
	w
ho
	c
reate,
	h
old,
	a
nd
	s
hare
	i
t.	
C
onsequently, the evaluation or research process can lead to significant negative or 
positive effects on the people involved in the evaluation/research…
•	 There
	
are
	
multiple
	
ways
	
of
	
knowing;
	
some
	
ways
	
are
	
privileged
	
over
	
others.	
Let us first explore the nature of these principles. The feminist lens 
brings an emphasis on power relations, structural elements of ineq -
uities, justice, and politics into evaluation. This lens and these foci 
can provide important and different perspectives on Equity-focused 
evaluations. Through these foci, feminist research has made impor -
tant contributions to development more generally, including on such 
diverse topics as: women’s work and the double work burden; social 
cleavages and overlapping sites of discrimination; the ‘black box’ of
<<<PAGE=64>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
42
the household; and understandings of rights that are less abstract 
and more lived. Specifically, just looking at the field of economics, 
the contributions of a feminist lens are extensive and important. 
Researchers have both used mainstream economic tools to examine 
wage gaps between men and women and critiqued these tools for 
their limited ability to shed light on the underlying inequities behind 
such gaps (Figart, Mutari and Power, 2002). Studies of unpaid work 
within households, the ‘black box’, have brought attention to women’s 
unpaid work (Waring, 1988) and highlighted inequities in distribu -
tion of resources within households (Sen 1990). Tools developed by 
McElroy and Horney (1981) have become commonly used for under -
standing decision making and agency within households. A femin -
ist lens has also lead to innovations in the analysis of government 
budgets according to their effects on gender equity (Budlender et al., 
2002) and understanding the effects of macroeconomic policies of 
structural adjustment and liberalization (Çagatay, Elson and Grown, 
1995; Grown, Elson and Çagatay, 2000). For example, such research 
has demonstrated that actions such as cutbacks in health care pro -
grammes often have their most immediate impact on women. Fem -
inist economists have also analyzed how factors such as race and 
caste (Brewer, Conrad and King, 2002) interact with gender and 
affect economic outcomes. 
Just looking at this very brief list of how feminist insights and analy -
sis have strengthened one field of development (economics), one 
can draw parallels to the way in which such analysis can bring new 
developments, approaches and insights to Equity-focused evalua -
tion. Equity-focused evaluation can focus attention on different vari -
ables, and in doing so, challenge or critique the dominant discourse 
underpinning the programme. Examples of the ways in which cen -
tral ideas on the structural nature of inequities can be explicitly 
brought into evaluation design include:
•	 Collecting
	 d
ata
	 o
n
	 w
omen’s
	 ti
me
	 an
d
	 w
omen’s
	 d
rudgery
	 i
n	
i
ncome generating projects (Sudarshan and Sharma, forthcoming, 
Murthy, forthcoming); 
•	 Examining	w
hich	ch
ildren	f
rom	w
hich	s
ocial	g
roups	h
ave	a
ccess	
t
o better schooling and their experience within those school 
systems (Ramachandran, forthcoming);
<<<PAGE=65>>>
43
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
•	 Documenting	h ow 	e lite 	w omen 	c apture 	b enefits 	f rom 	p olitical	
d
ecentralization processes to the detriment of other less 
privileged women or men (Devika and Thampi. 2010).
Feminist work on breaking into the ‘black box’ of the household, 
understanding and examining overlapping sites of inequities, and 
bringing focus to women’s work and women’s double burden, cre -
ates rich terrain that Equity-focused evaluation could and should 
more explicitly draw from. 
With the modifications suggested, it is suggested that tenants from 
feminist evaluation (themselves drawn from a broader field of femi -
nist research in multiple disciplines) can be usefully applied to all 
Equity-focused evaluations to bring useful and needed insights into 
Equity-focused evaluation. The rest of this section explores and 
suggests what this may entail in practice.
Evaluation is a process. Different evaluation theorists and practi -
tioners categorize it into different stages, but in general: there is 
a start or a planning phase that includes deciding what to evalu -
ate and what questions to ask; a design phase of determining what 
methodologies and methods will best generate the kind of knowl -
edge and evidence needed; an implementation phase where data 
is gathered and analysed, and; a phase of use where the evaluation 
findings are shared and applied. These phases usually overlap in dif -
ferent ways depending on the nature of the evaluation.
This chapter applies a modified set of principles drawing from femi -
nist analysis and utilization-focused approaches to evaluation stages 
(see figure 1) to explore through a number of case examples, how 
researchers and evaluators can integrate these principles into their 
Equity-focused evaluation work. The following sections look at how 
the ideas can influence the framing of evaluation questions, evalua -
tion design, evaluation judgements, evaluation practice, and evalu -
ation use.
<<<PAGE=66>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
44
Figure 1: Principles for Equity-focused evaluation drawn 
from feminist research and approaches and stages in  
the evaluation process.
Principles:
1. Has a central focus 
on inequities
2. Recognizes that inequities 
are structural
3. Recognizes that evaluation 
is political
4. Recognizes and values different 
ways of knowing
5. Proposes to add value to 
those who are marginalized
6. Requires use
Evaluation
Questions
Evaluation
Design
Evaluation
Judgements
Evaluation
Practice
Evaluation
Use
Setting evaluation questions
Programme theory is informed by competing discourses on devel -
opment and equity that are at times explicit, more often implicit, 
and at times competing. Integrating the analysis of power and 
the structural nature of inequities into Equity-focused evaluation 
offers opportunities to critique dominant discourses and hold them 
up for scrutiny. ‘Discourse’ here means the ‘big ideas’ that shape 
our understanding of how the world works. Discourse matters 
because it underpins and legitimizes interventions. For example, 
policy responses to HIV were based on dominant discourses on 
HIV that evolved over time. These discourses included ‘gay plague’ 
discourse, a ‘contaminated other’ discourse, an ‘innocent victim’ 
discourse, a ‘heterosexual-risk’ discourse and…a ‘development’ 
discourse on AIDS (Hill, 1995). Discourses can (sometimes) be 
unpacked fairly easily in hindsight but can often be obscure (often 
intentionally so) as they are lived. Ideas from deconstructive anal -
ysis (Dietz 2003, Nash 2002) from feminist research can provide 
useful starting points to ground this effort to unpack discourse, as 
can realist synthesis approaches from within the evaluation field 
(Pawson, 2006). Evaluation can raise questions about the discourse
<<<PAGE=67>>>
45
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
itself, the way it is articulated in policies and programmes, and 
whether the implicit theories around the nature of the problem, and 
how change will happen, hold true on the ground. 
Trends in discourse evaluators using equity-focused approaches 
should consider the dominance of questions on impact and increas -
ingly, with some funders, on value for money. At times these are 
the most critical or important factors to examine. At times they 
become political rallying calls, which are inserted into evaluations 
rather thoughtlessly. In such cases, evaluators should demand a 
more thoughtful discussion on the use and users of the evaluation 
and negotiation to change the questions when it is not possible 
to measure impact or cost, or where it is not the most important 
issue. For example, evaluators describe shifting the questions of 
impact and attribution to new questions on assessing ‘how effec -
tive are strategies in particular contexts’ or whether outcomes are 
in line with needs of beneficiaries (Sudarshan and Sharma, forth -
coming). Equity-focused evaluation may also include valuing, and 
thus generating knowledge on process results and unintended out -
comes. Reflecting on several evaluations of gender programmes 
and organizations, Sudarshan and Sharma (forthcoming) note that, 
in their experience, a more ‘iterative framework’ and approach to 
evaluations is most useful for capturing unintended outcomes.  
Several evaluation theorists (Morell 2005, Mertens 2009) have 
made this a focus for their work. However, it is particularly impor -
tant in evaluations relating to structural inequities, as interventions 
may further reinforce inequities in ways that were not anticipated, 
or in attempting to shift those inequities may create conflict or rein -
force other divisions. 
Ramachandran (forthcoming) illustrates how changing discourse 
around education in India in the last 50 years has influenced pro -
grammes; from education being conceptualized as a ‘universal good’ 
at the time of independence (1947), to an instrument for population 
control in the 1960s, to a ‘right’ by the 1980s, and to a cornerstone 
of women’s ‘empowerment’ by the 1990s. Evaluation can be used 
to examine the ways in which dominant discourses become lodged 
in policies and programmes and test whether the implicit assump -
tions behind these discourses resonate with the actual experience 
of marginalized groups on the ground. In doing so, evaluation offers 
opportunities to reshape and critique the discourse informing those 
policies, and to bring a greater diversity of views and values into 
that discourse. Equity-focused evaluations can ask, ‘who has con -
structed this discourse and whose experiences are not reflected?’
<<<PAGE=68>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
46
Jandhyala’s (forthcoming) account of the Mahila Samakhya pro -
gramme, a large programme on women’s education and empower -
ment in India, reflects the understanding of evaluation as a political 
space where competing discourses that inform programme theory 
can be examined. She described how an external donor coming into 
the programme made funding contingent on defining results and tar -
gets in a way that reflected an understanding of the changes sought 
that was fundamentally different from that of the implementing 
organization. The funder wanted to show progress towards achiev -
ing the Millennium Development Goals, with women’s mobilization 
through the programme being a means to reach goals around ele -
mentary education. The target associated with Millennium Develop -
ment Goal three is to eliminate gender disparity in education. So the 
implicit change theory is that more educated and informed women 
will be more likely to send their daughters to school. This vision 
however, is quite different from that of the programme implement -
ers, who saw women’s mobilization and empowerment as the goal 
itself. The monitoring and evaluation framework became the space 
where different views on the nature of structural inequities and the 
‘goals’ of empowerment were articulated.
Evaluation can also identify gaps in programme theory that weaken 
opportunities to address inequities. For example, India has a set 
of programmes that has some parallels with depression era works 
programmes of the United States, including a huge programme 
designed to create jobs through building infrastructure in rural 
areas, called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guar -
antee Scheme (MGNREGS). Analysis of this programme, illustrates 
that the design of the programme was gender sensitive in a range 
of ways (equal wages for men and women, participation of women 
in committees, provision of a crèche on work sites etc.). Evalua -
tions of the MGNREGS, illustrate how evaluations can test different 
dimensions of programme theory (Sudarshan and Sharma, forth -
coming). However, evaluations showed not only that crèches are 
often not set up – an implementation failure – but also that women 
workers were more comfortable leaving infants in the care of older 
children – a programme theory failure. The second finding speaks 
to the design itself and the ideas informing that design. Specifically, 
it is based on an assumption that parents would choose to leave 
their children at crèches rather than with family members. By get -
ting both the design and the implementation wrong the programme 
led to older female children missing school in order to provide child -
care.
<<<PAGE=69>>>
47
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
There is an opportunity for evaluators to identify and test the the -
ories underpinning policies and programmes – including by looking 
across sets of programmes. For example, in the case above, how do 
assumptions about gender roles and child care feed into development 
programmes and schemes that cut across a range of development 
domains? How do assumptions of women and girl’s labour prefer -
ences and time inform (if at all) discourse on development plans? To 
what extent do programmes assume women’s time is unlimited and 
unintentionally move domestic burdens onto girl children by further 
engaging women in productive and development work? 
Implicit (or even explicit) theoretical underpinnings of programmes 
can vary among actors and can change and shift over time. The 
space to explore and critique this may be very limited. As Khanna 
(forthcoming) notes, “Unequal power relations are so deeply inter -
nalised within hierarchical bureaucracies that discussion on gender 
power relations is next to impossible.” Nonetheless, evaluation 
designs and frameworks can serve to embed, ignore, reflect or 
challenge those underpinnings and relationships. A recognition of 
evaluation as a political space can bring these tensions to the sur -
face and promote more transparent review and dialogue on compet -
ing or alternative values or theories. 
Evaluation design
Equity-focused evaluation can be situated within different 
approaches to evaluation and draw upon the differing traditions in 
design, methodology, and approaches to rigour and validity found in 
those approaches. As Segone notes, “most of the Equity-focused 
evaluation data collection and analysis techniques is built on 
approaches with which many practitioners in development evalua -
tion already have some familiarity: the emphasis is on refining and 
refocusing existing technics – and enhancing national capacities to 
use those technics – rather than starting with a completely new 
approach” (Segone, 2011).
Equity-focused evaluation is not one design or one set of methods, 
but a lens or standpoint that influences the choices made in design 
and methods. A rigorous Equity-focused evaluation would be one 
that used the range of methods that best matched the questions 
around the type of change the policy or programme is addressing. 
In this view – equity is the lens in which questions are asked and 
evidence is challenged. Feminist analysis brings to Equity-focused 
evaluation, recognition that this process is constructed and political.
<<<PAGE=70>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
48
Individual methods per se are not ‘equity-focused or feminist’; their 
suitability (and rigour) in any given evaluation is a function of their 
ability to generate valid and reliable data that speaks to the nature 
and change around the inequity that the programme is attempting 
to address. That said, there are a range of lines of evaluation and 
research theories that focus on issues of equity, rights and voice; 
for example, the transformative evaluation paradigm (Mertens 
2010) and participatory paradigms (Chambers 1983, 1987). Equity-
focused evaluation (and empowerment, feminist, participatory and 
transformative approaches) must start with the principle of includ -
ing the voice of the stakeholder, as do these approaches to evalu -
ation. However, what is considered ‘valid and reliable’ in Equity-
focused evaluations often mirrors broader trends in evaluation and 
development. 
On-going debates on qualitative versus quantitative approaches 
remain, but are now superimposed with other new debates on 
experimental (randomized) and quasi-experimental designs. Despite 
debates that are at times polarizing, there does appear to be a broader 
openness and interest in more mixed-method approaches and rec -
ognition that different designs suit different questions, contexts, 
and resources. Ramachandran (forthcoming) points to the impor -
tance of mixed methods using an example from education evalua -
tion. Detailed observation-based studies revealed that parents were 
sending more boys to private schools and more girls to government 
schools. These qualitative micro studies, in turn, created demand for 
larger quantitative data sets, on both government and private school 
admissions (disaggregated by social group and gender) (Ramachan -
dran, forthcoming). With the passage of the Right to Education bill in 
2010, India moved towards capturing this data through larger quanti -
tative data sets but it was the smaller more qualitative studies that 
raised the issue, and which continue to be the only source of evi -
dence on this issue of exclusion and discrimination. 
Evaluators conducting Equity-focused evaluations must recognize 
the perceptions of credibility by intended users of some evaluation 
designs (and of quantification more generally). As noted earlier, 
without use of evaluation, the purpose of equity cannot be achieved 
and use can at times be centred on perceived methodological cred -
ibility. This can also make choice of method a strategic choice. For 
example, Sudarshan and Sharma (forthcoming) note: 
"… the current dominant mode in evaluation design emphasizes 
quantification stemming from the need to provide evidence of
<<<PAGE=71>>>
49
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
success to the donor, and the fact that numbers are far more 
effective in advocacy than narratives are…" 
Different types of knowledge, expressed through different methodo -
logical traditions, have more, or less, power in decision-making struc -
tures. Noting that women’s grass roots and implementing organiza -
tions in India, ‘shy away from quantitative and macro data,’ Khanna 
(forthcoming) integrates quantitative evaluation in her evaluations “… 
to increase their mastery over quantitative data.” The feminist lens 
brings recognition of the power of quantitative data and the trans -
formative potential of empowering organizations working with mar -
ginalized groups with the capacity to use both quantitative and quali -
tative data through the Equity-focused evaluation process itself.
Evaluation judgments
The purpose of evaluation includes improving the accountability 
and compliance of programmes and organizations, and knowledge 
development (Mark, Henry, and Julnes, 2000). Making a judgement 
about what works and what does not work is also a fundamental 
purpose of evaluation. As Segone notes in the introduction, “An 
Equity-focused evaluation is a judgment made of the relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability of policies, pro -
grammes and projects on equitable development results” (Segone, 
2011).
Much development programming is not actually explicit about what 
the programme intends to do. What do feminist principles bring to 
discussions of “what working looks like?” and how do they inform 
the ways that Equity-focused evaluation’s define and identify 
whether policies, programmes, projects, or organizations are suc -
cessful or not? 
Figuring out whether something works or not often entails first 
articulating what ‘working’ or success, means. For example, using 
Jandhalaya’s (forthcoming) example on a women’s education and 
empowerment programme in India, the donor defined success as 
‘consolidating and expanding’ the programme to promote equality. 
Among a much longer set of goals, the ‘engendered’ goals devel -
oped by the programme included increasing ‘life-long learning, 
leadership among poor and most marginalised women, and break -
ing discriminatory social barriers and practices (at individual, family, 
community and state levels).’
<<<PAGE=72>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
50
The two stakeholders set up success (and the measures of suc -
cess) very differently 2. Rather than counting increases in the num -
ber of groups and the numbers of women involved in groups, the 
engendered goal takes the programme down a path where success 
is defined by questions of ‘which women’ are involved, and how the 
groups make decisions, for example. The engendered framework 
sees the women’s collectives as the place where success resides, 
where the programme is trying to bring change and thus where 
change should be measured. The debate over measures illustrates 
how evaluation can become a space where programmes are con -
tested. They are contested in terms of how success is defined, 
where success is seen to reside, what is measured, and by exten -
sion often, what is done. The point here is not to suggest which 
definition of success is ‘right’ and which measures of success 
come closest to measuring changes that are relevant and meaning -
ful. Rather it is demonstrating that in any programme, and certainly 
in large scale programmes, there are different or competing defini -
tions and criteria of success. Equity-focused evaluation can bring 
those criteria to the surface for debate and critique.
Taking another example, in a women’s health and empowerment proj -
ect undertaken in the early days of the women’s micro-credit move -
ment, some of the changes that implementing organizations argued 
were the most impressive result of years of efforts in certain con -
texts, were that women from different castes were eating together, 
and that women were looking others (non-family members) in the 
eye (Bhirdikar et al, 2005). Other goals, perhaps much more impres -
sive on paper, they were less proud of as they were much easier to 
achieve, for example, the thousands of groups that were formed. As 
Sudarshan and Sharma (forthcoming) point out, ‘impact’ is relative; 
measures should be embedded in the context of the intervention.
Evaluation practice
Inequities are deeply persistent for many reasons, many of which 
are deeply resistant and difficult to change. If reducing inequities 
is a goal of Equity-focused evaluation, it should come with a rec -
ognition of what can be at times a deep and inherent contradiction 
in using a time-bound, resource-bound, judgment-focused exercise 
– evaluation – with stakeholders who may be more or (often) less 
connected to equity and where the starting point is usually terms of 
2 T he full version of the original and engendered results framework is available in 
Jandyala (2010)
<<<PAGE=73>>>
51
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
reference developed by others, to understand and shift inequities. 
Reflecting on this tension can lead to hand-wringing from evalua -
tors deeply committed to Equity-focused evaluation (because it is 
never quite good enough, deep enough, transformative enough). 
Contributions on ‘self-reflexivity’ from feminist theory (Ackerly and 
True 2009, Cornwall 2003. Desai 2007) can offer important insights 
into Equity-focused evaluation on the role of reflection, and adjust -
ment based on reflection. 
Reflexivity is the critical introspection and analysis of the self as 
evaluator, and the way this influences the conduct of evaluation. 
Reflexivity can lead to insights and new hypotheses by pushing 
the evaluator to challenge their own theoretical positions. Reflexiv -
ity comes with a grounding or positioning of the evaluator within 
the process. The tension can become a healthy tension, because 
it comes with reflection, analysis, and adjustment, which lead 
to evaluation that moves closer to the Equity-focused evaluation 
principles. Sudarshan and Sharma (forthcoming), write: “It is our 
position that evaluation of NGO interventions in remote and dif -
ficult to work areas, has to maintain a balance between a level of 
objectivity and a level of sympathetic understanding.” This posi -
tioning relates to questions of what is negotiable and non-negotia -
ble in evaluation work sought, considered, or rejected, and to how 
evaluators see themselves in the evaluation process and, how this 
relates to the way they see themselves in the broader contexts in 
which they operate. It often finds a home in the way that evalua -
tors identify themselves and position themselves in the work. Posi -
tioning is not new to social science. Feminist standpoint theory 
(Harding, 2004, Hartsock, 1997) has informed feminist research 
for over two decades and this understanding has filtered into the 
ways and approaches that some equity-focused evaluators use in 
their practice. ‘Standpoint theory’ offers alternative conceptualiza -
tions of rigour and validity rooted in principles of situated and con -
structed knowledge that acknowledges ‘positionality’, and begin 
from ‘lived experiences.’ Unlike ‘positivist approaches‘, construc -
tivist approaches’ to evaluation start with the idea that knowledge 
is constructed and shaped, and the principle of evaluation should 
add value to those who are marginalized. As Harsh Mander (2010) 
has said of social science, Equity-focused evaluation: “is not an 
investigation into inert, static, external realities, but into the fluid, 
subjective worlds of people’s lives, as experienced, interpreted, 
recalled and mediated by them.” Similarly, Khanna (forthcoming) 
writes that providing “opportunities for the ‘target community’ to 
articulate their concerns and their analysis, and to share with them
<<<PAGE=74>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
52
my own analysis and suggestions, I believe promotes their empow -
erment.” 
Even if evaluators recognize that evaluation findings are socially 
constructed and evaluators clearly shape that construction, calls for 
‘objectivity’ can be used to discredit evaluation findings. This may 
be particularly true in certain domains, and is likely to be particularly 
true where evaluations challenge deeply entrenched inequities. 
Equity-focused evaluations drawing on constructivist approaches 
may find theoretical work such as ‘standpoint theory’ useful in artic -
ulating the rigour and validity of such approaches. 
In contexts that privilege certain methods and approaches, Equity-
focused evaluators need language for demonstrating and speaking 
to the strengths, rigour, validity (and limitations) of the approaches 
they are using. In contexts where other evaluation approaches top 
the lists of what donors and national governments consider cred -
ible, such work is both essential and contested. 
Use of evaluation 
A challenge in Equity-focused evaluation is the evaluator’s responsi -
bility to promote use of or action on findings. While use is generally 
never fully in the hands of the evaluator, Equity-focused evaluation 
entails seeking pathways to use, while understanding these path -
ways as being political and negotiated. Certain pathways are risky 
(for the programme, the group experiencing inequities, etc.), others 
may be blocked, and some are strategic – but all are negotiated 
and constructed. While Utilization-focused evaluation offers deep 
insights and lessons for Equity-focused evaluation on designing for 
use, feminist analysis also offers insights on the types of use that 
are appropriate in Equity-focused evaluation. Put another way, with 
an equity lens, ‘any use’ is not a valid or responsible use. Improv -
ing or addressing inequities must be a central use, along with other 
uses particular to particular evaluations. Speaking to this idea of 
responsible use, Sudarshan and Sharma (forthcoming) write:
"Responsible feminism requires recognition of the contextual 
constraints and the feasibility of recommended courses of 
action and choices. We have therefore tried to be responsible 
feminists – pointing out specific changes and actions that in our 
analysis would empower women; at the same time, we have 
learnt a great deal about what is possible or desirable, given any 
particular context and capacities, and this learning itself moder -
ates our recommendations."
<<<PAGE=75>>>
53
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
Equity-focused evaluation should build responsible use explicitly 
into their evaluation design and process. This is mentioned earlier 
in this volume with various emphases being placed on ethics. In 
some contexts, pathways for Equity-focused evaluation findings 
to gain traction and influence are severely curtailed. For example, 
reflecting on one experience in India, Khanna (forthcoming) writes 
on the limits to use in the face of deeply internalized power differ -
entials:
"I found senior nurses and Nursing College Principals who were 
Master Trainers – and expected to be change agents within 
the profession – playing subservient hand maidens to Deans of 
Medical Colleges and State Health Officers. The same women, 
when interacting with their own junior colleagues, replicated 
exploitative relationships that they alleged they were victims of 
vis-à-vis the medical profession. The lack of self-awareness in 
relation to the concept of gender power relations and the lack of 
internal collectivisation in the face of external threats to the pro -
fession was very apparent. These issues could not be addressed 
within the evaluation debriefing. They needed a different, more 
personally introspective process…"
The underlying structures and systems that create inequities cannot 
be programmed away within contexts that perpetrate and reinforce 
those systems. Multiple pathways will generally need to be sought 
in Equity-focused evaluations, and used at different points in time 
(both immediate and longer term), including through policy and pro -
gramming windows that open after the evaluation has ended. 
Understanding how evidence informs policymaking and decision- 
making in different contexts is essential to commissioning and 
leading the Equity-focused evaluation’s that will be used. For exam -
ple, the
 
Rajinder Sachar Committee Report (2006), on the state of 
Muslims in India, documented extensive and persistent inequities 
that combined to make the Muslim community among the most 
marginalized in the country. The report recommended autonomous 
evaluation of the extent to which programmes address issues of 
inequities. Media reports have quoted a former member secretary 
of the Sachar Committee, as saying that the authority met only 
three times in four years, did not consider implementing the report 
and had no independent technical person
3. Though government-
led evaluation of the implementation of the report did not occur, 
a research organization called the Centre for Equity Studies (CES) 
3 h ttp://www.hindustantimes.com/StoryPage/Print/728651.aspx
<<<PAGE=76>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
54
led by a member of the National Advisory Council, Harsh Mander 
did evaluate the implementation of the committee findings. Those 
researchers found that conditions were not improving, nor being 
adequately addressed or resourced, and blamed the government 
for lacking ‘political courage’ to directly address Muslims for fear of 
being criticised. According to news accounts, Minority Affairs Min -
ister disputed the study, purportedly also arguing that it was consti -
tutionally not possible to directly target Muslims in programmes and 
schemes. This example illustrates how discussion around inequi -
ties and targeting of inequities is often highly politicized. Evaluation 
of policies and programmes is not detached from those politics, 
particularly when it comes to use. In this case, Muslims face dis -
crimination exactly because of their socio-religious identities, how -
ever, visible programme interventions directly targeting particular 
religious groups is deemed to be politically untenable. One way of 
side-stepping this issue is to critique the rigour of the evaluation 
studies and discredit the findings. 
In terms of use by policymakers, certainly evidence suggests that 
their on-going involvement can be an effective strategy when they 
are open to evaluation findings in the area of enquiry. However, 
evaluators should not underestimate the degree to which findings 
that contradict the dominant policy discourse may find difficulty in 
getting traction with policymakers. 
The work of Mercedes Gonzalez De la Rocha , on poverty in Mexico 
is an interesting example of how the policy context affects what find -
ings are used. In the 1980s economic crisis De la Rocha’s looked 
at poor people’s strategies for survival and the ways in which poor 
urban households responded to crisis. Her work created the ‘myth 
of survival’ or the idea that the poor have an unlimited capacity to 
withstand shocks. About 10 years later, her later research following 
the 1998 financial crisis brought this ‘myth’ into question. She argues 
that her work has since then been selectively used by key institutions 
such as the World Bank, with her early work highlighting the strat -
egies of the poor being picked up, and her later work, showing the 
limitations of those strategies, being ignored (2007). Evidence can, 
and often is, interpreted and used to reinforce dominant policies, in 
this case economic liberalization. Her first set of research supported 
existing economic liberalization policies – her later research did 
not. Evidence is usually used selectively. Those involved in Equity-
focused evaluations need to be more strategic in understanding the 
role of evidence in policymaking and be more intentional in trying to 
support more open and transparent dialogue on evidence.
<<<PAGE=77>>>
55
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
Engagement with and connections between social activists, 
researchers, and evaluators can also create or seize policy windows 
where there is openness to change, demand for change, and evi -
dence to inform change. For example, Ramachandran (forthcoming) 
reflects on experiences from the education sector:
"When the national assessment of gender and equity in primary 
education was presented to the government in a Joint Review 
Mission in 2002, the first reaction was dismissive – some said 
“there is no segregation in Indian education” and some officials 
objected to the use of the phrase “hierarchies of access”. How -
ever, as the months rolled by and as commentators started com -
paring the findings with other research studies, especially the 
PROBE [Public Report on Basic Education] study, there was a 
gradual thawing. At least on paper, the government and donors 
accepted the findings and said that they would address it. The 
issue of children from different social strata attending differ -
ently endowed schools, gender discrimination in the choice of 
school by parents (government for girls and private for boys) 
or the issue of poorly endowed village schools / single teacher 
schools being the preserve of the most deprived – have now 
been accepted within educational discourse. The 2009 Right to 
Education Act has formally recognised the need to provide equal 
education for all." 
Given the amount of evaluation happening there is a lost opportu -
nity for synthesizing and generating deeper understandings from 
evaluation, on how development affects change on the ground. 
There is tremendous but largely untapped potential for evaluation to 
deepen understanding around inequities. Knowledge being gener -
ated through evaluations is generally not broadly shared, made avail -
able, or tapped and used to explore questions beyond the particular 
evaluation. This limits the opportunities to use evaluation to trian -
gulate, challenge, or reinforce other bodies of knowledge around 
issues of social change and equity. Resources to generate evidence 
on inequities are always limited; groups working to address inequi -
ties in different domains and / or focused on different marginalized 
groups, need to begin to see evaluations as a rich body of evidence 
to drawn into other modes of knowledge generation and transla -
tion. Groups involved in doing Equity-focused evaluations need to 
begin to question decisions on keeping evaluations out of the public 
domain.
<<<PAGE=78>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
56
Conclusion
This chapter examined how principles drawing from feminist and 
other research traditions and theories can inform the framing, 
methods, and conduct of Equity-focused evaluation. This chapter 
has demonstrated how these principles can be used in practice to 
inform the understanding of programme theory, shape evaluation 
design and methods, negotiate judgment of success, guide prac -
tice, and guide choices and opportunities for influence. The chap -
ter suggests that principles generated from feminist theory can be 
helpfully and usefully applied to strengthen Equity-focused evalua -
tions – whether they have a central focus on gender inequities or on 
other inequities. Applying these principles to Equity-focused evalu -
ation can help evaluation play a stronger role in understanding how 
societies change and which policies and programmes show prom -
ise in shifting norms and inequities. Reaching this potential requires 
more intentional integration of evaluation knowledge into broader 
knowledge translation exercises around rights, exclusions, and dis -
crimination. 
References
Ackerly, B. and True, J. (2009). Reflexivity in Practice; Power and Ethics in Feminist 
Research on International Relations. International Studies Review.
Birdikar, K. et al. (2005). How a Use and Learning Oriented Planning, Monitoring & 
Evaluation System Evolved in the Swayamsiddha Project. Available at: http://web.idrc.ca/
uploads/user-S/11592100393M__E_Report_Version_21.pdf
Brewer, Rose M., Cecilia A. Conrad and Mary C. King, (eds), (2002). A special issue on 
gender, color, caste and class. Feminist Economics, 8 (2).
Budlender, D., D. Elson, G. Hewitt and T. Mukhopadhyay. (2002). Gender Budgets Make 
Cents. London: Commonwealth Secretariat Publications.
Çagatay, N., D. Elson and C. Grown, (eds), (1995). Special issue on gender, adjustment 
and macroeconomics, World Development 23 (11).
Chambers, R. (1983). Rural Development – Putting the Last First . Longman.
Chambers, R. (1997)  Whose Reality Counts: Putting the First Last . Intermediate 
Technology.
Cornwall, A. (2003). Whose Voices? Whose Choices? Reflections on Gender and 
Participatory Development. World Development  31, 8: 1325-1342.
Desai, M. (2007). The Messy Relationship between Feminisms and Globalizations. 
Gender Society  21, 6: 797-803.
<<<PAGE=79>>>
57
Strengthening Equity-focused evaluations through insights from feminist theory and approaches
Devika, J. and Thampi, V. (2010). Empowerment or politicization? The limits of gender 
inclusiveness of Kerala's political decentralization. In, Development, democracy, and the 
state
 
critiquing the Kerala model of development . Ed. K Ravi Raman. Routledge, New York.
Dietz, M.G. (2003). Current Controversies in Feminist Theory. Annual Review of Political 
Science  6:300-431. 
Figart. D., E. Mutari and M. Power. (2002). Living Wages, Equal Wages . London: 
Routledge. 
Harding, S. (2004). Rethinking Standpoint Epistemology. In S. Harding (Ed.), The Feminist 
Standpoint Theory Reader . New York and London: Routledge.
Grown, C., D. Elson and N. Çagatay, (eds), (2000). Special issue on growth, trade, 
finance and gender inequality. World Development  28(7).
Hartsock, N. (1983). The Feminist Standpoint: Developing the Ground for a Specifically 
Feminist Historical Materialism. In S. Harding and M.B. Hintikka (Eds.), Discovering 
Reality: Feminist Perspectives in Epistemology, Metaphysics .
Hay, K., and Sudarshan, R. (2010). Making Research Matter in South Asia. Economic & 
Political Weekly, Vol xlv no 3 .
Hay, K. (2011). Evaluation Field Building in South Asia: Reflections, Anecdotes and 
Questions. American Journal of Evaluation . Vol. 31, Number 2.
Jandhyala, K. (forthcoming). Indian Journal of Gender Studies . Sage, India.
Khanna, R. (forthcoming). Indian Journal of Gender Studies . Sage, India.
MacKinnon, C.A. (2006). Are Women Human? And Other International Dialogues . 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Mander, Harsh (2010). Words from the Heart: Researching People's Stories. Journal of 
Human Rights Practice  (2010) 2(2): 252-270.
Mark, M.M., Henry, G.T., and Julnes, G. (2000). Evaluation: An Integrated Framework for 
Understanding, Guiding, and Improving Policies and Programs . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
McElroy, M. B. and Horney, M. J. (1981). Nash bargained household decisions. 
International Economic Review 22: 333-349.
Mertens, D. (2009). Transformative Research and Evaluation , New York; Guilford Press.
Mohanty, C.T. (2003). Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing 
Solidarity . Durham, NC: Due University Press.
Morell, J.A. (2005). Evaluation? Why Are There Unintended Consequences of Program 
Action, and What Are the Implications for Doing Evaluation? American Journal of 
Evaluation , 26-444.
Murthy, Ranjani. K. (forthcoming). Indian Journal of Gender Studies. Sage, India.
Narayan, U. (1997). Dislocating Culture: Identities, Traditions, and Third World Feminism . 
New York: Routledge.
<<<PAGE=80>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
58
Nash, Kate. (2002). Human Rights for Women: An Argument for ‘Deconstructive 
Equality.’ Economy and Society 31, 3:414-433. 
Pawson, R. (2006). Evidence-based Policy: A Realist Perspective . London, Sage. 
Patton, M.Q. (2010). Developmental Evaluation: Applying Complexity Concepts to 
Enhance Innovation and Use , New York: Guilford Press.
Podems, D. (2010). Feminist Evaluation and Gender Approaches: There’s a Difference? 
Journal of Multi-Disciplinary Evaluation . Vol 6, No 14 (2010)
Ramachandran, V. (forthcoming). Indian Journal of Gender Studies . Sage, India.
Segone, M. and Bamberger, M. (2011). How to design and manage Equity-focused 
evaluations . UNICEF.
Sen, A. (1990). More than 100 million women are missing. The New York Review of 
Books , Dec. 20.
Sudarshan, R and Sharma, D. (forthcoming). Indian Journal of Gender Studies Sage , India.
Waring, M. (1988). If Women Counted . San Francisco: Harper & Row.
<<<PAGE=81>>>
59
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
DE CO lO NI zI NG  EVAlU AtI ON  IN  A 
D
EVElO
PING
 
WORlD. IM
PlI
CAtI
ONS 
A
ND 
CAUtI
ONS fO
R E
qU
It
y-fO
CUSED 
EV
AlU
A
tI
ON1
Rodney K. Hopson, Duquesne University;  
Karen E. Kirkhart, Syracuse University;  
Katrina L. Bledsoe, Education Development Center, Inc.
Introduction
This chapter suggests that the good intentions of Equity-focused 
Evaluation must be tempered by cautions. This concern flows from 
a legacy of research and evaluation that has exerted colonizing influ -
ences over Indigenous and minoritized populations. The opening 
section covers the context of development, evaluation, and culture. 
The second section argues that efforts to decolonize evaluation 
must begin with epistemology. A third section examines the impli -
cations of decolonization for evaluation method. Within the paper, 
a scenario is provided based on a development project in south -
ern Africa. The scenario illustrates the complexity of stakeholders, 
projects, and cultural dynamics in a development evaluation where 
equity is an important concern. The chapter closes with implica -
tions and cautions for how evaluation generally, and more specifi -
cally, Equity-focused evaluation may perpetuate colonizing assump -
tions and aims.
locating development, evaluation,  
a
nd culture
Basic understandings of culture and cultural difference in the evalu -
ation and development fields are only now taking shape; however, 
these have not been typically perceived as mainstream models of 
evaluation or development. The recent moves to address culture 
and cultural differences represent both a challenge and an oppor -
tunity for practitioners in development – specifically international 
1 A cknowledgements. The authors acknowledge the support of Michaele Webb 
(Syracuse University) who assisted with a meticulous review of citations and 
references.
<<<PAGE=82>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
60
development – and for evaluation. There is a need to rethink domi -
nant notions about how to work with and understand the particular 
concerns of traditionally marginalized and under-represented ethnic 
and racial groups, including indigenous groups, in varied country and 
nation-state contexts.
2 Now more than ever, both evaluators and 
developers are embracing specific paradigms that are more focused 
on social equity, empowerment, transformation, participation, and 
collaboration. Matters of culture and cultural differences are integral 
to these current approaches and deserve increasing attention.
For development practitioners and policymakers, the result is an 
increasing need to address questions and issues to do with culture 
and development. Thierry Verhelst’s (1987/1990) book on this topic 
is just one example that critiques the collapse of current develop -
ment models in favor of prioritizing a cultural dimension as an alter -
native path of development. Verhelst’s premise rests on the failure 
of western development policies and models that have perceived 
nations in the global south as both backward and underdeveloped. 
This failure is despite the credible efforts by the United Nations 
in the 1980s to raise attention to these issues. Nevertheless, the 
prevailing development ideology, reinforced by notions of social 
Darwinism, colonialism, and unilinear views of history, has contrib -
uted to competing if not conflicting notions of development, mod -
ernization, civilization, and progress (Escobar, 1995; Rodney, 1981). 
These ideological conflicts persist between those from the West 
who practice development and those on the ground in “developing 
nations” who face “development” (Ferguson, 1994).
As such, even contemporary development practices, often referred 
to as participatory, “tend to emphasize the who  and the what  of 
development, with little attention to the why  and the how  [empha -
sis added]” (Eversole, 2005, p. 298). That is, development prac -
titioners and policymakers ask questions such as who is involved 
in the development initiative and who benefits from its implemen -
tation. Other questions focus on illustrating distinctions between 
grassroots and top-down development and the different agendas 
that they imply. The ‘what’ development questions include, what 
initiatives are implemented; what do the development initiatives 
actually promote; or what type of development is to be carried out, 
2 O f course issues of culture and cultural differences are much broader, such as 
around differences surrounding geography, gender, social class, etc… than around 
traditionally marginalized, stigmatized groups who are considered ethnic or/and 
racial minorities or indigenous, but the concerns of these groups are especially 
acute and the focus of this chapter.
<<<PAGE=83>>>
61
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
“with the assumption that the right kind of initiative will solve those 
lurking questions about achieving authentic participation for target 
groups” (Eversole, 2005, p. 299). 
‘Why’ and ‘how’ questions not only help to pay attention to cultural 
differences and the cultural ‘groundedness’ of efforts in develop -
ment initiatives, but also dig deeper to draw on unstated assump -
tions about development, its processes, goals, and expected out -
comes. These questions help to understand the competing and 
conflicting visions of development between the concerns and 
perspectives of different target groups, and outside development 
policymaking and practitioners. Asking questions about the ‘why’ 
and the ‘how’ of development presupposes a different set of inter -
actions with a wide range of people, including acknowledging that 
involvement or participation by target groups without processes 
that fit the culture of the target group is hardly truly participatory.
Considerations of culture in evaluation have seen considerable 
growth domestically and internationally in recent years, since the 
first sets of literature on the topic in the mid-1980s and early 1990s 
(Hopson, 2003; Madison, 1992; Patton, 1985). What is clear from 
the early attention to culture is the bifurcated ways in which the 
evaluations and evaluators addressed the topic of culture. For those 
in the field working in international cross-cultural settings, the Pat -
ton (1985) edited volume asked, “what happens when we export 
the ideas, concepts, models, methods, and values of evaluators to 
other countries and cultures?” Evaluators from generally western 
perspectives were encouraged to consider the problems and poten -
tials of doing international, cross-cultural evaluations. The Madison 
(1992) edited volume brought attention to how evaluations should 
be sensitive to multicultural issues and traditionally underrepre -
sented and minoritized peoples and their perspectives in North 
American settings. Together, these volumes laid the groundwork 
for the increased number of professional workshops, conferences, 
symposia and published matter, on topics related to culture and 
evaluation in the United States (Chouinard & Cousins, 2009; Fri -
erson, Hood, Hughes, & Thomas, 2010; Hood, 1998, 2001; Hood, 
Hopson, & Frierson, 2005; Mertens & Hopson, 2006; Samuels & 
Ryan, 2011).
3 
3 M uch of this work has promoted an emerging evaluation approach or model, 
Culturally Responsive Evaluation (CRE), as a system or culmination of practical 
frameworks that attend to culture during various stages of the evaluation process.
<<<PAGE=84>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
62
Epistemological issues in decolonizing 
evaluation
Evaluation directed toward equity must comprehend and respect the 
cultural contexts in which the work is sited. This understanding goes 
beyond superficial appreciation of local culture as art, music, dance, 
and literature (Verhelst, 1987/1990) to deeper roots of history, spir -
ituality, and core values. Central to the cultural location of any inquiry 
– research or evaluation – are cultural assumptions and beliefs about 
the nature of knowledge itself. Thus, any evaluation that hopes to 
address equity must begin by considering epistemology.
Epistemology is foundational to all evaluation, but it plays a particu -
larly key role in those methodologies that seek to promote equity 
and social justice. Epistemology is both personal and political. Eval -
uators must reflect on what knowledge they privilege as well as 
acknowledging the politics of knowledge construction. Examining 
the political nature of knowledge construction reveals the influence 
white privilege in marginalizing alternative ways of knowing, which 
leaves Indigenous inquiry “off the ‘buffet table’ of methodological 
options” (Kovach, 2010, p. 79). Decolonizing epistemology broad -
ens and expands what knowledge can entail, and creates room at 
the table for a richer menu of options. 
The colonizing effect of research is now well recognized (Estrada, 
2005; Grande, 2008; Smith, 1999; Weber-Pillwax, 1999). Indig -
enous frameworks that are explicitly decolonizing have been pro -
posed in both research (Cajete, 2000; Estrada, 2005; Kovach, 2010; 
Smith, 1999; Wilson, 2008) and evaluation (Kawakami, Aton, Cram, 
Lai, & Porima, 2008; LaFrance & Nichols, 2010). In evaluation, 
colonization manifests itself in determinations of merit or worth 
that are defined from a non-Indigenous – often geographically and 
culturally distant – perspective, and applied to Indigenous persons 
and programmes without regard to local culture and values. Evalu -
ation is colonizing when it defines the programme, poses evalua -
tion questions, gathers and analyzes data, and formulates results 
in ways that silence the voices of Indigenous persons in the local 
context. Evaluation is colonizing when, by omission or commission, 
it bolsters majority power structures without critique or challenge. 
Decolonizing evaluation means locating it within Indigenous cultural 
specificities, preferences and practices. It means recognizing and 
critically interrogating Eurocentric knowledge systems and stand -
ards of inquiry that have historically been imposed upon Indigenous 
cultures in Africa, Asia and the Americas.
<<<PAGE=85>>>
63
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
The key to shifting perspectives lies in understanding how knowl -
edge is created and understood within a given cultural context and 
in using that understanding to define standards of good practice in 
research or evaluation, including standards of legitimation such as 
validity. Standards of practice and legitimation in turn guide method 
choice. These three elements – standards, validity and methods – 
stand in reciprocal relation to one another, grounded in epistemol -
ogy. Together, they offer a three-strand approach to decolonizing 
evaluation, informed by Indigenous scholars on five continents. 
Strand 1: Epistemology informs what is understood as good 
evaluation practice. To decolonize ways of thinking about good 
evaluation practice, one must appreciate how Indigenous episte -
mology places the entire evaluation process outside of Western
4 
understandings. Indigenous epistemologies stand in contrast to 
Western epistemologies in both scope and content. The bounda -
ries of what constitutes knowledge are much broader; knowledge 
from dreams, visions and prayers is respected (Ermine, 1999). His -
torically, Indigenous knowledge systems, which do not separate 
spirit and reason (Deloria, 1999), were dismissed as superstitions 
by Eurocentric researchers. “Indigenous knowledges could not be 
understood from a reductionist analysis because they could not be 
fragmented, externalized, and objectified” (Kovach, 2010, p. 77). Lit -
tle Bear (2000) reviews fundamental differences in Aboriginal and 
Eurocentric worldviews. He characterizes Aboriginal worldviews as 
holistic and cyclical, generalist, process-oriented and grounded in 
place; European worldviews as linear, singular, static and objective. 
It is important to note that when he speaks of “jagged worldviews 
colliding,” Little Bear is speaking not only of collisions between/
among cultural groups but also within a given person.
To decolonize means that standards of good evaluation practice 
are defined by local values and protocols. Inquiry must be vetted 
through appropriate local authority that determines what knowl -
edge can be shared under what circumstances. Evaluation must be 
done in the right way, following the path recognized as good, honor -
able, and respectful – all of which is defined by local culture, linked 
to understandings of the right way to live upon the earth. 
Indigenous belief in the interconnectedness of all living things dis -
rupts linear understandings, both in defining the parameters of what 
4 W e use Western here and throughout to designate those perspectives that generally 
derive from a limited North American (United States, primarily) and western 
European geographic reality that privilege theirs above others.
<<<PAGE=86>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
64
is being evaluated and in setting forth the framework for the evalua -
tion. Telling a programme’s story replaces linear Western logic mod -
els (LaFrance & Nichols, 2009). Cram (2011) cites Conner’s ‘Draw-
a-Path’ process of creating a visual timeline with drawings and sym -
bols so that people can tell the story of the programme as they 
understand it. Portrayals of Indigenous evaluation frameworks may 
also be visual and non-linear, often employing story or metaphor. 
They are in sharp contrast to Eurocentric portrayals of approaches 
to evaluation practice. Where Western frameworks or models are 
often presented via steps or categories, Indigenous frameworks 
use visual images and extended metaphors. For example, Estrada 
(2005) uses the metaphor of the Ceiba  (Tree of Life), to connect 
research to a circular and multidimensional cosmology directed by 
the Maya sacred book of Creation, the Popul Vuh . LaFrance and 
Nichols (2009) use Dr. Eric Jolly’s story of Cherokee basket making, 
told by his grandmother, as a metaphor for Indigenous evaluation.
Good evaluation under Indigenous epistemology addresses power 
imbalance. It positions evaluation to resist exploitation and oppres -
sion by centering control of the initiation, information-gathering pro -
cedures, interpretation, and sharing of information in the local com -
munity (Bishop, 1998, L. T. Smith, 1999; G. H. Smith, 2004). Evalua -
tors must respect local authority and protocols for entering a commu -
nity and making introductions. These protocols are culturally-specific. 
For example, Bishop (1998), a Maori scholar, describes a formal ritu -
alized introduction, mihimihi , as “a statement of where you are from 
and of how you can be related to these other people and the land, in 
both the past and the present” (p. 203). LaFrance and Nichols (2009) 
introduce themselves through tribal and clan affiliation, family geneal -
ogy, and geographic locations in which they are grounded. 
When interacting with persons of authority, such as elders, to 
gather information, evaluators must consciously relinquish control 
of the conversation and let the story unfold from the perspective 
of the teller. The conversation should not be shaped to fit a prede -
termined outline or interview schedule without ensuring the ques -
tions or items are sufficiently rooted in Indigenous realities. Power 
dynamics relate also to the underlying vision of evaluation bringing 
benefit to communities. Who gets to define benefit and what seg -
ments of a community or society will experience it? These ques -
tions relate directly to concerns for equity. 
Location is extremely important to the practice of Indigenous eval -
uation. Both the evaluation and the evaluator must be situated in
<<<PAGE=87>>>
65
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
context. Place is a living presence that defines nationhood and the 
core values of Indigenous peoples (LaFrance & Nichols, 2009). 
So too, knowledge and the ability to access it may be linked to a 
particular place or location (Hermes, 1998; Kovach, 2010; Wilson, 
2008). Location also refers to the cultural location of the evaluators 
and their use of theory as well as to the programmes, structures 
or persons being evaluated (Kirkhart, 2010). For example, in her 
Ceiba metaphor, Estrada (2005) sees the tree trunk as Indigenous 
knowledges and woman-centered epistemologies, noting that “this 
stance better reflects my cultural location, since the Maya culture is 
traditionally matrilineal” (p. 50).
Time plays an enormous role in setting the parameters of good eval -
uation. Indigenous epistemology calls evaluation to look forward 
and backward, beyond the present moment. Long-term outcomes 
must be carefully considered. Evaluators must resist becoming 
narrowly focused on immediate effects on direct programme par -
ticipants; impacts (intended or unintended) on persons in the com -
munity are of equal or greater importance. Indigenous evaluation 
is patient. It may not conform well to fixed deadlines or the time -
lines of Western funding cycles. Standards of practice also address 
time in a way that is unfamiliar to non-Indigenous evaluators. “Good 
practice” includes rules governing when  certain stories may be told 
or information gathered, often tied to the four seasons or cycles of 
Nature (Tafoya, 1995). 
To achieve a decolonizing outcome, Indigenous evaluation supports 
sovereignty and self-determination. Local epistemology gives Indig -
enous persons control over how evaluation is conducted, in ways 
that contribute to greater control over their lives. The conduct of 
Indigenous evaluation honors core values (LaFrance & Nichols, 
2009) and reflects cultural, political, economic and social prefer -
ences (Smith, 2004). It is action oriented. Indigenous evaluation 
practice moves beyond determinations of merit or worth to support 
cultural reclamation and transformation. 
Indigenous epistemology expands voice and vision in evaluation. 
It offers more diverse worldviews (and a correspondingly clearer 
sense of the limitations of narrow cultural location) that challenge 
our prior understandings, moving evaluation beyond a data-gather -
ing and interpretation exercise, even within participatory or collabo -
rative models. A similar expansion recasts validity concerns.
Strand 2: Epistemology informs validity. Validity holds author -
ity in systems of inquiry – both research and evaluation. It signi -
<<<PAGE=88>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
66
fies power and control over the legitimization and representation of 
knowledge (Bishop, 1998), which is contested space in decoloniza -
tion. Who determines what is valid and invalid, legitimate and illegit -
imate? What is given heavy consideration and what is discounted? 
Under decolonization, validity must be expanded beyond a reduc -
tive, monolithic construct to allow different ways of being valid and 
multiple pathways of validation and legitimization. Validity must be 
recast to fit local understandings about the nature of knowledge 
and how legitimacy and trustworthiness is determined. 
Validity resides within language; this is especially critical for Indig -
enous knowledge and languages. Translation compromises and dis -
rupts valid understanding. If one is limited by the English language 
for instance, genuine meaning may not be conveyed. Nuances of 
meaning are not captured in generic nouns. A simplistic search for 
direct translation leads to frustration and misunderstanding (see 
Tafoya, 1995, for an illustrative story). 
Decolonization involves unfolding validity arguments to make the 
logic and bases of justification more transparent and to expand 
the range of arguments considered legitimate. Indigenous under -
standings of validity emphasize justifications that are relational, 
experiential, and attentive to consequences (Kirkhart, 1995, 2005). 
Relational accountability lies at the heart of Indigenous research 
and evaluation (Wilson, 2008). Relational criteria replace criteria 
of “neutrality, objectivity and distance,” which have historically 
excluded Indigenous peoples from participating in the construc -
tion, validation, and legitimization of knowledge (Bishop, 1998, p. 
201). Experience resides in both outward and inward space, physi -
cal and metaphysical, objective and subjective (Ermine, 1999). 
Consequences are viewed in terms of the good of the whole – the 
sovereignty and well-being of the tribe or community (LaFrance & 
Nichols, 2010).
Decolonization avoids the construction of sweeping rules and pro -
cedures for validation that lie outside a given research or evalua -
tion project, because such rules remove authority from participants. 
When validity is located external to context, it ends up defining 
other people’s realities, disregarding local epistemology (Bishop, 
1998). Validity must be understood within, not outside of, Indige -
nous worldviews. 
Indigenous perspectives on validity must be foremost, so that con -
clusions are validated by appropriate criteria and procedures com -
patible with the context. But this does not mean that all Indigenous
<<<PAGE=89>>>
67
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
perspectives are identical or that only  indigenous perspectives may 
apply. The links between global and local must be well understood 
and made visible in evaluation research (Stanfield, 2011). Such link -
age is an issue of particular importance to matters of equity that 
cross national boundaries. Evaluators working in international devel -
opment contexts import paradigms that do not fit the realities of 
the local cultural context, including but not limited to frameworks 
of validation. These imported beliefs must be recognized, under -
stood, and replaced or balanced with culturally-specific ones. The 
importance of balancing rather than replacing is not an unwilling -
ness to commit to local epistemology. Rather, it is recognition that 
the primary value in evaluation is utility – in this case, the utility of 
a given approach in achieving equity. One must be multilingual with 
respect to epistemologies, because conversations about access 
to resources cross cultural boundaries (Williams, 2006). Whole -
sale rejection of majority epistemologies may be as unproductive 
as wholesale acceptance. In a development context, the ability 
to move clearly and transparently among epistemologies in work -
ing with multiple stakeholders, avoids “collisions” of incompatible 
worldviews in favor of well-informed dialogue. 
Strand 3: Epistemology informs method. Consistent with 
broader understandings of good evaluation practice and valida -
tion, epistemology also expands the range of available methods. It 
alters time frames and modifies procedures for gathering, process -
ing and using information to reflect local ways of knowing. This is 
not simply a question of “sensitivity to context” in translating and 
using non-Indigenous tools, but of the nature of the tools them -
selves. Tools used in Western approaches may need to be decon -
structed and rethought. Some methods are culturally-specific and 
must be created from scratch. Others may be repurposed, modified 
or adapted to context. Tools that are traditional to Indigenous com -
munities may appear “new” when viewed from Western perspec -
tives. Conversely, methods that may at first glance appear familiar 
(e.g., interview or observation as data-gathering strategies) are in 
fact quite different when applied with a different epistemological 
foundation.
The processes of data gathering must allow participants to share 
their experiences in their own terms. The non-linearity of Indige -
nous knowledge discussed above (Little Bear, 2000) often defines a 
data-gathering process that does not resemble a Western exchange 
of questions and answers. In framing evaluations, questions are 
sometimes not appropriate at all; statements about what knowl -
<<<PAGE=90>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
68
edge is desired or needed are more suitable (LaFrance & Nichols, 
2009). Answers often reveal themselves in stories that are indirect 
and non-linear. This requires a different attitude and skills set on the 
part of the listener, as well as those interpreting the stories to form 
evaluative conclusions. 
"It helps if you listen in circles, because there are stories inside 
and between stories, and finding your way through them is as 
easy and as hard as finding your way home. Part of finding is get -
ting lost, and when you’re lost you start to open up and listen" 
(Tafoya, 1995, pp. 11-12).
Along with tools and methods, Western notions of research design 
may also be reinvented. Preordinate designs, perhaps mapped out 
even prior to entering a community, are antithetical to Indigenous 
evaluation frameworks. Indigenous epistemology informs designs 
that are emergent. Hermes (1998) is explicit in stating that her 
methods were not clearly delineated before she started her work. 
They were continually changing, acting as a “situated response” to 
both theory and context. Such a fluid view often accompanies a 
focus on inductive (vs. deductive) methods.
Indigenous epistemology privileges context over method (LaFrance, 
Nichols, & Kirkhart, forthcoming). “Context-stripping methods” 
long associated with positivist epistemology (see, for example, 
Mishler, 1979) must be avoided in favor of methods that honor the 
context dependence of ideas (“variables”) and the relationships 
among them. However, it is important to be clear that no single 
method or category of methods (e.g., qualitative vs. quantitative) 
necessarily obviates the problem of colonization (Bishop, 1998).
The scenario that follows illustrates how understanding context 
sets the stage for development evaluation. It describes the project 
history, key stakeholders, and other key aspects of an educational 
evaluation of the San
5 in the context of southern Africa.
San education evaluation project scenario: Part 1
In the southern African region of the world lives one of our oldest 
known human groups, the San. In one such community, an inter -
national aid agency based in Europe has requested its first evalu -
ation of the last decade. Project activities included teacher train -
ing, teacher support, and other efforts to support education at a 
primary level and to influence the educational situation in the local 
5 O ther terms used to refer to San are Bushmen, or (in Botswana), Basarwa.
<<<PAGE=91>>>
69
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
San community. At stake are a set of decisions and recommenda -
tions needed to contribute to administrative transitions underway 
by the Ministry of Education (MoE) and the European aid agency 
(EAA) regarding the future directions of the educational projects. 
At the time of the evaluation, there is a little angst about the future 
direction of the educational project from the ministry and the com -
munity. It is believed that the evaluation will help to answer ques -
tions and propose a future direction for the government and dis -
pel the fears the community has about the potential termination of 
the project. In addition to the angst about the future of the project, 
there is as much anxiety about the evaluation. Some key stakehold -
ers recall how a prior evaluation by another international aid agency 
over a decade ago left more questions than answers. 
Since the development of language and educational projects after 
Independence, the San community has had less participation in 
formal schooling systems than any other indigenous group, both 
in the country and in the region. For the 20 years after Independ -
ence, efforts were made by other international and local aid agen -
cies in collaboration with the MoE to increase the number of San 
attending school and to take advantage of the fruits of develop -
ment. Although the San gained increased access to formal school -
ing during this time, there were incredible challenges for them in 
completing that schooling. For instance, while increases had been 
seen in the attendance of San children in formal schools, too many 
dropped out due to complex economic, social, and cultural issues 
that prevented many from achieving educational success. Specifi -
cally, reports of bullying from other ethnic indigenous groups, lack 
of supportive adults (teachers and staff), irrelevant curricula, and 
acute homesickness were the common reasons reported by non-
governmental and governmental agencies for why San children 
dropped out of schools at the upper primary and junior secondary 
levels. Typically, no San children remain enrolled at the senior sec -
ondary level of schooling.
Even before arriving at primary school, the San children have foun -
dations in language(s), culture(s), values, and skills learned from 
their home and local communities. The village communities from 
which most rural San children come are tight-knit systems of par -
ents and community leaders. Historically, the San lived as hunter-
gatherers in areas of their traditional territory. At Independence, 
traditional ways of living continued to influence a series of impor -
tant decisions and policies on maintaining and classifying traditional 
lands. While these decisions seemed to benefit this San commu -
<<<PAGE=92>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
70
nity, there were significant racial and class divisions and many San 
families at and following Independence still struggle with a basic 
subsistence livelihood as farm laborers, either on the outskirts of 
town or in rural areas. 
As required by the terms of reference (ToR), the evaluation method -
ology was expected to be a review of project documentation through 
a desk study and interviews with key stakeholders involved in the 
project. More specifically, the ToR proposed: i) a general update 
on the situation for the San; ii) an overview of goals achieved com -
pared to goals initially set forth; iii) analysis of effects of the project 
on grade 1-3 students, compared to those not participating in the 
project; iv) analysis of educational levels achieved by San children; 
v) an investigation of how partners perceive the success of the pro -
ject operation, implementation, and influence; vi) input toward local 
ownership and local participation; vii) discussion of how funds were 
prioritized; and viii) recommendations for future steps. According 
to the ToR, the report of the evaluation would span a period of four 
months and a summary would be provided in the local language.
As a starting point, a team of foreign-born evaluators wrestled with 
the specific ToR, wondering to what extent the desk study and 
interviews would reveal answers to the questions posed; how an 
evaluation study could be designed to answer the questions related 
to achieved and intended goals; the effects of the project on stu -
dents in primary school; and the expected influence of the project 
and the evaluation for future decision-making purposes. The EAA’s 
managing director, in response to questions about the ToR, was 
both vague and brief. He responded to the evaluators’ request for 
clarification by reiterating his hope that the evaluation would assist 
communities in focusing on the intended directions of the project. 
Of particular concern was the impending transfer of responsibilities 
for the project administration from the primarily European-led pro -
ject coordinators, who had led the efforts for the first eight years, 
to the regional office of the MoE. The motives for the transfer from 
the international aid agency to the country-led regional line ministry 
office were not clear. The EAA had presumed that the time taken 
to develop the educational projects was sufficient to allow for the 
transfer, although at the time of the evaluation, considerable unease 
remained within the San community over the timing and specifics 
of the transfer.
<<<PAGE=93>>>
71
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
Methodological considerations  
in decolonizing evaluation
The dilemma of the evaluators within the San scenario is one that 
all evaluators must face: evolving situations subject to whatever 
changes occur. Ensuring evaluation that promotes equity and social 
justice means understanding that methods and methodological 
designs must be representative of the culture, the location in which 
the culture is situated, and the political context. 
Arguably, the tension between the consideration of Indigenous 
epistemology versus the practical constraints of resources, politics, 
and decision-making timelines is palpable (Kovach, 2010). To sim -
ply insinuate that conducting evaluation in developing countries is 
a challenge is to understate the issue of undertaking evaluation in 
unforeseen and, in many ways, unstable circumstances including 
culture, socioeconomic status, physical environment, and internal 
and regional politics. When one adds the agendas of westernized 
often Eurocentric countries such as the United States, that often 
fund developing countries’ humanitarian programmes, the multi -
tude of stakeholders who impose perspectives on what is consid -
ered good evaluation, grows exponentially. 
Although only the most altruistic rationales underlie development 
programming and by extension, programme evaluation, develop -
ment remains largely an externally focused activity, with funders 
and donors as the givers, and target groups as the receivers (Ever -
sole, 2005). By its very nature, evaluation that is equity-focused or 
socially just should challenge the view of obtaining answers in a 
context-free location, and in a value-free climate. Instead, evalua -
tion models that privilege equity, for instance, would strive to rep -
resent and explore the views of “the other,” and dare say, work to 
decolonize by reflecting on the common core values that underlie 
the cultural context, the culture, and the political milieu. 
Yet, there is pressure to answer the questions of developing coun -
tries (and funders) using a westernized, and arguably Eurocentric 
view of what is considered rigorous, systematic and objective eval -
uation. It is problematic to interpret data using a one-size-fits-all 
approach to answer questions from multiple stakeholder perspec -
tives. Methods and methodological designs must be contemplative, 
exemplifying the context and various mores imbued throughout 
the country. In this way, the focus is on the values of the country 
and target group rather than a colonized view. Additionally, tailored
<<<PAGE=94>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
72
designs and methods are, in the end, intended to insure the preci -
sion, validity, and credibility of the information gathered. 
The above mentioned issues have been considered as tensions in 
epistemology and practice in developing countries. For instance, in 
understanding evaluation in Africa, evaluators such as Gariba (2007) 
call for understanding African Knowledge Systems as a basis for 
evaluation, rather than using traditional perspectives. Such a per -
spective means considering: a) the historical and political perspec -
tives of the country; b) the purpose of evaluation in the context and 
within the setting; c) what standards should be used to provide the 
background for design and execution in methodology and data col -
lection; and d) what is meant by ‘credibility of information’.
Understanding historical perspectives and contexts of countries and 
their relationship to evaluation methodology. To understand the con -
text of the country and modern day programming, one must under -
stand international relations in general. Pronk (2009) notes that 
international conflicts in the 20
th century were, at a larger level, both 
political and ideological between west and east, but also reflective 
of the aspirations of people to free themselves from political, eco -
nomic and cultural oppression. The 21
st century has brought similar 
perspectives, with nations across the world witnessing a wave of 
resistance to colonization that has been imposed either within the 
country or with influence from powerful nations from east and west 
(Pronk, 2009). With the aforementioned as a backdrop, the focus 
on equity across nations, within classes and cultures, becomes sig -
nificant. 
Acknowledging imperialism in programming and evaluation. Con -
lin and Stirrat (2006) acknowledge that programmes in developing 
countries were and have continued to be primarily donor focused, 
designed and shaped in the manner that donors find most palat -
able, and most congruent with their values. By extension, evalua -
tions face similar issues. Evaluations have in the past, and in many 
ways continue, to abide by the scientific clinical trial model of test -
ing that includes Randomized Control Trials (RCT) and experimen -
tal designs. Despite calls for considerations of the contrary (e.g., 
Mertens & Wilson, 2012; Hood, Hopson, & Frierson, 2005), these 
designs are still considered a “gold standard” for impact evaluation, 
and the standard by which all evaluation, no matter what the cul -
ture, political perspective, or context, should aspire. Yet to Conlin 
and Stirrat (2006), this so-called gold standard is feasible only in 
a modicum of international circumstances and contexts. In under -
<<<PAGE=95>>>
73
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
standing this reality, it becomes clear that evaluation that privileges 
equity must consider the context in which the evaluation would be 
conducted, and acknowledge the colonialist perspective that such a 
standard projects. 
In attempting to address equity in evaluation, the design must 
address variables such as the historical understanding of imperi -
alism. Such designs would account for issues such as class and 
status warfare, and why these might influence any type of interna -
tional development that might be accomplished. For instance Gar -
iba (2007) pondered the question of how African evaluators cope 
with challenges posed by the need to use evaluation as a tool for 
transformation, and not just ex-post assessment. Thus, evaluations 
committed to equity and social justice must keep in mind that the 
evaluative process is a collaborative process, a synergy between 
all parties dedicated to obtaining evidence that is representative of 
context, while addressing the needs of stakeholders. 
Standards for design and execution in methodology and data collec -
tion. Many approaches – even those focused on social justice, inclu -
sivity, and equity – are steeped in traditional deductive methods ver -
sus those methods that are more inductive. These deductive strate -
gies may be useful and in some cases necessitated by the design; 
however, they can be disarming and distancing, discouraging the 
very aim of social justice values. Therefore, the focus must be on 
those designs that encourage inductive reasoning and by extension, 
designs. Conlin and Stirrat (2006) note that, “perhaps the time has 
come to recognize that interpretative approaches which owe more 
to history than to experimental sciences might be better suited to 
the world of development” (p. 200). Designs that are inclusive of 
non-traditional, inductive-based methods might be better suited to 
chronicling a community’s response to programmes. Additionally, 
such methods can insure validity of information, as well as inform -
ing multicultural validity (Kirkhart, 2005). 
In addressing what else might enhance an equity-focused agenda, 
the Culturally Responsive Evaluation (CRE) framework is informa -
tive in providing insights and strategies for promoting equity (Fri -
erson, et al., 2010; Mertens, 2008) and is adept at acknowledging 
and encouraging the full participation of underserved and disadvan -
taged communities. CRE strives to bring the cultural context to the 
fore in evaluation design, thereby insuring that the methods used, 
whether traditional or non-traditional will be true to the context in 
which the culture operates.
<<<PAGE=96>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
74
Even under the best circumstances within a CRE approach, donors 
and recipients can, and regularly do, clash on factors related to pro -
gramme design and by extension, the best way to illustrate results. 
As Gariba (2007) notes, the question is, whose standards for 
research are used? And, by association, whose ethics? 
Cultural competence and responsiveness in method design and 
methodology. A mainstay for Equity-focused evaluation must be the 
consideration of cultural competence in method design and meth -
odology. Cultural competence can be defined as a “state of being” 
(American Evaluation Association, 2011). But Lee and Farrell (2006) 
wonder if is cultural competence an excuse to continue to per -
petuate racism, nationalist attitudes and stereotypes (for instance) 
in programming, and evaluation? They warn that the tendency to 
use race, culture, and ethnicity interchangeably further categorizes 
communities and groups. To avoid these issues, one must consider 
that there must be some sort of collaboration between those who 
are evaluated, the evaluation agenda, and the evaluator. As Gariba 
(2007) notes, those with power and instruments of communication 
and those who do not have access to these instruments (the target 
population) must work in tandem with one another, deciding the 
most congruous channels for communication of results. 
Participants and participation. Much like development programming, 
evaluation donors of developed countries, while asking for a more 
collaborative and close relationship with developing countries, con -
tinue to subtly and sometimes overtly shape the goals, landscape 
and processes of initiatives. This colonial perspective suggests that 
there is a specific way to design programmes, usually one that is 
closer and more representative of a westernized perspective. In an 
Equity-focused evaluation, it makes sense that the values of those 
who are most affected by the programme and evaluation (the con -
sumers) would come to the fore, while acknowledging the context 
in which these values are executed, and reconciling those of the 
funders and donors who may subscribe to a different perspective.
Credibility of information. Perhaps the cornerstone of methodol -
ogy endeavors is the credibility of information gathered (and inter -
preted). Credibility, as Donaldson (2009) notes is the reliability and 
validity  of the information gathered, the analysis of it in a manner 
that is reflective of the data, and finally, dissemination at all levels. 
Earlier within this chapter, we postulated that validity must fit local, 
contextual understandings about the nature of knowledge. Specifi -
cally, to insure true validity, multiple ways of knowing and concep -
<<<PAGE=97>>>
75
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
tualizing must be encouraged and accepted. Thus, the evaluator is 
emboldened to look beyond traditional identifications and defini -
tions of validity. These might include, as Gariba (2007) encourages, 
considerations of “voices and collective energies of the marginal -
ized” (p. 8).
Although we do not assume that there are exact similarities between 
evaluation performed in developing counties versus developed coun -
tries, the ongoing conversation is appropriate for both contexts. Such 
context-specific situations illustrate the need for uniquely developed 
location-situated understandings and evaluations. For instance, the 
American Evaluation Association’s Public Statement on Cultural 
Competence (2011) provides several tenets for culturally responsive 
and culturally competent evaluation, especially as they relate to valid -
ity. Validity requires a level of shared understanding, and to achieve 
such an understanding, all voices and perspectives must be honestly, 
equitably, and equally represented. Such a combination ensures that 
credibility of information is enhanced. When translating the tenets 
of validity for Equity-focused evaluation, into international develop -
ment efforts, validity and by extension, credibility is supported and 
enhanced (AEA, 2011, pg. 5) when evaluators:
•	 accurately
	 an
d
	 r
espectfully
	 r
eflect
	 the
	 l
ife
	 e
xperiences
	 an
d	
p
erspectives of programme participants in their evaluations;
•	 establish
	r
elationships
	th
at
	s
upport
	tr
ustworthy
	c
ommunication	
a
mong all participants in the evaluation process;
•	 draw
	u
pon
	c
ulturally
	r
elevant,
	an
d
	i
n
	s
ome
	c
ases
	c
ulturally
	s
pecific,	
the
ory in the design of the evaluation and the interpretation of 
findings;
•	 select
	an
d
	i
mplement
	d
esign
	o
ptions
	an
d
	m
easurement
	s
trategies	
i
n ways that are compatible with the cultural context of the study;
•	 consider
	i
ntended
	an
d
	un
intended
	s
ocial
	c
onsequences
	i
n
	the	
o
verall assessment of their work.
The final section of the educational evaluation scenario in the San 
community in southern Africa specifically addresses methodologi -
cal considerations and challenges in carrying out equity and socially 
just evaluations. Specifically, the evaluators were placed in a conun -
drum in which they needed to choose a design that was respon -
sive to the development agendas of the ToR, but also respon -
sive to the needs of the San. In keeping with Eversole’s (2005)  
participatory typology, the evaluators discovered that a collabora -
<<<PAGE=98>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
76
tive approach was best suited for the context, as well as the politi -
cal landscape. However, as the scenario progresses, we notice that 
the collaborative approach does not solve all questions, and issues 
linger at the conclusion at the end of the scenario, as discussed 
below:
San education evaluation project scenario: Part 2
The evaluators chose a design that would be collaboratively forma -
tive and culturally grounded, ensuring there was opportunity to 
meet a host of stakeholders at multiple levels in the country, region, 
and community, including building an opportunity to share the draft 
report to all groups prior to submission to the EAA. They had had 
recent experience where researchers or evaluators had either col -
lected information without full ownership of the document by the 
San community or, as was more typical, the findings were non-rep -
resentative, not available, or not in a language that could be under -
stood by most in the local community.
To illustrate the challenge that the evaluators faced at the time of 
their fieldwork, the total number of learners in grades 4-8 at the 
regional primary and junior secondary schools numbered only 40 
out of the nearly 150 primary school students. These figures are 
for the village schools in a good year, based upon enrollment sta -
tistics recorded by the principal of the village schools. Many San 
children came from their village schools at grades 1-3. Out of the 
large numbers of students who had completed grade 3 over the 
last decade or so, many did not make the transition to school in 
the regional center. By the time of the evaluator’s visit, there was 
only one student still enrolled in 8
th grade and fewer than a hand -
ful in junior secondary school. As the MoE statistics continued to 
illustrate, the higher the grade, the more likely San learners were 
to drop out. The situation facing the one village school student left 
in 8
th grade reflects a larger, more complicated challenge related 
to changes and transitions that took place at multiple school lev -
els. These challenges were both pupil-related and staff-related. 
They included logistical challenges around transportation, materials, 
food, support, the increased need for teacher uptake and training, 
and community consultation and involvement.
In two in-country fieldwork periods and one set of interviews at the 
aid agency offices in Europe, a variety of stakeholders were inter -
viewed at the locations where stakeholders worked. At the time 
of the interviews, these stakeholders were involved with educa -
tional efforts in the San community in the capital city, the regional
<<<PAGE=99>>>
77
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
city, or the local or village constituency, as well as in the European 
country that funded the project. At the outset of the fieldwork, it 
was important for the evaluators to visit each village and ensure a 
community meeting was held to gather insights at the village level. 
Local research assistants were employed during the fieldwork at 
the regional and local levels. The nearly 130 respondents included 
educational planners, land and environment consultants, members 
of the MoE in regional positions, San community, principals, teach -
ers, village committees, students, and matrons. 
During a second fieldwork visit a few months after the initial team 
fieldwork, preliminary results were reported to groups of stakehold -
ers in three regions of the country – in the capital city, in the regional 
headquarters, and in the San regional area. In the San regional area, 
two presentations were given over a weekend to facilitate attend -
ance by groups of teachers and community members to listen and 
provide feedback. In addition to presenting the draft report, the pur -
pose of the meetings was to gather additional input regarding the 
intended recommendations of the report. At these meetings, evalu -
ators ensured that multiple languages – local, regional, and official – 
were spoken in the feedback presentations and that the final report 
recommendations would be in the San language.
In the final report to the EAA, evaluation recommendations were 
arranged in several sections related to the key sections of the 
report: the context and background of the aid agency’s project, the 
goals of the project, its impact, and challenges for transition, logis -
tics, roles and responsibilities, teacher training, and community con -
sultation and involvement. Five priority recommendations preceded 
the remaining 49 recommendations. These priority recommenda -
tions focused on the key presence of the agency and the need for 
a consultative conference, a clearly established mission statement, 
role clarification between the aid agency and the ministry, and the 
development of alternative approaches to education. 
The response to the report from the aid agency was generally posi -
tive and priority recommendations were, by and large, likely to be 
acted upon beginning with the suggested consultative conference 
later in the year. This was to involve a diverse group of stakeholders 
who would revisit the recommendations of the evaluation report. 
What was less clear from the perspective of the evaluators, despite 
the expected consultative conference where all matters pertaining 
to San education would be discussed, were the continued expres -
sions of alienation these groups faced. This alienation was evident
<<<PAGE=100>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
78
even in government schools that were attempting to close achieve -
ment gaps and to ensure that all groups had access to schools and 
educational materials that had heretofore not been available for 
most and especially the San. The nature and transparency of the 
relationship and roles between the MoE and the aid agency also 
remained unclear, as was how community involvement and input 
would actually be guaranteed or promoted in moving forward.
Concluding thoughts and critiques
Much of this chapter has been focused on understanding the impli -
cations and cautions about Equity-focused evaluation within the 
context of westernized colonialistic programming, while acknowl -
edging, embracing, and privileging local culture. As with all evalu -
ation approaches, but especially those that are transformative and 
focus on social justice and Indigenous populations, the challenge 
is to provide voice and true representation of those who the evalu -
ative process affects the most. We do not question outright the 
motives of developed countries such as the United States who 
would work collaboratively with developing nations. Many of those 
collaborations are altruistic in nature. However, we consider Equity-
focused evaluation to be a strategy by which to equalize  the often 
benevolent and charitable nature of international funding and pro -
grammatic assistance. Given that Equity-focused evaluation is new 
to, as Mertens and Wilson (2012) would assert, values-driven eval -
uation approaches, it bears a large responsibility. 
Before closing this critique, transparency requires acknowledg -
ing the complexities and pitfalls of what has been proposed, just 
as the scenario above insinuates. Decolonization is neither easily 
nor quickly accomplished; it is an enormous project over genera -
tions of evaluators. It requires a long view of time, and an appre -
ciation of the slow process of building trustworthy relationships.
 
 It 
requires deep commitment and motivation, as well as resilience to 
steel oneself against the realities and limitations of what can be 
accomplished at any one site and time – what Maori scholar and 
educator Graham Hingangaroa Smith calls “the politics of truth” in 
the context of his work in the Academy. It requires an apprecia -
tion of irony, acknowledging that one is undertaking decolonization 
within a development context that has held, and often continues to 
hold, an explicitly colonial agenda. It requires an insider perspective 
that must be engaged authentically. When evaluators are not Indig -
enous to a given community, it requires genuine partnerships and
<<<PAGE=101>>>
79
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
an acute awareness of one’s cultural location. It requires unlearning 
some traditional definitions of “good evaluation” to create space for 
broader understandings of validity and rigor, of utility and relevance. 
It requires tolerance for ambiguity, moving away from a search for 
singular truths. 
This chapter suggests that decolonizing evaluation is not easy 
work. There are many challenges in committing to and carrying 
out Equity-focused evaluation. There are deep commitments to 
the epistemologies and methods in which we have been schooled. 
Furthermore, there is arrogance in assuming that anyone can fully 
know and understand the worldviews of others, particularly when 
one is coming from outside the community in which the evaluation 
is located. In grappling with new realities, one risks reifying cultural 
dimensions as singular and static or creating fixed categories to aid 
description. One must struggle to retain a vision of culture as fluid, 
dynamic, and multifaceted. In seeking to build evaluation on Indig -
enous knowledge, one risks advancing an assimilation agenda that 
changes the worldview one is attempting to incorporate.
  
Seeking 
partnerships brings stressors of multiple accountabilities, creating 
tensions between two or more loyalties, and potentially dividing 
communities. One must balance circumspection about the possibili -
ties of missteps with the imperative to move ahead toward equity 
and justice, not to be paralyzed by one’s acknowledged ignorance 
but to advance with humility.
References 
American Evaluation Association. (2011).  American Evaluation Association public 
statement on cultural competence in evaluation . Fairhaven, MA: Author. Retrieved 
from 
www.eval.org/ccstatement.asp.
Bishop, R. (1998). Freeing ourselves from neo-colonial domination in research:  
A Maori approach to creating knowledge. International Journal of Qualitative Studies  
in Education , 11(2), 199-219.
Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence . Santa Fe,  
New Mexico: Clear Light Publishers.
Chouinard J., & Cousins, J. B. (2009). A  review and synthesis of current research  
on cross-cultural evaluation. American Journal of Evaluation . 30(4), 457-494.
Conlin, S., & Stirrat, R. L. (2008). Current challenges in development evaluation. 
Evaluation, 14 (2), 193-208.
Cram, F. (2011, November). Methods for Kaupapa Maori Evaluation. Panel presentation  
at the annual meeting of the American Evaluation Association, Anaheim, CA.
<<<PAGE=102>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
80
Deloria, V., Jr. (1999). Ethnoscience and Indian realities. In B. Deloria, K. Foehner,  
& S. Scinta (Eds.) Spirit & reason: The Vine Deloria, Jr., reader (pp. 63-71). Golden, CO: 
Fulcrum Publishing.
Donaldson, S., (2009). In search of the blueprint for an evidence-based global society.  
In S. Donaldson, C. Christie, C., & M. Mark (Eds.),
 
What counts as credible evidence  
in applied research and evaluation practice (pp. 2-18). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Ermine, W. (1999). Aboriginal epistemology. In M. Battiste (Ed.), First Nations education 
in Canada: The circle unfolds (pp. 101-12).Vancouver: UBC Press.
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The making and unmaking  
of the third world . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Estrada, Jiménez V. M. (2005). The Tree of Life as a research methodology.  
The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education , 34, 44-52.
Eversole, R. (2005). Who vision? Whose rules? A culture and development typology. 
Canadian Journal of Development Studies , 26(2), 295-308.
Ferguson, J. (1994). The anti-politics machine: “Development,” depoliticization,  
and bureaucratic power in Lesotho . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Frierson, H. T., Hood, S., Hughes, G. B., & Thomas, V. G. (2010). A guide to conducting 
culturally-responsive evaluations. In J. Frechtling, (Ed.), The 2010 user-friendly handbook 
for project evaluation  (pp. 75-96). Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
Gariba, S. (2007, January). Changing paradigms in participation & partnership for 
development evaluation in Africa: Are we ready for the race? 4
th Conference of the African 
Evaluation Association. Niamey, Niger.
Grande, S. (2008). Red pedagogy: The un-methodology. In N. K. Denzin, Y. S. Lincoln, 
& L. T. Smith (Eds.), Handbook of critical and Indigenous methodologies  (pp. 233-254). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Hermes, M. (1998). Research methods as a situated response: Towards a First Nations’ 
methodology. Qualitative Studies in Education, 11 (1), 155-168.
Hood, S. (1998). Responsive evaluation Amistad style: Perspectives of one African-
American evaluator. In R. Sullivan (Ed.), Proceedings of the Stake Symposium  
on Education Evaluation . Urbana-Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
Hood, S. (2001). Nobody knows my name: In praise of African American evaluators  
who were responsive. In J. C. Greene & T. A. Abma (Eds.) Responsive Evaluation,  
New Directions for Evaluation , Number 92 (pp. 31-43). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hood, S., Hopson, R., & Frierson, H. (2005). The role of culture and cultural context:  
a mandate for inclusion, the discovery of truth and understanding in evaluative theory  
and practice . Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Hopson, R. (2003). The problem of the language line: Cultural and social reproduction of 
hegemonic linguistic structures for learners of African descent in the USA. Race, Ethnicity 
and Education, 6 (3), 227-245.
<<<PAGE=103>>>
81
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation
Kawakami, A. J., Aton, K., Cram, F., Lai, M. K., & Porima, L. (2008). Improving the 
practice of evaluation through indigenous values and methods: Decolonizing evaluation 
practice – Returning the gaze from Hawai’i and Aotearoa. In N. L. Smith & P. R. Brandon 
(Ed.), Fundamental issues in evaluation  (pp. 219-242). New York, NY: Guilford.
Kirkhart, K. E. (1995). Seeking multicultural validity: A postcard from the road. Evaluation 
Practice, 16 (1), 1-12.
Kirkhart, K. E. (2005). Through a cultural lens: Reflections on validity and theory in 
evaluation. In S. Hood, R. Hopson, & H. Frierson (Eds.), The role of culture and cultural 
context: A mandate for inclusion, the discovery of truth, and understanding in evaluative 
theory and practice  (pp. 21-39). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Kirkhart, K. E. (2010). Eyes on the prize: Multicultural validity and evaluation theory. 
American Journal of Evaluation , 31(3), 400-413.
Kovach, M. (2010). Indigenous methodologies; Characteristics, conversations, and 
contexts . Toronto, Ontario, Canada: University of Toronto Press.
LaFrance, J., & Nichols, R. (2009). Indigenous Evaluation Framework: Telling our story 
in our place and time. Alexandria, VA: American Indian Higher Education Consortium 
(AIHEC).
LaFrance, J., & Nichols, R. (2010). Reframing evaluation: Defining an Indigenous 
Evaluation Framework. The Canadian Journal of Program Evaluation, 23 (2), 12-31.
LaFrance, J., Nichols, R., & Kirkhart, K. E. (forthcoming). Culture writes the script: On the 
centrality of context in Indigenous evaluation. In R. F. Conner, J. Fitzpatrick, & D. J. Rog 
(Eds.), Context: A framework for its influence on evaluation practice. New Directions for 
Evaluation . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lee, S. A., & Farrell M. (2006). Is cultural competency a backdoor to racism? 
Anthropology News, 47 (3): 9-10. 
Little Bear, L. (2000). Jagged worldviews colliding. In. M. Battiste (Ed.), Reclaiming 
Indigenous voice and vision (pp. 77-85). Vancouver, BC: UBC Press.
Madison, A. M. (Ed.) (1992). Minority issues in program evaluation, New Directions  
for Program Evaluation , Number 52, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Mertens, D. M. (2008). Transformative research and evaluation . New York, NY:  
Guilford Press.
Mertens, D. M., & Hopson, R. K. (2006). Advancing evaluation of STEM efforts through 
attention to diversity and culture. In D. Huffman & F. Lawrenz (Eds.), Critical issues in 
STEM evaluation, New Directions for Evaluation , Number 109 (pp. 35-51). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Mertens, D. M., & Wilson, A.T. (2012). Program evaluation theory and practice: A 
comprehensive guide. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Mishler, E. G. (1979). Meaning in context: Is there any other kind? Harvard Educational 
Review, 49 (1), 1-19.
Patton, M. Q. (Ed.) (1985). Culture and evaluation,
 
New Directions for Program Evaluation , 
Number 25. San Franciso: Jossey-Bass.
<<<PAGE=104>>>
Evaluation for equitable  
development results
82
Pronk (2009). Development, culture, and conflict. Development, 52 (4), 445-455.
Rodney, W. (1981). How Europe underdeveloped Africa . Washington, DC: Howard 
University Press.
Samuels, M., & Ryan, K. (2011). Grounding evaluations in culture. American Journal  
of Evaluation, 32 (2), 183-198.
Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies; Research and Indigenous peoples. 
London: Zed Books, Ltd.
Smith, G. H. (2004). Mai i te Maramatanga, kit e Putanga Mai o te Tahuritanga;  
From Conscientization to Transformation. Educational Perspectives: Journal of the College 
of Education/ University of Hawai‘i at Manoa, 37 (1), 46-52. 
Stanfield, J. H., II (2011). Epistemological reconsiderations and new considerations:  
Or what I have been learning since 1993. In J. H. Stanfield, II (Ed.), Rethinking race and 
ethnicity in research methods (pp. 11-26). Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Tafoya, T. (1995). Finding harmony: Balancing traditional values with Western science  
in therapy. Canadian Journal of Native Education, 21 (supplement), 7-27.
Verhelst, T. G. (1990). No life without roots; Culture and development . (B. Cummings, 
Trans.). London: Zed Books Ltd.
 
(Original work published 1987).
Weber-Pillwax, C. (1999). Indigenous research methodology: Exploratory discussion  
of an elusive subject. Journal of Educational Thought, 33 (1), 31-45.
Williams, C. C. (2006). The epistemology of cultural competence. Families in society, 
87(2), 209-220. 
Wilson, S. (2008). Research is ceremony: Indigenous research methods .  
Halifax & Winnipeg, Canada: Fernwood Publishing.
<<<PAGE=105>>>
83
Decolonizing evaluation in a developing world. Implications and cautions for Equity-focused Evaluation