<<<PAGE=1>>>
Evidence-based	policy	making	in	the	tropics:	are	developing	countries	different?	Stephen	Howes,	Ashlee	Betteridge,		Lawrence	Sause	and	Lhawang	Ugyel	Abstract	Evidence-based	policy	making	has	been	advocated	as	much,	if	not	more,	for	developing	as	developed	countries.	However,	very	little	attention	has	been	given	to	the	conditions	or	prerequisites	for	evidence-based	policy	making,	and	whether	these	are	in	general	more	or	less	likely	to	hold	in	developing	countries.	We	argue	that	an	environment	conducive	to	evidence-based	policy	making	is	one	in	which	there	are	strong	incentives	for	good	policies	to	be	adopted,	capable	institutions	to	implement	them,	a	wide	range	of	domains	within	which	good	policy	can	be	adopted,	and	a	ready	supply	of	well-developed	policy	proposals.	Based	on	the	development	literature,	our	own	experience,	and	the	comparison	of	two	countries,	Australia	and	Papua	New	Guinea,	we	conclude	that	these	conditions	are	all	more	likely	to	exist	in	developed	than	developing	countries.	Developing	countries	on	the	other	hand	have	the	advantage	of	foreign	aid.	Much	foreign	aid	is	dedicated	to	the	purpose	of	facilitating	evidence-based	policy	making.	But	we	argue	that	at	best	this	is	a	partial	compensation	for	the	other	problems	faced	by	developing	countries	in	striving	to	base	their	policies	more	firmly	on	sound	evidence.	While	this	paper	is	not	a	counsel	for	despair,	it	is	a	call	for	realism.	Strengthening	institutions	or	the	structure	of	the	economy	are	long-term	endeavours.	But	the	dearth	of	funding	for	research	and	teaching	is	a	constraint	that	can	more	readily	be	lifted,	especially	with	support	from	donors.				
 Development	Policy	Centre	Discussion	Paper	59	July	2017	SERIES	ISSN	2206-303X
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Evidence-based	policy	making	in	the	tropics:	are		developing	countries	different?	Stephen	Howes	Ashlee	Betteridge	Lawrence	Sause		Lhawang	Ugyel	Professor	Stephen	Howes	is	the	Director	and	Ashlee	Betteridge	is	Program	Manager	of	the	Development	Policy	Centre,	Crawford	School	of	Public	Policy,	Australian	National	University.	Dr	Lawrence	Sause	is	a	Senior	Lecturer	and	Dr	Lhawang	Ugyel	is	a	Visiting	Lecturer	in	the	Public	Policy	Division	in	the	School	of	Business	and	Public	Policy,	University	of	Papua	New	Guinea.1	Howes,	S,	Betteridge,	A,	Sause,	L	&	Ugyel,	L	2017	“Evidence-based	policy	making	in	the	tropics:	are	developing	countries	different?”	Development	Policy	Centre	Discussion	Paper	#59,	Crawford	School	of	Public	Policy,	The	Australian	National	University,	Canberra.		The	Development	Policy	Centre	is	a	research	unit	at	the	Crawford	School	of	Public	Policy,	The	Australian	National	University.	The	discussion	paper	series	is	intended	to	facilitate	academic	and	policy	discussion.	Use	and	dissemination	of	this	discussion	paper	is	encouraged;	however,	reproduced	copies	may	not	be	used	for	commercial	purposes.	The	views	expressed	in	discussion	papers	are	those	of	the	authors	and	should	not	be	attributed	to	any	organisation	with	which	the	authors	might	be	affiliated.	For	more	information	on	the	Development	Policy	Centre,	visit	http://devpolicy.anu.edu.au	
																																																								1	Email	for	correspondence:	stephen.howes@anu.edu.au.	This	paper	is	written	to	be	a	chapter	in	a	forthcoming	book	on	public	policy	edited	by	Professor	Robert	Breunig	and	Mark	Fabian	of	Crawford	School	of	Public	Policy,	ANU.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
1	
Introduction	Evidence-based	policy	making,	which	this	volume	seeks	to	promote,	is	as	important	for	poor	countries	as	for	rich	ones,	perhaps	even	more	so.	But	can	evidence-based	policy	making	be	made	to	work	in	poor	countries?	What	special	challenges	do	such	countries	face	in	formulating	and	implementing	evidence-based	policy?	Australia’s	Productivity	Commission	defines	evidence-based	policymaking	as	‘a	process	that	transparently	uses	rigorous	and	tested	evidence	in	the	design,	implementation	and	refinement	of	policy	to	meet	designated	policy	objectives’	(Productivity	Commission,	2009).	The	“theory	of	change”	behind	evidence-based	policy	runs	something	like	as	follows:	policy	making	suffers	from	a	lack	of	good,	substantiated	proposals;	therefore,	if	we	can	improve	the	quantity	and	quality	of	policy	proposals	we	will	improve	the	quality	of	policies.		This	argument	seems	reasonable,	but	incomplete.	One	can	think	of	numerous	constraints	on	the	adoption	of	good	policies,	of	which	a	scarcity	of	good	proposals	is	only	one.	Those	in	a	position	to	make	good	policy	may	lack	the	incentive	to	do	so.	And	even	if	the	supply	of	proposals	is	the	binding	constraint,	relaxing	that	constraint	might	be	difficult.	These	are	the	issues	we	explore	in	this	paper.	In	the	literature,	evidence-based	policy	making	has	been	advocated	as	much,	if	not	more,	for	developing	as	developed	countries.	Among	its	champions	have	been	multilateral	institutions	such	as	the	World	Bank,	which	are	active	in	developing	countries.	A	special	area	of	focus	has	been	policy	evaluation,	with	the	promotion	of	randomized	control	trials	as	a	tool	that	could	be	transformational	for	development	policy	(Duflo	and	Kremer,	2008).	However,	very	little	attention	has	been	given	to	the	conditions	or	prerequisites	for	evidence-based	policy	making,	and	whether	these	are	in	general	more	or	less	likely	to	hold	in	developing	countries.	Our	attempt	to	examine	the	challenges	facing	evidence-based	policy	making	in	developing	countries	draws	on	the	development	literature,	on	our	own	experience,	and,	in	particular	and	for	concreteness,	on	comparisons	between	Australia	and	Papua	New	Guinea	(PNG),	two	countries	the	authors	collectively	know
<<<PAGE=4>>>
2	
well.	These	two	neighbours	make	for	useful	comparisons	as	they	are,	despite	their	geographical	proximity,	very	different.	If	we	rank	all	countries	of	the	world	for	which	data	is	available,	we	can	see	that	Australia	is	a	country	in	which	the	mortality	rate	is	very	low	and	income	per	capita	very	high.	In	PNG	this	situation	is	reversed	(Figure	1).	Put	simply	but	accurately,	Australia	is	a	developed	or	rich	country	and	PNG	is	a	developing	or	poor	country.	Figure	1:	Infant	mortality	rate	and	GNI	per	capita,	Australia	and	PNG	compared	with	other	nations	of	the	world	
	Sources	and	notes:	World	Development	Indicators.	In	this	and	subsequent	graphs,	PNG	is	represented	by	the	red	line;	Australia	by	the	yellow	one.	
	The	two	countries	are	also	on	different	growth	trajectories.	Papua	New	Guinea	is	a	resource	dependent	economy,	and,	for	such	economies,	GDP	can	be	a	particularly	misleading	indicator	of	economic	welfare.	A	better	indicator	is	non-resource	GDP,	that	is,	the	domestic	output	of	the	non-mining	and	non-petroleum	sectors.	(The	argument	is	that	whatever	benefits	of	mining	and	petroleum	projects	are	captured	by	PNG	are	reflected	in	the	non-resource	sector	through	spillover	effects,	in	particular	construction	and	government	revenue.)	Non-resource	GDP	per	capita	is	about	the	same	today	in	PNG
<<<PAGE=5>>>
3	
as	it	was	shortly	after	independence,	in	1980.	By	contrast,	Australia’s	GDP	per	capita	is	almost	twice	as	high	now	as	it	was	then.		Figure	2:	Income	per	capita	in	Australia	and	PNG			
	Source	and	notes:	Australian	data	from	World	Development	Indicators;	PNG	data	compiled	by	Paul	Flanagan	from	various	sources.	Data	in	constant,	local	currency	prices.	Australian	data	is	GDP	per	capita	and	PNG	data	is	non-resource	GDP	per	capita	(which	is	appropriate	given	the	large	share	of	the	resources	sector	in	the	PNG	economy).	
	Of	course,	one	should	be	wary	of	generalizations	based	on	comparisons	between	two	countries	or	even	two	categories	of	countries.	Developing	countries	differ	from	each	other,	and	in	many	cases	it	is	better	to	think	of	countries	as	facing	various	degrees	of	challenge,	rather	than	either	facing	a	challenge	or	not.	Nevertheless,	we	do	think	developing	countries	are	different,	and	that	careful	scrutiny	of	the	challenges	they	face	when	it	comes	to	evidence-based	policy	making	will	pay	dividends.		Our	discussion	and	the	structure	of	our	paper	are	based	around	four	differences	relating	to	institutions,	policy	options,	research	capacity	and	foreign	aid.			 	
00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82
198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002200420062008201020122014AustraliaPNG
<<<PAGE=6>>>
4	
Institutions	As	defined	by	Douglas	North,	institutions	are	‘the	rules	of	the	game	in	a	society	or,	more	formally,	are	the	humanly	devised	constraints	that	shape	human	interaction’	(North,	1990,	p.3).	In	general,	poor	countries	have	weak	and	immature	institutions.	While	we	would	subscribe	to	the	now	orthodox	view	that	the	quality	of	institutions	is	a,	if	not	the,	critical	determinant	of	economic	performance	(Acemoglu	and	Robinson,	2012),	all	that	is	needed	for	the	purposes	of	this	section	is	an	acceptance	of	the	strong	correlation	between	the	two:	richer	countries	generally	have	better	institutions.	We	illustrate	this	stylized	fact	using	our	comparison	of	Australia	and	PNG,	and	2015	World	Governance	Indicators	data	on	‘government	effectiveness’.	Australia	is	ranked	in	the	top	10	per	cent	of	countries	when	it	comes	to	government	effectiveness;	PNG	in	the	bottom	30	per	cent.		Figure	3:	Percentile	ranking	for	government	effectiveness,	Australia	and	PNG	(higher	is	better)	
	Source:	World	Governance	Indicators	
	
92.3
29.8
020406080100
AUS PNG
<<<PAGE=7>>>
5	
More	generally,	Figure	4	shows	the	strong	cross-country	correlation	between	government	effectiveness	and	per	capita	income.		Figure	4:	The	correlation	across	countries	between	government	effectiveness	and	income	per	capita	
	Source	and	notes:	World	Development	Indicators.	The	red	dotted	line	is	a	trendline.	The	government	effectiveness	score	is	a	percentile	ranking.	
The	presence	of	weak	institutions	makes	it	less	likely	that	good	policies	will	be	adopted,	even	if	evidence	is	found	in	their	favour.	This	can	be	understood	in	political	terms.	Institutions	are	an	outcome	of	politics	(Acemoglu	and	Robinson,	2012);	and	institutions	are	therefore	weak	if	political	incentives	are	not	well-aligned	with	the	welfare	of	the	population.	If	there	are	only	weak	incentives	to	improve	policies,	then	little	improvement	will	happen.2	The	binding	constraint	will	not	be	a	lack	of	solid	evidence,	but	a	lack	of	will	to	take	that	evidence	and	its	implications	seriously.	For	example,	if																																																									2	This	discussion	raises	the	interesting	question	of	the	difference	between	policies	and	institutions.	If	institutions	cover	all	the	rules	of	the	game,	then	policies	are	simply	a	sub-set	of	institutions.	But	institutions	are	perhaps	more	sensibly	thought	of	as	the	fundamental	rules	of	a	society.	Policies	can	be	regarded	as	rules	that	can	be	changed	holding	institutions	constant.	For	example,	giving	a	Central	Bank	independence	is	an	institutional	change.	If	the	policy	rate	of	interest	is	changed	–	by	the	independent	Central	Bank	or	any	other	part	of	government	–	that	is	a	policy	change.	
-20 
0
20
40
60
80
100
500 5000 50000
Government	Effectiveness	Score	2015
2012	GDP	per	capita,	PPP	(current	international	$)
<<<PAGE=8>>>
6	
politics	are	clientelistic	and	politicians	are	thus	more	interested	in	providing	private	goods	to	their	supporter	rather	than	public	goods	to	all	citizens,	then	there	will	be	little	interest	in	proposals	to	focus	more	on	public	goods,	and	even	less	on	how	to	supply	public	goods	more	efficiently.	Such	research,	and	the	recommendations	based	on	them,	might	be	literally	regarded	as	merely	“academic”.	Another	way	to	think	about	this	problem	is	that	weak	institutions	manifest	themselves	in	limited	capacity.	Indeed,	this	is	what	the	government	effectiveness	metric,	graphed	above,	tries	to	measure.	Limited	capacity	means	that	governments	struggle	to	absorb	good	research	and	implement	policy.	Of	course,	these	two	arguments	converge	since	limited	capacity	is	itself	a	symptom	of	a	politics	that	gives	little	weight	to	development	objectives.	Sause	(2008)	has	investigated	“the	state	of	policy	advisory	capacity”	in	PNG’s	central	government	agencies.	He	finds	“pervasive	and	systematic”	problems	which	limit	this	capacity,	arising	from	“a	variety	of	interlocking	(and	often	interwoven)	problems	from	both	the	political	and	the	administrative	and	organisational	dimensions	within	which	policy	advice	is	developed	and	delivered.”	(Sause,	2008,	Abstract).	If	institutions	are	so	important,	it	would	seem	obvious	to	focus	on	improving	them.	Indeed,	at	first,	it	might	seem	like	an	advantage	from	a	reform	perspective	to	be	in	a	country	with	weak	institutions	as	it	gives	rise	to	the	possibility	of	rapid	catch	up.	Just	as	poor	countries	don’t	need	to	develop	their	own	technology	in	order	to	have	productivity	growth—they	can	instead	import	the	technology	from	advanced	economies—so	it	might	be	thought	that	poor	countries	can	short-cut	the	arduous	process	of	developing	good	institutions	by	importing	institutions	from	advanced	economies.	Should	not	researchers	then	focus	their	efforts	on	institutional	design?	Unfortunately,	this	line	of	argument,	while	superficially	convincing,	neglects	three	factors	which	make	institutional	improvement	far	more	difficult	than	technological	catch-up.		First,	it	is	difficult	to	find	convincing	evidence	in	favour	of	a	particular	institutional	set	up.	Institutions	that	work	well	in	one	country	might	not	work	well	in	another.	As	Rodrik	has	written,	‘It	is	easier	to	list	the	functions	that	good	institutions	perform	that	it	is	to	describe	the	shape	they	should	take’	(2008,	p.	100).	Second,	it	is	not	clear	which	institutions	make	a	difference;	that	is,	which	are	the	ones	that	really	retard	progress.	For	example,	how	much	of	a	drag	on	growth	is	corruption?	This	is	still	not	something	on
<<<PAGE=9>>>
7	
which	we	have	a	convincing,	clear-cut	answer	(compare	Khan,	2004	with	Campos	et	al.,	2016).	As	a	result,	it	is	not	clear	which	institutions	most	need	to	be	reformed	to	promote	development.	Third,	as	already	noted,	institutions	are	the	outcome	of	political	forces.	Domestic	political	forces	normally	only	change	slowly	or,	if	abruptly,	not	necessarily	in	a	positive	direction.	Far	from	poor	countries	being	able	to	catch-up	quickly	in	terms	of	institutions,	international	evidence	suggests	that	in	many	countries	it	is	not	easy	to	improve	institutions,	even	if	weaknesses	are	glaring,	and	it	is	obvious	what	needs	to	be	done.	Most	poor	countries	are	in	what	is	called	a	‘capability	trap’;	that	is,	their	institutions	improve	only	glacially,	if	at	all	(Pritchett	et.	al	2010).	Moreover,	just	because	institutions	in	general	improve	only	slowly	does	not	mean	they	do	not	change	at	all.	Indeed,	institutions	in	developing	countries	can	change	quickly	over	time;	just	not	necessarily	in	a	positive	direction.	PNG	and	Australia	provide	a	good	example	of	this	in	the	area	of	decentralization:	the	division	of	power	between	provincial	and	local	governments.	PNG	is	divided	into	about	20	provinces.	Most	provinces,	except	for	the	smallest,	are	divided	into	two	or	more	districts,	for	a	total	of	89	districts.	PNG’s	parliament	is	made	up	of	representatives	of	districts	and	provinces.	Over	time,	not	surprisingly	given	the	balance	of	numbers,	power	and	funds	have	shifted	from	provinces	to	districts.	In	the	2000s,	the	focus	was	on	getting	more	funds	to	provinces	through	provincial	function	grants.	But	this	decade,	there	has	been	a	massive	increase	in	grants	and	responsibilities	devolved	to	the	district	level,	through	much	larger	District	Support	Improvement	Program	grants.	This	state	of	flux	has	made	it	very	difficult	to	develop	an	effective	decentralization	policy.	The	politics	of	decentralization	need	to	be	settled	first.	By	contrast,	in	Australia,	where	local	governments	are	under	the	control	of	state	governments,	and	are	not	aligned	with	electoral	boundaries,	the	distribution	of	powers	and	funds	between	state	and	local	governments	is	well-settled.	Changes	in	this	distribution	of	decentralized	powers	in	Australia	would	be	much	more	difficult	to	achieve	than	in	PNG,	but,	on	the	other	hand,	in	Australia	one	has	a	solid	institutional	base	on	which	relevant	policy	reforms	involving	state	and	local	governments	can	be	and	are	pursued.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
8	
Limited	options	The	economies	of	poor	countries	are	dominated	by	the	informal	sector.	In	PNG,	less	than	10	per	cent	of	the	working-age	population	is	engaged	in	the	formal	sector.	In	Australia,	the	figure	is	about	60	per	cent	(Figure	5).		Figure	5:	The	formal	sector	participation	rate	in	PNG	and	Australia	
	Sources	and	notes:	ADB	2014	&	AIHW	2015.	The	formal	sector	participation	rate	divides	the	size	of	the	formal	sector	by	the	size	of	the	working	age	population.PNG	data	from	2009/10,	and	Australian	data	about	2014.	In	Australia,	it	is	assumed	that	everyone	working	is	in	the	formal	sector.		
Cross-country	data	on	the	relative	size	of	the	informal	sector	are	hard	to	come	by,	but	we	can	use	the	rural	population	as	a	proxy	since	typically	rural	areas	are	more	dominated	by	informal	activities	than	urban	ones	(ILO,	2015).	In	Figure	6,	we	see	a	close,	negative	correlation	between	the	variables	of	interest,	in	this	case	informality	(as	proxied	by	the	rural	population	share)	and	income	per	capita			 	
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 
PNGAustralia
<<<PAGE=11>>>
9	
Figure	6:	The	correlation	across	countries	between	the	rural	population	share	(a	proxy	for	informality)	and	income	per	capita	
	Source:	World	Development	Indicators.			
The	relative	prominence	of	the	informal	sector	makes	evidence-based	policy	making	more	difficult	in	developing	countries	for	the	simple	reason	that	by	definition	the	informal	sector	is	less	under	government	control	or	subject	to	government	reach.	In	essence,	the	greater	share	of	the	informal	sector	reduces	the	options	open	to	government.	If	there	are	fewer	policy	decisions	that	can	be	made,	the	scope	for	using	evidence	is	accordingly	reduced.		This	can	be	illustrated	more	concretely	in	several	ways.	First,	the	greater	size	of	the	informal	sector	is	the	fundamental	reason	developing	countries	have	a	lower	tax/GDP	ratio	than	developed	ones.	This	is	certainly	the	case	for	PNG	and	Australia.	The	former	has	a	revenue/GDP	ratio	of	about	15	per	cent;	for	the	latter	it	is	nearly	30	per	cent	(Figure	7).				 	
0102030405060708090100
500 5000 50000
%	of	population	rural	2015
2012	GDP	per	capita,	PPP	(current	international	$)
<<<PAGE=12>>>
10	
Figure	7:	Revenue/GDP	ratios	in	PNG	and	Australia	
	Source:	PNG	budget	documents	(2017	budget	estimate);	Australian	data	from	Australian	Government	2015	and	relates	to	2012.		The	positive	cross-correlation	between	tax/GDP	and	GDP	per	capita	is	shown	in	Figure	8.	The	correlation	is	quite	weak.	Other	factors	are	also	clearly	important.	Resource-rich	countries	tend	to	have	higher	tax/GDP	ratios,	for	example.		
Figure	8:	The	correlation	between	tax/GDP	and	income	per	capita
Source:	World	Development	Indicators		
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 
revenue/GDPPNGAustralia
0510152025303540
500 5000 50000
Tax	as	a	%	of	GDP	2012
2012	GDP	per	capita,	PPP	(current	international	$)
<<<PAGE=13>>>
11	
While	other	factors	are	important,	Figure	8	nevertheless	confirms	that	governments	in	poor	countries	generally	have	fewer	resources	to	allocate	not	only	because	their	economies	are	poorer,	but	also	because	they	can	lay	claim	to	a	lesser	share	of	those	economies.	As	a	result,	these	governments	have	far	fewer	resources	which	can	be	deployed	in	response	to	good	policy	suggestions.	One	might	find	the	evidence,	but	not	the	funds.	The	composition	of	government	expenditure	and	revenue	is	as	important	as	its	size.	In	general,	direct	taxes	and	transfers	are	much	less	important	in	developing	countries	than	they	are	in	developed	ones.	Bastagli	et	al.	(2012)	confirm	that	developed	countries	do	on	average	have	much	higher	tax/GDP	ratios.3	They	also	reveal	important	compositional	differences.	Income	taxes	make	up	more	than	half	the	total	tax	take	in	developed	countries,	but	only	a	quarter	or	less	in	the	various	developing-country	regions.	On	the	expenditure	side,	Bastagli	et	al.	(2012)	also	show	that	transfers	make	up	15	per	cent	of	GDP	in	developed	economies	but	only	about	2	per	cent	in	Asian	economies	and	1	per	cent	in	sub-Saharan	Africa.	It	is	not	that	targeted	transfers	are	impossible	in	developing	countries.	Proxy	indicators	like	a	lack	of	consumer	durables	can	be	used,	as	in	India	for	example,	to	assess	whether	a	household	is	poor	and	thereby	institute	targeted	cash	or	other	transfers	programs.	But	targeted	transfers	are	certainly	more	difficult	to	make	in	developing	countries.	For	example,	schemes	of	employment	insurance	are	simply	impossible	to	implement	in	developing	countries,	since	informal	employment	is	non-verifiable.		The	contrast	can	certainly	be	seen	in	the	case	of	PNG	and	Australia.	Both	countries	have	highly	progressive	direct	tax	systems.	In	PNG,	however,	only	a	small	minority	are	subject	to	the	direct	tax	system,	whereas	in	Australia	virtually	the	entire	workforce	is	covered.	Australia	also	has	an	extensive	and	complex	system	of	direct	transfers,	including	universal,	means-tested	age	pensions,	disability	benefits,	and	unemployment	
																																																								3	On	average,	developed	economies	have	a	tax/GDP	ratio	of	just	over	35	per	cent.	The	four	developing	country	regions	of	Latin	America,	Middle	East	and	North	Africa,	Asia	and	Pacific,	and	Sub-Saharan	Africa	all	have	a	tax/GDP	ratio	of	20	per	cent	or	less.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
12	
benefits.	Formal	sector	employees	in	PNG	receive	superannuation	benefits,	but	none	of	the	transfer	schemes	evident	in	Australia	operate	in	PNG	at	the	national	level.4	Limited	research	capacity	So	far,	we	have	looked	at	what	might	be	thought	of	as	demand	side	factors	hindering	evidence-based	policy	making	in	developing	countries:	factors	that	reduce	the	incentives	for	good	policy,	and	that	reduce	the	policy	options	open	to	government.	In	summary,	the	argument	of	the	paper	so	far	is	that,	on	the	demand	side,	poor	institutions	make	it	less	likely	that	good	policy	suggestions	will	be	implemented,	and	a	large	informal	sector	reduces	the	policy	options	open	to	governments.	In	this	section,	we	turn	to	supply-side	factors	that	make	evidence-based	policy	making	more	difficult	to	implement.	Here	the	relevant	stylised	fact	is	that	universities	and	think	tanks	in	developing	countries	are	generally	small	in	size	and	of	low	quality.		The	contrast	between	rich	and	poor	countries	in	this	regard	is	shown	clearly	by	Figure	11,	which	compares	per	capita	spending	on	university	education	in	the	two	countries.	PNG	spends	only	$6	per	person	on	university	education;	Australia	spends	more	than	$1,000.	This	ratio	of	more	than	100:1	is	far	greater	than	the	ratio	of	per	capita	incomes	which	is	approximately	15:1.	PNG	not	only	puts	far	fewer	students	through	universities	and	spends	only	a	fifth	of	what	Australia	does	on	each	of	them.			 	
																																																								4	One	resource-rich	PNG	province,	New	Ireland,	operates	its	own	cash	transfer	program.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
13	
Figure	11:	Per	capita	and	per	student	university	funding	in	Australia	and	PNG	
		Sources	and	note:	Total	spending	for	four	state-owned	universities	in	PNG	(2015	actuals)	from	budget	documents	divided	by	estimates	of	the	student	body	and	population.	For	Australia,	government	spending	per	student	and	total	number	of	students	from	Universities	Australia	(2015),	for	2015	with	Census	population	estimate	for	that	year.	Current	exchange	rate	used	(university	salaries	are	lower	in	PNG,	but	the	purchasing	power	of	salaries	is	similar	if	not	higher	in	Australia).	
	Comparable	cross-country	data	on	tertiary	education	is	hard	to	come	by.	Instead,	we	can	use	the	share	of	the	labour	force	with	a	tertiary	education	as	a	proxy	(Figure	12).	There	is	a	strong	positive	correlation	between	the	share	of	the	labour	force	with	a	tertiary	education	and	income	per	capita.			 	
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
PNG Australia
$A	per	student
Government	university	spending	per	student
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
PNG Australia
$A	per	person
Government	university	spending	per	capita
<<<PAGE=16>>>
14	
Figure	12:	The	correlation	across	countries	between	the	share	of	the	labour	force	with	a	tertiary	education	(a	proxy	for	education	spending)	and	income	per	capita	
Source:	World	Development	Indicators	A	smaller	share	of	spending	on	tertiary	education	would	not	necessarily	be	a	problem	for	evidence-based	policy	making	if	the	education	sector	in	developing	countries	was,	although	small,	of	high	quality.	However,	this	is	rarely	the	case.	The	quantity	and	quality	of	tertiary	education	move	together,	at	least	to	a	certain	threshold.	Education	spending	per	student	is	typically	much	lower	in	developing	countries	than	in	developed	ones,	as	the	comparison	between	PNG	and	Australia	illustrates	(see	the	second	graph	in	Figure	11	above).	Partly	as	a	result	of	fewer	resources,	universities	in	developing	countries	have	a	greater	focus	on	teaching,	and	a	lesser	focus	on	research—including,	therefore,	a	lesser	focus	on	research	into	policy	questions.		A	good	measure	of	the	quality	of	tertiary	education	in	a	country	is	the	ranking	of	its	universities.	While	there	is	no	doubt	that	the	ranking	by	quality	of	universities	is	a	far	from	perfect	science,	it	would	be	a	mistake	to	write	off	any	such	ranking	as	a	meaningless	exercise.	Two	of	the	most	popular	and	comprehensive	rankings	are	the	QS	World	University	Rankings	and	the	Times	Higher	Education	World	University	Rankings.	As	Table	1	below	shows,	only	4	of	the	top	100	universities	(according	to	the	QS	World	
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
500 5000 50000
Percentage	labour	forrce	with	tertiary	educationGDP	per	capita	2012	(PPP	USD,	current	prices)
<<<PAGE=17>>>
15	
University	Rankings)	or	2	(according	to	the	Times	Higher	Education	World	University	Rankings)	are	located	in	a	developing	country,	namely,	China.5	Table	1:	The	most	represented	countries	in	two	top-100	world	university	rankings	Countries	 QS	World	Universities	Rankings	2016-2017	 Times	Higher	Education	World	University	Rankings		2016-2017	United	States	 32	 41	United	Kingdom	 18	 12	Germany	 4	 9	The	Netherlands	 2	 8	Australia	 6	 6	Japan	 5	 2	Canada	 4	 3	China	 4	 2	Hong	Kong	 4	 3	Source:	Bridgestock	2016		Economics	is	one	discipline	widely	regarded	as	critical	for	evidence-based	policy	making.	A	qualitative	comparison	between	Australia	and	PNG	is	useful	in	this	context.	There	is	only	one	university	where	students	can	study	economics	in	PNG,	namely	the	University	of	Papua	New	Guinea	(UPNG).	In	Australia,	there	are	dozens.	At	UPNG,	in	2014,	there	were	only	two	lecturers	in	the	Economics	Division.	The	situation	has	
																																																								5	While	Hong	Kong	is	part	of	China,	it	still	functions	separately,	and	certainly	in	this	context	is	best	thought	of	as	a	developed	economy,	rather	than	as	part	of	a	larger	developing	country.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
16	
improved	slightly	since	then	due	to	the	provision	of	visiting	lecturers	from	The	Australian	National	University	(ANU)	(with	funding	from	the	Australian	aid	program),	but	at	the	time	of	writing	there	are	only	four	lecturers	in	the	Economics	Division.	Any	one	of	the	dozens	of	universities	teaching	economics	in	Australia	would	have	a	stronger	faculty.	Little	research	is	carried	out	by	the	UPNG	Economics	Division,	though	again	there	has	been	some	improvement	in	recent	years	as	a	result	of	the	ANU	partnership.	Of	course,	universities	are	not	the	only	place	where	economic	or	policy-related	research	is	carried	out.	Papua	New	Guinea	is	fortunate	to	have	two	think	tanks,	the	National	Research	Institute	(NRI),	which	is	government	funded,	and	the	Institute	of	National	Affairs	(INA),	which	is	funded	by	the	private	sector.	Both	the	NRI	and	INA	make	a	valuable	contribution	to	economic	research	in	PNG.	But	they	are	relatively	small	institutions,	and	thinly	stretched.	Australia	has	a	much	more	robust	network	of	think	tanks,	both	government-funded,	such	as	the	Productivity	Commission,	and	non-government-funded,	such	as	the	Grattan	Institute,	the	Centre	for	Independent	Studies,	and	the	Australia	Institute,	to	name	only	a	few.	The	limitations	pointed	to	in	this	section	not	only	act	as	constraints	to	the	supply	of	evidence	for	policy-making	in	developing	countries.	They	also	limit	contestability:	the	ability	of	think	tanks	and	universities	to	question	official	wisdom,	and	suggest	an	alternative	narrative.	This	in	turn	leads	to	a	greater	prospect	of	policy	capture	of	the	dominant	public	sector	institutions,	such	as	The	Treasury	and	the	Central	Bank,	and	an	increased	likelihood	that	evidence,	even	if	it	is	available	to	support	an	alternative	policy	position,	will	be	ignored	if	it	is	politically	inconvenient.	PNG	has	recently	seen	major	changes	in	its	exchange	rate	regime	away	from	a	floating	towards	a	fixed	exchange	rate	(IMF	2016).	This	has	not	gone	unnoticed,	but	nor	has	it	been	accompanied	by	the	sort	of	lively	debate	one	would	expect	if	a	similar	seismic	shift	in	economic	policy	occurred	in,	say,	Australia.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
17	
Foreign	aid	So	far	we	have	considered	various	disadvantages	that	developing	countries	have	to	contend	with	in	relation	to	pursuing	the	desideratum	of	evidence-based	policy	making.	But	developing	countries	also	have	an	advantage.	They	receive	foreign	aid,	and	much	foreign	aid	is	intended	to	help	with	better	policy	making.	To	what	extent	does	this	actually	compensate	for	the	other	difficulties?	Foreign	aid	is	still	significant	for	low	income	and,	to	a	lesser	extent,	lower-middle	income	countries.	In	2012,	low	income	countries	on	average	received	aid	worth	9.9	per	cent	of	their	GDP.	Lower-middle	income	countries	received	aid	worth	on	average	0.8	per	cent	of	their	GDP.	For	upper-middle	income	countries,	however,	the	ratio	was	only	0.1	per	cent.	Developed	countries	receive	no	aid,	though	they	do	occasionally	receive	international	assistance	following	disasters	and	financial	crises.	PNG	receives	foreign	aid	worth	about	5	per	cent	of	its	GDP.	We	can	certainly	conclude	that	aid	is	a	significant	volume	of	funds	for	the	poorer	of	the	developing	countries,	though	it	also	needs	to	be	recalled	that	most	of	the	world’s	countries	are	nowadays	middle	rather	than	low	income.		Aid	is	provided	for	a	whole	variety	of	reasons	and	causes.	Aid	is	given	as	disaster	relief,	food	aid,	budget	support	and	debt	relief.	Most	aid	is	given	to	fund	sectoral	projects,	whether	to	build	a	new	road,	or	to	strengthen	teacher	training.		Another	important	form	of	aid	is	technical	assistance	or	cooperation.	On	average,	about	one	quarter	of	all	aid	is	given	as	technical	assistance.	Australia	in	general	is	more	focused	on	technical	assistance	than	this.	At	times,	as	much	as	60	per	cent	of	Australian	aid	has	been	given	as	technical	assistance,	with	the	current	figure	sitting	around	40	per	cent.	Technical	assistance	is	itself	given	for	a	range	of	reasons,	but	in	general	it	is	given	to	strengthen	institutions	and	improve	policy	making.	Indeed,	technical	assistance	can	be	viewed	as	the	public	sector	equivalent	of	foreign	direct	investment.	Just	as	foreign	direct	investment	is	a	transfer	mechanism	by	which	developing	countries	can	access	advanced	industrial	technology,	so	technical	assistance	is	a	mechanism	by	which	developing	countries	can	access	developed-country	public-sector	processes	and
<<<PAGE=20>>>
18	
reforms.	Perhaps	the	most	typical	use	of	technical	assistance	is	the	provision	of	advisers	to	government	departments	to	improve	capacity	for	policy	reform	and	implementation.		Another	form	of	aid	explicitly	directed	at	improving	policy	is	budget	support	given	on	the	basis	of	reform	conditions.	Less	than	ten	per	cent	of	aid	is	given	as	budget	support.	Evaluations	of	budget	support	vary	widely,	but	the	more	positive	ones	claim	only	a	modest	role	for	it	(Mosley	et	al.	1995).	To	what	extent	is	aid	able	to	compensate	for	the	disadvantages	that	developing	countries	face?	Some	claim	that	aid	in	fact	is	a	negative	for	the	countries	that	receive	it.	Angus	Deaton	among	others	claims	that	aid	undermines	institutions	(Deaton	2013).	Evidence	for	this	claim	is	limited	though,	and	in	fact	there	is	evidence	in	the	opposite	direction	(summarized	by	Wood,	2016).	While	it	seems	unreasonable	to	claim	that	aid	in	fact	makes	things	worse,	how	much	does	it	make	it	better?	There	are	certainly	positive	examples	of	policy	and	institutional	transfer.	One	of	them	is	provided	in	this	book:	income-contingent	loans.	However,	in	general,	the	track	record	of	using	aid	to	promote	reforms	is	limited	if	not	disappointing	(Andrews,	2013).		First,	reforms	are	determined	by	domestic	politics,	and	the	influence	of	outsiders,	even	cashed-up	outsiders,	is	normally	limited.	Second,	OECD	institutions	and	policies	may	not	in	general	be	appropriate	for	developing	countries.	The	practice	that	Evans	(2004)	refers	to	as	“institutional	monocropping”	may	be	sub-optimal.	Third,	even	when	countries	adopt	the	recommended	reforms,	the	adoption	might	be	only	skin	deep,	or	in	form	rather	than	substance.	Pritchett	et	al.	(2010)	highlight	the	phenomenon	of	“isomorphic	mimicry”	by	which	developing	countries	pretend	to	adopt	developed-country	reforms	to	keep	donors	happy,	but	in	which	their	underlying	institutions	in	fact	do	not	change.	The	World	Bank	(2017,	p.92)	shows	that	the	gap	between	formal	rules	and	actual	practice	is	greater	in	poorer	countries.	For	example,	many	developing	countries	have	adopted	anti-corruption	institutions	without	making	a	dent	on	the	level	of	national	corruption	(Kuria,	2016).
<<<PAGE=21>>>
19	
Fourth,	the	literature	recommends,	as	a	result	of	the	disappointments	associated	with	foreign	aid,	that	donors	promote	home-grown,	iterative	solutions	(Andrews	et	al.,	2017).	They	also	recommend	that	they	look	for	opportunities	for	politically-feasible,	incremental	reform—a	more	realistic	option	compared	to	seeking	wider-ranging	institutional	change	(The	Asia	Foundation	2011).	These	ideas	sound	promising,	but	they	also	suggest	that	the	role	of	aid	is	limited,	and	that	at	best	it	is	a	partial	rather	than	full	compensation	for	the	other	difficulties	developing	countries	face	in	implementing	evidence-based	policy.	The	history	of	aid	to	PNG	provides	a	rich	range	of	experiences	that	illuminate	the	limitations	of	aid	in	promoting	policy	and	institutional	reform.	An	interesting	example	is	the	National	Road	Authority	(NRA).	It	was	set	up	to	secure	funding	for	road	maintenance	with	much	encouragement	and	assistance	from	the	Asian	Development	Bank.	Since	its	creation	in	2003,	however,	the	NRA	has	never	been	funded	more	than	tokenistically.	A	miniscule	tax	of	0.04	Kina	(about	$A0.02)	per	litre	of	petrol	provides	next	to	no	funding	for	it	($AUD7	million	in	2014	or	1.5	per	cent	of	all	government	spending	on	road	maintenance	and	rehabilitation),	and	makes	it	impossible	for	it	to	play	anything	resembling	the	role	intended	for	it	(Dornan,	2014,	2016).		Another	interesting	example	is	the	Sovereign	Wealth	Fund	(SWF),	which	PNG	finally	established	in	2015	after	having	agreed	with	Australia	to	establish	it	in	2009	and	having	subsequently	received	considerable	assistance	to	do	so.	The	establishment	of	the	SWF	was	controversial,	and	PNG	took	so	long	to	set	it	up	that,	by	the	time	it	did,	its	resource	boom	was	well	and	truly	over.	Perhaps	the	SWF	will	be	of	assistance	as	a	savings	mechanism	next	time	the	country	has	a	resource	boom,	but	significant	questions	raised	about	its	design	(Osborne	2015)	make	even	this	uncertain.		A	more	positive	example	is	the	provincial	function	grants	mentioned	earlier.	This	scheme	was	also	established	with	Australian	assistance	and	encouragement.	The	increased	funds	that	have	flown	to	PNG’s	provinces	through	these	redesigned	grants	are	generally	reviewed	as	responsive	to	PNG’s	needs.	The	establishment	of	the	requisite	formulae	was	based	on	significant	domestic	input,	rather	than	a	simple	transplanting	of	best	practice	(ODE	2009).	Nevertheless,	even	for	this	positive	example,	there	is	the	risk	that	good	policy	will	be	trumped	by	institutional	change.	The	earlier-noted	shift	in
<<<PAGE=22>>>
20	
PNG’s	approach	to	decentralization,	with	its	much	greater	emphasis	on	districts	rather	than	provinces,	has	already	resulted	in	a	dwarfing	of	the	provincial	function	grants	by	new	district	grants,	and	raises	serious	questions	about	the	long-term	viability	of	the	provincial	grants.	Conclusion	An	environment	conducive	to	evidence-based	policy	making	is	one	in	which	there	are	strong	incentives	for	good	policies	to	be	adopted,	capable	institutions	to	implement	them,	a	wide	range	of	domains	within	which	good	policy	can	be	adopted,	and	a	ready	supply	of	well-developed	policy	proposals.	These	conditions	are	all	more	likely	to	exist	in	developed	than	developing	countries.	Developing	countries	on	the	other	hand	have	the	advantage	of	foreign	aid.	Much	foreign	aid	is	dedicated	to	the	purpose	of	facilitating	evidence-based	policy	making.	But	at	best	this	is	a	partial	compensation	for	the	other	problems	faced	by	developing	countries	in	striving	to	base	their	policies	more	firmly	on	sound	evidence.		This	is	not	a	counsel	for	despair.	One	of	the	most	important	stylised	facts	of	development	is	the	“growth	triangle”,	which	shows	that	while	developed	countries	grow	at	slow,	steady	rates	over	decades,	developing	countries	show	much	more	variation,	with	the	extent	of	variation	growing	the	poorer	the	countries	were	at	the	start	of	the	period	of	analysis	(Jones	&	Romer	2010).	Most	developing	countries	have	the	potential	for	rapid	growth	based	on	technological	catch-up,	but	only	some	of	them	are	able	to	realise	that	potential.	Those	that	do	realise	that	potential	are	in	general	those	with	good	institutions,	or	at	least	those	that	have	a	political	dynamic	that	supports	the	development	of	better	institutions.	As	they	develop,	the	constraints	around	evidence-based	policy	making	are	weakened,	their	institutions	improve	(or	were	already	good	enough	to	start	with),	their	economies	formalise,	widening	the	government’s	options,	and	they	have	more	funds	to	spend	on	universities	and	think	tank.	Clearly	not	all	countries	find	themselves	in	such	a	virtuous	circle.	Those	excluded	from	it	are	those	with	poor	institutions	and	without	a	political	dynamic	that	will	improve	institutional	quality	over	time.		Implementing	evidence-based	policy	making	is	a	tough	ask	in	such	countries.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
21	
While	this	paper	is	not	a	counsel	for	despair,	it	is	a	call	for	realism.	There	are	no	easy	answers,	and	evidence-based	policy	making	of	course	remains	an	admirable	aspiration.	It	just	may	be	a	long	way	away.		What	can	be	done	to	promote	evidence-based	policy	making	in	poor	countries	given	the	constraints	on	them?	One	promising	example	in	this	regard	is	the	African	Economic	Research	Consortium.	Jim	Adams,	former	World	Bank	Vice	President,	has	written	as	follows	concerning	the	AERC:	In	the	mid-1980s	when	the	call	for	structural	adjustment	was	at	its	peak	in	Africa,	a	clear	sense	emerged	that	too	much	of	the	debate	on	reform	and	adjustment	was	dominated	by	donors.	The	local	capacity	involved	was	both	too	small	and	of	limited	depth.	The	near	total	absence	of	solid	economic	analysis	emerging	from	within	the	continent	was	an	obvious	gap	requiring	action.	There	was	a	parallel	concern	about	the	quality	of	the	economic	training	within	the	region.	In	direct	response,	an	effort	was	led	by	a	number	of	donors	to	put	in	place	support	for	developing	a	network	of	qualified	policy-focused	economists.	Called	the	African	Economic	Research	Consortium	(AERC),	it	began	operations	in	1988.		From	its	initiation,	the	AERC	included	a	program	of	funding	and	training	young	economists	in	the	area	of	economic	policy,	with	a	strong	focus	on	quality	and	regular	workshops	to	exchange	ideas.	Today,	governments	across	Africa	see	AERC-funded	work	as	central	to	their	policy-making	processes.	They	are	no	longer	totally	dependent	on	outside	researchers	and	donors.	AERC	graduates	are	increasingly	taking	on	senior	policy	positions	across	Africa.	The	AERC	itself	has	expanded	from	the	original	three	countries	in	which	it	began	to	cover	the	entire	continent.	(Adams	2013)	Adams	concludes	that	‘The	AERC	model	can’t	be	directly	copied,	but	its	accumulation	of	25	years	of	successful	experience	does	provide	some	useful	guidance	for	…	donors	on	how	to	go	about	the	critical	task	of	building	the	economic	capacity	required	to	promote	and	sustain	economic	reform’	(Adams	2013).		While	economics	is	important,	one	might	reasonably	generalise	this	advice	to	cover	those	disciplines	relevant	to	public	policy	more	broadly,	including	political	science,	and
<<<PAGE=24>>>
22	
the	study	of	public	policy	itself.	If	we	want	more	evidence-based	policy	making	in	the	tropics,	donors	and	governments	alike	should	do	more	to	support	evidence-gatherers	by	investing	in	local	universities	and	think	tanks.			References	Acemoglu,	D	&	Robinson,	JA	2012,	Why	Nations	fail:	the	origins	of	power	prosperity	and	poverty,	Crown	Business,	New	York.			Adams,	J	2013,	‘Africa’s	economic	reform	experience:	lessons	for	the	Pacific’,	Devpolicy	blog,	<http://devpolicy.org/africas-economic-reform-experience-lessons-for-the-pacific-20131121/	Asian	Development	Bank	(ADB)	2014,	Pacific	economic	monitor:	Papua	New	Guinea	economic	and	labour	market	2014,	Asian	Development	Bank,	viewed	3	March	2017,		<	https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/42675/pacmonitor-addendum-jul2014.pdf>.	Andrews,	M	2013,	The	limits	of	institutional	reform	in	development,	Cambridge	University	Press,	New	York.		Andrews,	M,	Prichett,	L,	&	Woolcock,	M	2017,	Building	state	capability:	evidence,	analysis,	action,	Oxford	University	Press,	United	Kingdom	Australian	Institute	of	Health	and	Welfare	(AIHW)	2015,	‘Australia’s	welfare	2015:	Working	age	(25-64)’,	Australian	Institute	of	Health	and	Welfare,	viewed	2	March	2017,		<http://www.aihw.gov.au/australias-welfare/2015/working-age>.		Bastagli,	F,	Coady,	D,	&	Gupta,	S	2012,	‘Income	inequality	and	fiscal	policy’,	IMF	Staff	Discussion	Note,	International	Monetary	Fund,	viewed	22	February	2017,	<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2012/sdn1208.pdf>.	Australian	Government	2015,	Re:think:	better	tax,	better	Australia,	Tax	Discussion	Paper,	Australian	Government,	<	http://bettertax.gov.au/files/2015/03/TWP_combined-online.pdf>.			Bridgestock,	L	2016,	‘World	university	rankings	2016-2017:	QS	vs	Times	Higher	Education’,	QS	Top	Universities,	<https://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/world-university-rankings/2016-2017-qs-vs-times-higher-education>.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
23	
	Campos,	N,	Dimova,	R,	&	Ahmad,	S	2016	‘Corruption	and	economic	growth:	an	econometric	survey	of	the	evidence’,	Journal	of	Institutional	and	Theoretical	Economics,	172(3):	521-543.	Deaton,	A	2013,	The	great	escape:	health,	wealth,	and	origins	of	inequality,	Princeton	University	Press,	New	Jersey.		Dornan,	M	2014,	‘Road	management	in	Papua	New	Guinea	(part	2):	the	road	fund	and	National	Road	Authority’,	Devpolicy	blog,	<	http://devpolicy.org/road-management-in-papua-new-guinea-part-2-the-road-fund-and-national-road-authority-20140905/>.		Dornan,	M	2016,	‘The	political	economy	of	road	management	reform:	Papua	New	Guinea's	National	Road	Fund’,	Asia	and	the	Pacific	Policy	Studies,	vol.	3,	no.	3,	pages	443–457	<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1002/app5.142/full>.			Duflo,	E	&	Kremer,	M	2008,	‘Use	of	randomization	in	the	evaluation	of	development	effectiveness’,	in	W	Easterly	(ed.),	Reinventing	foreign	aid,	The	MIT	Press,	Cambridge,	Massachusetts.	Evans,	P	2004,	‘Development	as	institutional	change:	the	pitfalls	of	monocropping	and	the	potentials	of	deliberation,’	Studies	in	Comparative	International	Development,	vol.	38,	no.	4,	pp.	30-52,	ILO	2015,	‘Transitioning	to	formality	in	the	rural	informal	economy’,	Decent	Work	in	the	Rural	Economy	Policy	Guidance	Notes,	ILO,	<http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/economic-and-social-development/rural-development/WCMS_437189/lang--en/index.htm>		IMF	2016	Papua	New	Guinea:	2016	Article	IV	Consultation,	IMF	Country	Report	No.	17/22.		Jones,	CI	&	Romer,	PM	2010,	‘The	new	Kaldor	facts:	ideas,	institutions,	populations	and	human	capital’,	American	Economic	Journal:	Macroeconomics,	vol.2,	no.	1,	pp.	224-245.		Mosley,	P,	Harrigan,	J	&	Toye	J	1995	Aid	and	power,	Vol.	1,	2nd	edition.	Routledge.	Khan,	M	2004,	“Corruption,	governance	and	economic	development”	in	Jomo,	K.S.	&	Fine,	B.	(eds.)	The	new	development	economics,	Zed	Press.	Kuria,	M	2012	‘Why	do	anti-corruption	agencies	fail?’,	The	FPCA	Blog,	November	13	<http://www.fcpablog.com/blog/2012/11/13/why-do-anti-corruption-agencies-fail.html>		North,	DC	1990,	Institutions,	Institutional	Change,	and	Economic	Performance,	Cambridge	University	Press,	United	Kingdom.
<<<PAGE=26>>>
24	
Office	of	Development	Effectiveness	(ODE)	2009,	AusAid	support	to	service	delivery	financing	reform	in	Papua	New	Guinea,	The	Office	of	Development	Effectiveness,	Australia's	aid	program,	Federal	Government	of	Australia,	Canberra.		Osborne,	D	2015,	‘Review	of	the	legislation	establishing	the	Sovereign	Wealth	Fund	in	Papua	New	Guinea’,	Issues	Papares,	no.	16,	The	Nation	Research	Institute,	<https://pngnri.org/portfolio/review-of-the-legislation-establishing-the-sovereign-wealth-fund-in-papua-new-guinea/>.		Pritchett,	L,	Woolcock,	M	&	Andrews,	M	2010,	‘Capability	traps?	The	mechanisms	of	persistent	implementation	failure’,	Working	Papers,	no.	234,	Centre	for	Global	Development,	viewed	2	March	2017,	<https://www.cgdev.org/publication/capability-traps-mechanisms-persistent-implementation-failure-working-paper-234>.	Productivity	Commission	2009,	Strengthening	evidence-based	policy	in	the	Australian	Federation,	Roundtable	Proceedings,	Volume	2,	Background	paper,	Australian	Government,	Canberra.		<http://www.pc.gov.au/research/supporting/strengthening-evidence>			Rodrik,	D	2008,	‘Second-best	institutions’,	American	Economic	Review,	vol.	98,	no2,		pp.	100	–	104,	<http://drodrik.scholar.harvard.edu/files/dani-rodrik/files/second-best-institutions.pdf>.		Sause,	L	2008	Policy	advisory	capability	in	Papua	New	Guinea’s	central	government:	evaluation,	implications	and	lessons,	PhD	thesis,	Victoria	University	of	Wellington.		The	Asia	Foundation	2011,	Built	on	dreams	grounded	in	reality:	economic	policy	reform	in	the	Philippines,	The	Asia	Foundation,	viewed	2	March	2017,		<https://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/FRONT.pdf	>	Universities	Australia	2015,	Higher	education	and	research:	facts	and	figures,	Universities	Australia,	viewed	3	March	2017,		<https://www.universitiesaustralia.edu.au/ArticleDocuments/169/UA%20Higher%20Education%20and%20Research%20Facts%20and%20Figures%20November%202015.PDF.aspx>.	Wood,	T.	2016,	‘Comment’,	Devpolicy	Blog,	Development	Policy	Centre,	<http://devpolicy.org/in-brief/fortnightly-links-deatons-nobel-canada-votes-global-poverty-guesstimates-and-more-20151023/#comment-512089	>.	World	Bank	2017	Governance	and	the	law:	World	Development	Report	2017,	World	Bank	Group.