<<<PAGE=1>>>
Multidiscip. Rev. (2024) 7:e20240170 
 
Received: February 19, 2024 | Accepted: April 14, 2024  
 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
Published Online: May 10, 2024 
https://doi.org/10.31893/multirev.2024170  
 
      
 
Exploring competency: Corporate framework, 
learning theories, and a cognitive development 
model 
 
 
 
Anuj Jajooa   | Pooja Deshmukha  
 
 
  
aMGM Institute of Management & Research, Aurangabad, India.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. The meaning of Competency 
 
Hoffmann (Hoffmann, 1999) classifies individual competencies into the following two categories: 
i. Output-based competencies: These competencies are typically applied to straightforward job roles, focusing on 
performance and standards. Performance refers to the expected behaviors for efficient job execution, serving as evidence of 
competency, while standards define the quality of performance. 
ii. Input-based competencies: These are commonly utilized for diverse job profiles, focusing on individual 
characteristics and job demands. Individual characteristics define job competency based on an individual's traits, contributing 
to effective job performance, while job demands articulate specific job requirements based on environmental factors. 
Competency is a combination of knowledge, skills, and behaviors that are required for success in a particular role or 
industry. (Society for Human Resource Management, 2023). 
 
1.2. Corporate Competency Framework 
 
A learning organization, in business management, is an organization that continuously facilitates the competency 
development of its employees (Pedler et al., 1997). Organizations establish a competency framework (Ali, 2021) as a 
structured approach to defining and organizing the competencies required for addressing business needs effectively in 
various roles within the organization. The following is a typical corporate competency framework (Figure 1). 
This framework categorizes organizational competencies into clusters, such as functional, personal effectiveness, 
technical, management, and academic competencies (Building Blocks for Competency Models, n.d.). 
There are two types of role competencies (IAEA, n.d.): 
Abstract This review paper delves into the cognitive aspects of corporate learning and competency development, focusing 
on various theories and models explaining neurocognitive and  behavioral psychology. This paper explores “Maslow's 
hierarchy of needs”, “Affective, Behavioral, and Cognitive (ABC) Model of Attitude”, “Expectancy Value Theory”, “NLP 
Communication Model”, “Social Cognitive Learning Theory”, “Knowles' theory of Andrago gy”, “NLP Neurological Levels”, 
“Theory of Planned Behavior”, "Cognitive Load Theory", "Cognitive Learning Principles Underlying the 5E Model", and 
"Constructivism Theory". While these theories individually address specific aspects of human behavior, they have 
limitations in their individual scope when applied to the corporate competency development process. This paper 
constructs the "Cognitive Competency Development Model (CCDM)", which integrates the examined theories and models, 
providing a cohesive fram ework for understanding competency development within organizations. This paper briefly 
discusses the meaning of competency and a typical competency development framework used by corporates.  The CCDM 
emphasizes the multifaceted nature of competency development. It considers the intricate interplay of individual, social, 
and environmental factors in shaping competency development. It begins with the mental filtering of learning stimuli by 
various expectancies, neurological factors, and hierarchies of needs. This filtered information forms a perception and 
knowledge construct, leading to competency development. Competency may affect attitudes and intentions, resulting in 
behavioral change and better performance at work.  The paper concludes by highlighting the potential of the model to 
inform the design of more effective learning and development interventions. By understanding how the brain influences 
learning and development, organizations can improve their training programs and create a culture of continuous learning. 
 
Keywords: learning and development, behavioral psychology, corporate training effectiveness, cognitive competency 
structure
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
i. Core: These competencies contribute to the organization's differential advantage (for example, teamwork, decision 
making, problem solving, and adaptability). 
ii. Functional: These competencies are the professional ones necessary for quality outcomes (for example, data 
analysis, engineering, programming, accounting) 
Each competency is defined with an expertise level. For instance, leadership competency for a managerial role 
requires a greater expertise level than that of a junior role. 
The learning and development (L&D) unit is responsible for assessing competency gaps and designing development 
programs. Behavioral psychology plays an important role in the competency development process. This paper reviews several 
popular psychological theories and models in the Literature Review section. While these theories individually address specific 
aspects of human behavior, they have limitations in their individual scope when applied to the corporate competency 
development process. In response, the paper introduces the "Cognitive Competency Development Model", which integrates 
the examined theories and models, providing a cohesive framework for understanding competency development. 
 
 
Figure 1 Corporate Competency Framework. 
 
2. Literature Review 
 
In this section, popular behavioral psychology theories and models are reviewed and critically evaluated from the 
corporate competency development perspective. 
 
2.1. Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow, 1954) 
 
This theory proposes that people are motivated to fulfill certain needs in a hierarchical order. These needs range from 
basic physiological needs to higher-level needs such as self-actualization (Figure 2). 
The present status of employees in the hierarchy of needs can influence their sense of purpose behind developing a 
competency. When employees’ lower-level needs, such as physiological needs and safety needs, are met within the 
workplace, they can focus on next-level needs such as self-actualization, esteem, and belongingness. As they progress up the 
hierarchy, their sense of purpose may shift from fulfilling basic needs to seeking personal growth, fulfilling, and contributing 
to something greater than themselves. 
 
 
Figure 2 Hierarchy of needs with purpose and competency. 
2.1.1. Strength(s) 
 
The hierarchy of needs provides a holistic framework for understanding employee motivation and behavior, which can 
be valuable for designing corporate learning programs that address diverse needs.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
2.1.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Limited Predictive Power: The theory's hierarchical nature may not always accurately predict or explain the diverse and 
dynamic motivations of employees in a corporate setting. 
 
2.2. ABC (affective, behavioral, and cognitive) model of attitude (Rosenberg & Hovland, 1960) 
 
This psychological framework posits that attitudes are composed of three key components (Figure 3): 
 
 
Figure 3 ABC model block diagram. 
 
i. Affective component: This deals with the emotional aspect of an attitude. It encompasses a person's emotions or 
feelings toward an object, person, issue, or event. 
ii. Behavioral component: This component focuses on how a person acts or behaves in relation to an attitude object. It 
refers to the actions or intended actions a person takes regarding the attitude object. 
iii. Cognitive component: This relates to an individual's beliefs, thoughts, and knowledge about an attitude object. It 
encompasses the person's understanding and beliefs about the object. 
According to the ABC model, these three components are interconnected and influence each other on the occurrence 
of a stimulus. 
 
2.2.1. Strength(s) 
 
Predictive ability: Predictive ability aids in predicting and comprehending human behavior based on attitudes, as it 
takes into account the interplay between thoughts, emotions, and actions. 
2.2.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Lack of specificity: The model does not encompass the specific conditions or contexts that may influence the 
relationships between the components of attitudes. 
 
2.3. Expectancy Value Theory (Vroom, 1964) 
 
This theory proposes a psychological concept that explains the driving forces behind decision-making (Figure 4). It 
posits that an individual's motivation to undertake a specific action is influenced by the following two factors: 
i. Expectancy: This is the anticipation of achieving a desired outcome. According to this theory, people are inclined to 
act in a certain manner if they believe that their endeavors will yield the intended outcome. 
ii. Value: the significance attached to that outcome, i.e., when they perceive that outcome as valuable. The value can 
be external (e.g., financial, career) or internal (e.g., happiness, contentment). 
 
 
Figure 4 Expectancy value theory block diagram.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
2.3.1. Strength(s) 
 
Predictive power: The theory has been found to effectively predict and explain individuals' motivation and decision-
making in various contexts, including corporate training. 
Practical applications: This study can help educators understand and enhance students' motivation. 
Individual differences: The theory acknowledges and accounts for individual differences in how people perceive the 
likelihood of achieving outcomes and the value they place on those outcomes. 
 
2.3.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Simplification: The theory oversimplifies the complexity of human motivation and decision-making by reducing them 
to the expectancy and value components, potentially overlooking other important factors such as environmental factors and 
their effects on motivation and behavior, as it primarily focuses on individual beliefs and values. 
Measurement challenges: It can be challenging to accurately measure and quantify individuals' expectations and 
values. 
 
2.4. NLP Model of Communication (Bandler & Grinder, 1975) 
 
This framework describes how individuals perceive and process information and how this influences their behavior 
and communication. The neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) communication model, as illustrated in Figure 5, introduces the 
idea of mental filters. External world information passes through various filters, such as memory, decisions, beliefs and 
values, metaprograms, strategies, and attitudes. These filters cause deletion, distortion, and generalization of the 
information, resulting in the shaping of perception/internal representations. An individual's state of mind is a blend of 
cognition, emotions, and physiological conditions. Eventually, behavioral reactions are generated. 
 
 
Figure 5 NLP communication model. 
 
2.4.1. Strength(s) 
 
The NLP communication model provides valuable insights into mental filtering and the generation of perceptions. This 
can be leveraged to enhance corporate learning effectiveness. 
 
2.4.2. Limitation(s) 
 
This model is criticized for the lack of empirical evidence, controversial aspects, and potential overemphasis on 
techniques when utilizing the model in practice. 
 
2.5. Social Cognitive Learning Theory (SCLT)  (Bandura, 1977) 
 
SCLT posits that individuals acquire behaviors from models (others) through the processes of observing, mirroring, and 
modeling in three ways: 
i. By observing the behavior of live people (live modeling). 
ii. By acquiring a behavior from the verbal depiction of a behavior (Verbal instructional modeling). 
iii. By observing the conduct of fictional characters in the literature or movies (symbolic modeling).
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
 
Figure 6 SCLT block diagram. 
 
Bandura suggested that environmental factors, cognitive factors, and behavior are interconnected and mutually 
influential (Figure 6). Cognitive components encompass characteristics, beliefs, personality traits, and expectations. The 
environmental factors represent the circumstances that supply stimuli, whether rewarding or punishing. Behavior 
encompasses all actions undertaken by individuals within their environment. As a result of environmental and social factors, 
the actions that receive rewards are more likely to be replicated, while those that are punished are more likely to be 
discontinued. Bandura also emphasized the significance of the individual's mental state in the learning process. 
 
2.5.1. Strength(s) 
 
Observational Learning: Learning through observation and modeling can be valuable for employees to learn from 
successful peers or mentors, leading to improved competency development. 
Environmental factor: The theory emphasizes the effect of environmental factors. Factors such as organizational 
culture and leadership style can encourage the development of competencies. 
Cognitive Factors: According to Bandura, self-efficacy beliefs play a crucial role in determining how people think, feel, 
motivate themselves, and act. These beliefs influence individuals' choice of activities, effort, persistence, resilience to 
adversity, and level of performance. 
 
2.5.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Bandura's theory provides broader influencers; however, this theory has to be studied in combination with other 
theories to understand influencers at the micro level. 
 
2.6. Knowles’ theory of Andragogy (Knowles, 1984) 
 
This theory emphasizes the distinct characteristics of adult learners and how they differ from child learners. The 
following are the fundamental Andragogy principles: 
i. Self-concept: Adults perceive themselves as responsible for their own decisions and are motivated to learn when 
they see the learning as relevant to their goals. Involve them in planning their learning. 
ii. Experience: Adults bring a wealth of experience to the learning environment. They prefer learning activities that 
build on their existing knowledge and life experiences. 
iii. Readiness to learn: Adults are typically ready to learn when they believe that knowledge or skills will help them 
perform tasks or solve problems they encounter in their lives. 
iv. Orientation to learning: Adults are more task-oriented and prefer problem-centered rather than subject-centered 
learning. 
v. Motivation: Adults are motivated to learn by internal factors such as self-esteem, social status, and quality of life. 
They are motivated by the purpose behind the learning. They are less motivated by external factors such as grades or 
approval. 
 
2.6.1. Strength(s) 
 
Relevance: Andragogy emphasizes the importance of making learning relevant to adult learners' goals and 
experiences, which can enhance the effectiveness of corporate training programs. 
Experience Integration: The theory encourages the integration of adults' existing knowledge and experiences into the 
learning process, making the learning more practical and applicable to their work.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
2.6.2. Limitation(s)  
The theory's assumptions about adult learners may not universally apply to all adults, as individual learning 
preferences and motivations can vary widely. 
 
2.7. NLP Neurological Levels (Dilts, 1990) 
 
This model, developed by Robert Dilts, offers a framework for understanding and addressing different levels of 
experience and change within an individual or a system (Figure 7). 
 
 
Figure 7 NLP neurological levels. 
 
Robert Dilts suggests that creating change at a higher level in the hierarchy can lead to more profound and lasting 
change at lower levels. For instance, altering a person's beliefs and values can result in changes in behavior and 
competencies. This model is commonly utilized in coaching, therapy, and personal development to help individuals 
comprehend and address issues at different levels of experience. 
 
2.7.1. Strength(s) 
 
Holistic Understanding: The model provides a holistic framework for understanding individuals, allowing corporate 
trainers to address learning and development at multiple levels simultaneously. 
Alignment with Organizational Goals: The model can help ensure that individual learning and development efforts 
align with the broader goals and values of the organization. 
Personalized Development: This allows for a personalized approach to employee development, recognizing that 
change and growth occur at different levels for different individuals. 
 
2.7.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Time-consuming: Addressing change at multiple levels may require more time, resources, and expertise, which may 
not be present in all the training. 
Subjectivity: Assessing and addressing beliefs, values, and identity can be subjective and may vary greatly from person 
to person, making it challenging to create standardized learning programs. 
 
2.8. Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) (Ajzen, 1991) 
 
According to this psychological theory, an individual's intention to engage in a behavior is the primary determinant of 
whether the behavior will be performed. Intention is influenced by three key factors (Figure 8): 
i. Attitude toward the behavior: This encompasses the individual's positive or negative assessment of the behavior, 
including beliefs about the outcomes of the behavior and the value placed on those outcomes. 
ii. Subjective norms: This reflects the perceived social pressure to perform or not perform the behavior, including the 
influence of significant others and the person's drive to adhere to these influences. 
iii. Perceived behavioral control: This represents the individual's perception of the simplicity or complexity regarding the 
execution of the behavior, including beliefs about personal capabilities and the presence of facilitating or inhibiting factors. 
 
2.8.1. Strength(s) 
 
Predictive power: The theory can help organizations predict and understand employee behavior, allowing them to 
design training programs and interventions that are more likely to be effective.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
Focus on intention: The theory encourages organizations to address the factors that influence employees' willingness 
to engage in learning and development activities. 
 
2.8.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Complex Determinants: The model's reliance on attitudes, perceived behavioral control, and subjective norms may 
oversimplify the multitude of factors that can influence employee behavior. A broader range of internal and external factors 
can impact learning and development initiatives. 
 
 
Figure 8 TPB block diagram. 
 
2.9. Cognitive Load Theory 
 
The article on 'Neurophysiological Basis of Memory' (Camina & Güell, 2017) explores different types of human brain 
memory, as illustrated in Figure 9. The sensory memory stores information for a very short time. Short-term working memory 
allows the processing of information for a short period. Long-term memory allows the storage of information for long periods 
of time. It can be further divided into explicit memory, which we can consciously recall, and implicit memory (unconscious 
competence), which we cannot consciously recall. 
Working memory has limited capacity for processing the information received. When the received information 
exceeds the processing capacity, cognitive overload occurs, which affects the learning and retention of the information. There 
are 3 types of cognitive load. An intrinsic load is caused by the complex nature of the information. The extrinsic load is caused 
by unnecessary clutter along with the information. A germane load is essential for learning because it leads to neural 
connections (Sweller, 2019). 
 
 
Figure 9 Memory and cognitive load block diagram. 
 
2.9.1. Strength(s) 
 
The study of long-term memory creation is essential for corporate competency development. 
The understanding of cognitive load helps in optimizing it with better instructional design. 
 
2.9.2. Limitation(s) 
 
The article does not directly delve into competency development; however, it helps in forming the basis for other 
explanations. 
 
2.10. The cognitive learning principles underlying the 5E Model (Ruiz-Martín & Bybee , 2022) 
 
This theory posits a possible link between cognitive science principles and the theoretical framework of the 5E Model. 
Figure 10 provides a summary of the 5E phases, the activities to be facilitated, and the underlying cognitive processes as 
explained in the article.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
 
Figure 10 5E Model – stages, activities, and cognitive processes. 
 
2.10.1. Strength(s) 
 
Engagement and active learning: The 5E model's hands-on approach promotes participation and keeps learners 
actively involved in the learning process. This can be particularly impactful in corporate settings where traditional training 
methods may feel passive or monotonous. 
Constructivist learning: The model aligns with constructivist learning theory, encouraging individuals to build their 
understanding based on existing knowledge and experience. A schema (mental framework) becomes the basis for teaching, 
learning tools, and instructional design (Maj, 2022). This helps in developing a personalized approach for adult learners with 
diverse backgrounds and knowledge levels compared to a one-size-fits-all training approach. 
 
2.10.2. Limitation(s) 
 
Adapting to diverse needs: While the model offers flexibility, tailoring it to different competency levels, learning styles, 
and specific needs of a diverse workforce can be complex. 
 
3. Cognitive Competency Development Model (CCDM) for Corporate Employees 
 
The current theories and models each emphasize a specific aspect of how learners process information. Constructivism 
theory posits that the human brain constructs knowledge when it encounters new information (Steve , 2015). Upon studying 
various teaching-learning models and theories, a new model called the Cognitive Competency Development Model emerged. 
The CCDM (Figure 11) represents a comprehensive integration of the theories and models reviewed in the literature review 
section. 
 
Figure 11 CCDM block diagram.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
Learning stimuli: Employees receive learning inputs from various formal and informal channels, including formal 
training from L&D, coaching/mentoring, self-learning, and social learning. Employees also learn behavior by way of modeling 
(Bandura, 1977). Experiences, including learning from mistakes, serve as a foundation for adult learning (Knowles, 1984). 
Mental Filter and Perception: Stimuli are received in sensory memory. According to the NLP communication model 
(Bandler & Grinder, 1975), all sensory inputs and internal thoughts undergo a mental filtering process (in short-term 
memory), leading to cognitive interpretations that ultimately shape an individual's perception of the new information. 
Emotions, when triggered during this process, have a greater impact on memory formation. (Kahneman, 2011) 
The perception facilitates the knowledge construct, which goes to long-term memory and becomes part of the 
competency. 
At the neurological level (Dilts, 1990), higher-order factors, namely, purpose, identity, values, and beliefs, significantly 
influence competency development. The transformation of learning inputs into competency development is influenced by 
these higher-order neurological factors as follows: 
i. Motivation of learning (Purpose): The hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1954) can influence an employee's sense of 
purpose by shaping their motivations and aspirations as they progress through the different levels of the hierarchy, ultimately 
impacting their approach to competency development within the organizational context. 
Issues or difficulties at work can also motivate employees to learn in order overcome them. According to Knowles’ 
theory of Andragogy (Knowles, 1984), adults are typically ready to learn when they believe that knowledge or skills will help 
them perform tasks or solve problems. 
ii. Support Expectancy (Identity): Learners may consider how much social support they will receive for a behavior 
(Ajzen, 1991). When employees believe that they have the support of their colleagues, supervisors, and the organizational 
culture, it can positively influence their sense of self within the corporate environment. This support can contribute to a 
stronger sense of identity, confidence, and belonging, which are essential for their competency development. Identity, as a 
higher-order neurological factor, has a profound influence on beliefs, values, and, in turn, competency development (Dilts, 
1990). For instance, when a newly promoted supervisor adopts the identity associated with their new role, it leads to the 
formation of new beliefs and values which support the learning and development of the necessary managerial skills. 
iii. Performance, Control and Value expectancy (Beliefs and values): This encompasses learners’ anticipation of 
performance success, perceived behavior control, and perceived value of the performance reward for them (Vroom, 1964). 
iv. Competency (Capability): Competency in the corporate context is the ability to perform a task or achieve a goal 
effectively. It is a combination of knowledge, skills, and behaviors that are essential for success in a particular role or industry. 
v. Behavior: Competency translates into behavior when attitudes and intentions are aligned with it, as described in the 
theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991). Additionally, subjective norms (social factors) and perceived behavior control 
(belief) also contribute to creating intention for a behavior. Attitudes include all 3 types—affective, behavioral, and 
cognitive—as listed under the ABC model (Rosenberg & Hovland, 1960). The state of mind affects attitudes (Bandura, 1977). 
vi. Environment: The organization culture, leadership style, contextual factors, etc., form the environment where the 
employees execute behavior. Feedback, whether in the form of reward or punishment, from social and environmental 
factors, influences the likelihood of behavior being repeated or discontinued (Bandura, 1977). 
Competency development is an ongoing process that requires employees to continuously acquire new knowledge, 
skills, and attitudes to remain effective in their roles. 
 
4. Final considerations 
 
In conclusion, the exploration of the cognitive aspects of corporate learning and development through the study of 
various theories and models has provided valuable insights into the competency development process within organizations. 
The review of various teaching learning models and theories reveal both, the strengths and limitations of each 
individual theory in addressing the complexities of corporate competency development. 
The culmination of this review led to the development of the CCDM, which represents a comprehensive integration of 
the various theories and models examined. This model emphasizes the multifaceted nature of competency development, 
acknowledging the influence of learning inputs, mental filtering, perception formation, knowledge constructs, higher-order 
neurological factors, attitudes, intentions, behavior, and the environment on employee competency development within the 
organizational context. 
It is evident that competency development is an ongoing process that necessitates the continuous acquisition of new 
skills, knowledge, and abilities to ensure the effectiveness of employees in their respective roles. The 'cognitive competency 
development model' serves as a valuable framework for understanding and facilitating this ongoing process, providing a 
holistic perspective that considers the intricate interplay of individual, social, and environmental factors in shaping 
competency development within organizations. 
Moving forward, this model can be used to design effective learning and development approaches for competency 
development and cultivate organizational cultures that are conducive to behavioral transformation to support the corporate 
competency framework. This can help employees grow and succeed in today's rapid-paced world of business.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
10 
 
  
 
Jajoo and Deshmukh (2024) 
www.jabbnet.com 
https://www.malque.pub/ojs/index.php/mr  
5. Scope for Further Research 
 
Competency development is a multifaceted area of study. The cognitive competency development model, while built 
upon existing theories and models, would benefit from further empirical enhancements. The following suggestions outline 
potential avenues for future research. Every individual is unique. Deeper understanding of these individual differences can 
help tailor learning and development initiatives to better meet the diverse needs of employees. 
 
Ethical considerations 
 
Not applicable. 
 
Conflict of interest 
 
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 
 
Funding 
 
The authors declare that they have no funding. 
 
References 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes . doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0749 -5978(91)90020-
T 
Ali, M. M. (2021). Competency Framework Development for Effective Human Resource Management. SAGE Open . 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440211006124  
Bandler, R., & Grinder, J. (1975). The Structure of Magic I: A Boo k about Language and Therapy.  Palo Alto, California: Science and Behaviour Books.  
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory (pp. 16 -55). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall. 
Building Blocks for Competency Models.  (n.d.). Retrieved February 18, 2024, from U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration: 
http://www.melvinhenry.org/generic -model.pdf 
Camina, E., & Güell, F. (2017, June 30). The Neuroanatomical, Neurophysiological and Psychological Basis of Memory: Current M odels and Their Orig ins. 
8(438). doi:https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2017.00438  
Dilts, R. (1990). Neurological Levels. Capitola, CA: Meta Publications.  
Hoffmann, T. (1999). The meanings of competency. Journal of european industrial training.   
IAEA. (n.d.). The Competency Framew ork- A guide for IAEA managers and staff.  Retrieved from International Atomic Energy Agency: 
https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/18/03/competency -framework.pdf 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow.  USA: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.  
Knowles, M. (1984). Andragogy in Action: Applying Modern Principles of Learning.  San Francisco: Jossey Bass.  
Maj, S. P. (2022). A Practical New 21st Century Learning Theory for Significantly Improving STEM Learning Outcomes at all Edu cational Levels. Eurasia Journal 
of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 8 (2). doi:https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/11510  
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York: Harper and Row.  
Pedler, M., Burgogyne, J., & Boydell, T. (1997). The Learning Company: A strategy for  sustainable development (2nd ed.). London: McGraw -Hill. 
Rosenberg, M. J., & Hovland, C. I. (1960). Attitude organization and change: An analysis of consisfency among attitude components.  New Haven: CT Yale 
University Press. 
Ruiz-Martín, H., & Bybee , R. ( 2022, March 03). The cognitive principles of learning underlying the 5E Model of Instruction. IJ STEM Ed 9 . 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594 -022-00337-z 
Society for Human Resource Management. (2023). Competencies: The Key to HR Success . Retrieved from So ciety for Human Resource Management: 
https://www.shrm.org/hrcompetencies  
Steve , B. O. (2015, December). Constructivism Learning Theory: A Paradigm for Teaching and Learning. IOSR Journal of Research & Method in Education, 
5(6), 66-70. 
Sweller, J. v. (2019 , January 22). Cognitive Architecture and Instructional Design: 20 Years Later. Educational Psychology Review, 31 , 261 –292. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648 -019-09465-5 
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.