<<<PAGE=1>>>
Johnston-Goodstar, K. (2012). Decolonizing evaluation: The necessity of evaluation advi-
sory groups in Indigenous evaluation. In R. VeLure Roholt & M. L. Baizerman (Eds.), 
Evaluation advisory groups. New Directions for Evaluation, 136, 109–117.
Decolonizing Evaluation: The Necessity 
of Evaluation Advisory Groups in 
Indigenous Evaluation
Katie Johnston-Goodstar
Abstract
Research was and is central to the colonization and contemporary political 
realities of Indigenous communities. Because evaluation is a form of research 
and evaluation researchers are not immune to these oppressive practices, it is 
essential that evaluators acknowledge and engage with this history. One way to 
do this is through the use of advisory groups in evaluation research. This chap-
ter will explicate how evaluation advisory groups can help evaluation practi-
tioners decolonize their practice. Decolonized evaluation is centered in 
Indigenous values and goals. It ensures that evaluation processes and outcomes 
are appropriate to native communities by centering Indigenous worldviews, 
actively including Indigenous participation, and focusing on relevance as 
defined by Indigenous communities. ©Wiley Periodicals, Inc., and the Amer-
ican Evaluation Association.
Part of the colonization process is to render invisible the successes of indig-
enous science and knowledge while simultaneously infusing public discourse 
with images of Indians as intellectually inferior. (Walters et al., 2009, p. 148)
109
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION, no. 136, Winter 2012  © Wiley Periodicals, Inc., and the American Evaluation 
Association.  Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) • DOI: 10.1002/ev.20038
8
<<<PAGE=2>>>
110 EVALUATION ADVISORY GROUPS
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
110
A Brief History of Research in Indigenous Communities
Research was and is central to the colonization and contemporary political 
realities of Indigenous communities. The word Indigenous refers to the 
communities, clans, nations, and tribes that are “Indigenous to the lands 
they inhabit, in contrast to and in contention with the colonial societies 
and states that have spread out from Europe and other centres of empire” 
(Alfred & Corntassel, 2005). It is used in reference to the international and 
intertribal collective of communities who claim this experience. In this 
article, the word Indigenous will be capitalized as a proper noun so as to 
acknowledge and convey respect for the political status of native tribes.
Indigenous peoples have often engaged with colonial research agendas 
(Smith, 1999) and research that has served to “advance the politics of colo-
nial control” (Cochran et al., 2008, p. 22). Researchers in Indigenous com-
munities have been involved in unethical medical experimentation, 
“including the removal of organs and radiation exposure” (Walters et al., 
2009, p. 149), unauthorized genetic testing (Cochran et al., 2008), and the 
deliberate infection of Indigenous peoples with sexually transmitted dis-
eases (Presidential Commission, 2011). Researchers have further 
attempted to “patent” Indigenous bodies (Smith, 1999, p. 56) and estab-
lish “pedigrees of degeneration” to argue for eugenics and sterilization 
policies (Gallagher, 1999; Wilson, 2002). This is how research has become 
“one of the dirtiest words in the indigenous world’s vocabulary” (Smith, 
1999, p. 1).
These dubious research practices are sadly not the only concern of 
Indigenous communities. According to some researchers, native peoples 
have been “researched to death” (Castellano, 2004) and all too often, that 
research provides no tangible benefits to the community. This happens so 
frequently, in fact, that researchers are known in tribal communities by 
epithets such as “drive-by” researchers (Walters et al., 2009), “mosquito” 
researchers (Cochran et al., 2008, p. 22), and “helicopter” researchers 
(Robertson, Jorgenson, & Garrow, 2004).
Because evaluation is a form of research, and evaluation researchers are 
not immune to these oppressive practices, it is essential that evaluators 
acknowledge and engage with this history. In native communities, research 
and evaluation are often indistinguishable and both are in many ways  con-
sidered political acts. They are intricately tied to the colonization of the 
tribal community and as a consequence, researchers and evaluators must 
pay meticulous attention to the ways in which their practices might repli-
cate and/or be seen to replicate these colonial patterns. This chapter will 
explicate how the participation of evaluation advisory groups (EAGs), com-
monly referred to as Community Advisory Groups in the literature on 
Indigenous research and evaluation methods, can help evaluation practitio-
ners decolonize their practice and by doing so, contribute to community 
ownership of this type of research knowledge.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
<<<PAGE=3>>>
111DECOLONIZING EVALUATION
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
111
Nothing in this chapter should be read simply on a level of evaluation 
intention and perception, but rather more broadly, as a discussion about the 
evaluation function and practice. An awareness of colonial history in evalu-
ation practice is essential to the practitioner, but even with awareness and 
the best intentions, evaluation practice remains shaped by things the evalu-
ator may not be aware of, as well as by perceptions of evaluation held by 
others. Hence this chapter is deeply about method and practice, about 
developing a collaborative relationship within which to conduct an evalua-
tion meaningful to community, one that meets its tests for epistemology 
and method as well as those of the normative evaluation practice. More-
over, although the chapter is particularly helpful to evaluation work within 
Indigenous communities, the information and processes herein could also 
benefit evaluation practitioners who work with other marginalized and cul-
turally othered communities.
Why Evaluation Advisory Groups?
Why EAGs, one might ask? First, because Indigenous communities, quite 
frankly, are demanding them! Indigenous peoples and researchers have 
made entirely clear that they want evaluations that are “of, for, by and with 
us” (Kawakami, Aton, Cram, Lai, & Porima, 2007, p. 321) and research 
that doesn’t “plan about us, without us” (Walters et al., 2009, p. 151). 
EAGs can work to decolonize evaluation practice through the direct 
involvement of community members as advisors to, and even employees of, 
the evaluation.
Yellow Bird (1998), in his model of the effects of colonialism, proposes 
the creation of “community think tanks” as an intellectual antidote to colo-
nialism. The establishment of EAGs is one such way to create these com-
munity think tanks, which can serve to decolonize the evaluation research 
process. EAGs can make space for the “recovery and use of Indigenous 
approaches to research and evaluation, processes of knowledge creation 
that were once under Indigenous control but have been supplanted by 
Western ways of knowing” (Robertson, Jorgenson, & Garrow, 2004).
EAGs have a long tradition in many disciplines, including environ-
mental, education, and health research. EAGs, for example, are variously 
defined as “made up of representatives of diverse community interests. 
[The] purpose is to provide a public forum for community members to 
present and discuss their needs and concerns” (U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency, 2012) or a “dynamic group of local individuals who consult 
with us to make sure our work is responsive to the needs and concerns” of 
communities (Help Fight HIV, 2012). EAGs are particularly vital for evalu-
ators working in Indigenous contexts because the American Evaluation 
Association’s professional standards of respect states that “evaluators have 
the responsibility to understand and respect differences” and competence 
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
<<<PAGE=4>>>
112 EVALUATION ADVISORY GROUPS
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
states that evaluators must seek “awareness of their own culturally-based 
assumptions, their understanding of the worldviews of culturally-different 
participants and stakeholders in the evaluation, and the use of appropriate 
evaluation strategies and skills in working with culturally different groups” 
(American Evaluation Association, 2004). This focus on competence and 
respect implies that evaluators be “familiar enough with evaluation partici-
pants to be able to deliver such respect” (Kawakami et al., 2007, p. 321) 
and competence.
EAGs can serve to decolonize the research process and ensure the rel-
evance of the evaluation through community-based participation. They can 
provide these direct benefits to the evaluation:
 1. Centrality of Indigenous worldviews
 2. Participatory inquiry/evaluation
 3. Relevance and service to community
Centrality of Indigenous Knowledge
[D]ecolonizing research methods include deconstructing and externalizing 
the myth of the intellectually inferior Indian, while simultaneously privileg-
ing and centering indigenous worldviews and knowledge to promote revital-
ization of indigenous epistemologies, research practices, and ultimately, 
indigenous wellness practices. (Walters et al., 2009, p. 148)
EAGs consisting of community members who are knowledgeable 
about and invested in the inclusion, promotion, and practice of Indigenous 
worldviews are essential to decolonizing evaluation. Evaluations must con-
sider Indigenous identity, epistemology, values, and spirituality (Kawakami 
et al., 2007, p. 332). Evaluations should not be designed to measure how 
accustomed or assimilated Indigenous tribes or programs are to Western 
practices. Rather, they should be situated in the “context of a specific place, 
time, community and history” (p. 319). They should seek to understand 
and measure Indigenous practice and the “value added to quality of life that 
the community cares about” (p. 332). In order to accomplish this, an 
awareness of Indigenous values and epistemologies (Meyer, 2003) in the 
evaluation process is necessary. EAGs can assist in this awareness and in 
establishing indispensable relationships that will ensure the evaluation 
design, implementation, relevance, and overall success of the evaluation.
Some examples that often arise in research and evaluation result from 
conflicting values and epistemologies. For example, many tribes place a 
strong value on sacred sites and spiritual practices. Because Western 
research and evaluation paradigms tend to see science and faith in mutually 
exclusive ways or in ways that prioritize science over faith, this can cause 
tension in the evaluation process. Western philosophies are also often 
anthropocentric—prioritizing humans over animal relations and sacred
<<<PAGE=5>>>
113DECOLONIZING EVALUATION
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
places, or refusing to recognize the mana or spiritual energy in things non-
human (Johnston-Goodstar et al., 2010). Moreover, who holds certain 
knowledge, how that knowledge is taught/learned, and what protocols are 
used to share knowledge become critical points of contention.
Evaluations must be guided by tribal knowledge, protocols, and 
epistemology—in other words, the how of the knowledge should guide the 
evaluation (Meyer, 2001, 2003). “Knowing” in many Indigenous communi-
ties is different than in Western communities. This seemingly benign state-
ment is particularly difficult for many evaluation researchers who are 
educated in institutions of higher education that promote and practice cer-
tain epistemologies without acknowledging the existence of others. West-
ern beliefs about knowledge are often so entrenched in science that they are 
hard to identify, let alone wrestle with.
Indigenous values and epistemologies cannot be placed on the mar-
gins; they must be central to the evaluation process for authentic engage-
ment and evaluation to occur. Indigenous values, protocols, and 
epistemologies must be respected in evaluation practices. For example, 
members of the HONOR Project team worked into the early morning pre-
paring food for a kick-off feast for their new project. “[P]ersonal involve-
ment [in values and protocols] is expected to nurture meaningful 
partnerships” (Walters et al., 2009, p. 147).
This is not to say that Western knowledges or practices are not wel-
come; indeed, many tribes see Western knowledge as complementary or 
helpful in their evaluation processes. But an awareness of the typical privi-
leging of Western values, goals, and paradigms and a conscious effort to 
center Indigenous paradigms in the investigation of Indigenous communi-
ties is necessary to decolonizing evaluation practice.
Participatory Inquiry and Evaluation
Over the past few decades, researchers have begun to recognize how vital 
community participation is to research and evaluation projects. The rapid rise 
of community-based participatory research (Minkler & Wallerstein, 2008; 
Wallerstein & Duran, 2006; Walters et al., 2009) and participatory evaluation 
methodology is one such indication of this recognition (Checkoway & 
Richards-Schuster, 2003, 2004; Cousins & Whittmore, 1998). Participation 
is especially vital to decolonized evaluation because community members 
are invited to design and participate in the evaluation. Decolonized evalua-
tion demands that the process and the results of evaluations meet the needs 
and desires of the community as well as those of the program and funding 
agencies. Local ownership of projects has been shown to “generate a sense 
of even greater possibility” (Robertson et al., 2004, p. 506).
The Kawakami et al. (2007) conceptual framework for Indigenous 
evaluation practice provides a map for participation, shaping the purpose 
and goals of the evaluation, the driving question/problem, the methodology,
<<<PAGE=6>>>
114 EVALUATION ADVISORY GROUPS
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
the depth and breadth of data to be collected, the analysis and recommen-
dations of the evaluation, and the format and dissemination of findings. 
Indigenous evaluations are always political and moral. For example, Lakota 
approaches to research and evaluation support the idea of “creating knowl-
edge in order to accomplish an end that is desired by the people” (Robertson 
et al., 2004, p. 500) found in the concepts of wopasi or inquiry and tokata 
wasagle tunpi, or something you set up to go into the future.
Participation is essential to knowing precisely what the evaluation 
goals, questions/problems, and methods should be. Research often frames 
Indigenous communities in deficit-based ways. EAGs can help to frame the 
inquiry in a way that asks questions pertinent to the way the community 
views the issues, collects suitable data for that analysis, and provides find-
ings with real “value” (Kawakami et al., 2007, p. 331). For example: how 
might this evaluation help to address our questions and those “social 
issues” we are concerned about? In-depth participation of EAGs can also 
send a message to other community members that the community’s opin-
ions and participation matter to the evaluators, hence enhancing the study’s 
credibility and utilization by decision makers for policy and program 
improvement and other important decisions (Cousins & Earl, 1992).
Outside evaluators may have the financial resources and Western qual-
ifications to conduct evaluations in other communities, but a purposeful 
emphasis on participation allows those evaluators to share the power and 
“put local researchers in the driver’s seat” (Robertson et al., 2004, p. 507). 
EAGs allow for “multiple points of entry into dialogue and gathering and 
confirming observations and interpretations are necessary to obtain accu-
rate data, draw conclusions and interpret those data” (Robertson et al., 
2004, p. 333). This participation is often more time-consuming and chal-
lenging to outside evaluators, but it is well worth the effort because it 
strengthens the validity and the relevance of the findings, explored next.
Relevance and Service to Community
EAGs are one such tool that evaluators can use to help ensure that their 
work holds relevance to a particular community. EAGs promote the native 
community standards mentioned above, but they can also assist in the anal-
ysis process, dissemination, and overall usability of the evaluation findings. 
This process, moreover, can help build capacity among the Indigenous 
community to conduct its own evaluation and research, which could poten-
tially increase the relevance of future projects.
For example, EAGs can serve as sounding boards; they can be first to 
hear the findings (Kawakami et al., 2007) and provide a critical feedback 
loop to strengthen the data analysis or call attention to alternative or misin-
terpretation of findings. They can also support the dissemination of research 
findings through the identification of appropriate knowledge-dissemination 
methods (Kawakami et al., 2007). Written research reports, while valued in
<<<PAGE=7>>>
115DECOLONIZING EVALUATION
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
Western evaluation traditions, may not always be appropriate to the com-
munity’s paradigm. If story, or mo’oelo (narrative), oli (chant), or performa-
tive (tribal song) methods are most appropriate for the dissemination of the 
findings, then it is the evaluator’s obligation to know about and use them 
(Lai, Yap, & Dom, 2004 cited in Kawakami et al., 2007). If evaluation find-
ings are grounded and valid and the dissemination methods are relevant, the 
evaluation is more likely to be utilized. EAGs are integral to this process.
Finally, evaluation processes and outcomes that provide value to a 
community also help to build the capacity of those communities to conduct 
their own evaluations and to develop relationships for future collaborative 
evaluation efforts. Focusing on the relevance of the evaluation creates space 
to allow the community to struggle with knowledge paradigms, their own 
priorities in evaluation and dissemination. This struggle is key to building 
capacities for evaluation among community members otherwise not trained 
in this area, and it also allows the community to speak back to the institu-
tions and curricula that train “evaluators.”
Summary
[W]e remain a sovereign people who insist on the right to find our own solu-
tions and our own ways of evidencing social transformations. Evaluations 
that support us in this effort must exhibit both academic and cultural valid-
ity. We look forward to the day when this approach becomes the norm of our 
evaluation experience. (Kawakami et al., 2007, p. 344)
Evaluation must be relevant to the community. It should center Indig-
enous knowledge paradigms and include the participation of Indigenous 
peoples, and it should produce outcomes and processes that are meaningful 
to the community and provide service to the community in a variety of nego-
tiated ways that move beyond a cost–benefit perspective of evaluation study 
(Kawakami et al., 2007). Indeed, as Robertson et al. (2004) claim, evaluation 
should not only be relevant to a community’s wants, needs, and understand-
ings, but explicitly used in service of that community while simultaneously 
serving “larger goals of decolonization and liberation” (p. 500).
An evaluation study is often shaped without the knowledge or control 
of the Indigenous community. Until the time that Indigenous researchers 
and communities have full control over their own evaluation projects, 
EAGs are essential to complement evaluation practice. These groups can 
deconstruct Western assumptions, norms, and practices in order to ensure 
that the evaluation is centered in Indigenous epistemologies, values, and 
goals (Kawakami et al., 2007). They further use processes and outcomes 
that are appropriate to native communities by asking relevant questions 
and delivering relevant answers.
EAGs, however, are not only beneficial to outside evaluators. EAG par-
ticipation can assist inside researchers as well. They may help call the
<<<PAGE=8>>>
116 EVALUATION ADVISORY GROUPS
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
research team’s attention to mundane aspects of everyday life that may go 
unnoticed. They may challenge practices as usual that Indigenous commu-
nities have grown accustomed to, but upon further reflection counter their 
own decolonization, liberation, or community values. Furthermore, EAGs 
can provide a space for in-community variation in opinion and goals and 
an opportunity to dialogue further about the value of the evaluation pro-
cess and the program(s) being evaluated.
References
Alfred, T., & Corntassel, J. (2005). Being Indigenous: Resurgences against contempo-
rary colonialism. Government and Opposition, 40(4), 597–614.
American Evaluation Association. (2004). Guiding principles for evaluators. Retrieved 
from http://www.eval.org/publications/guidingprinciples.asp
Castellano, M. B. (2004, January). Ethics of Aboriginal research. Journal of Aboriginal 
Health, 1, 98–114.
Checkoway, B., & Richards-Schuster, K. (2003). Youth participation in community eval-
uation research. American Journal of Evaluation, 24, 21.
Checkoway, B., & Richards-Schuster, K. (2004). Youth participation in evaluation and 
research as a way of lifting new voices. Children, Youth and Environments 14(2), 84–98. 
Retrieved from http://www.colorado.edu/journals/cye/
Cochran, P., Marshall, C., Garcia-Downing, C., Kendell, E., Cook, D., McCubbin, L., & 
Gover, R. M. (2008). Indigenous ways of knowing: Implications for participatory 
research and community. American Journal of Public Health, 98(1), 22–27. 
Cousins, J., & Earl, L. (1992). The case for participatory evaluation. Educational Evalu-
ation and Policy Analysis, 14(4), 397–418.
Cousins, J., & Whittmore, E. (1998). Framing participatory evaluation. New Directions 
for Evaluation, 80, 5–23.
Gallagher, N. (1999). Breeding better Vermonters: The eugenics project in the Green Moun-
tain State. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
Help Fight HIV. (2012). Community Advisory Group. Retrieved from http://www
.helpfighthiv.org/board.htm
Johnston-Goodstar, K., Trinidad, A., & Tecle Solomon, A. (2010). Critical pedagogy 
through the reinvention of place: Two cases of youth resistance. In B. Porfilio & 
P. Carr (Eds.), Youth culture, education and resistance: Subverting the commercial order-
ing of life. Boston, MA: Sense Publishers.
Kawakami, A., Aton, K., Cram, F., Lai, M., & Porima, L. (2007). Improving the practice of 
evaluation through indigenous values and methods: Decolonizing evaluation practice—
returning the gaze from Hawaii and Aotearoa. Hulili: Multidisciplinary Research on 
Hawaiian Well-Being, 4(1), 319–348.
Meyer, M. (2003). Ho’oulu: Our time of becoming—Hawaiian epistemology and early writ-
ings. Honolulu, HI: Ai Pohaku Press.
Meyer, M. A. (2001). Our own liberation; reflections on Hawaiian epistemology. The 
Contemporary Pacific, 13(1), 125.
Minkler, M., & Wallerstein, N. (Eds.). (2008). Community-based participatory research 
for health: From process to outcomes (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues. (2011). “Ethically impossi-
ble”: STD Research in Guatemala from 1946 to 1948. Retrieved from www.healthequity.
umd.edu/documents/Guatemala2011.pdf
Robertson, P., Jorgenson, M., & Garrow, C. (2004). Indigenizing evaluation research: 
How Lakota methodologies are helping “raise the Tipi” in the Oglala Sioux Nation. 
American Indian Quarterly, 28(3/4).
<<<PAGE=9>>>
117DECOLONIZING EVALUATION
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
Smith, L.T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies. London, England: Zed Books.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2012). What is a community advisory  group? 
Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/superfund/community/cag/whatis.htm
Wallerstein, N., & Duran, B. (2006). Using community-based participatory research to 
address health disparities. Health Promotion Practice, 7(3), 312–323.
Walters, K., Stately, A., Evans-Campbell, T., Simoni, J., Duran, B., Schultz, K., . . .
Guerrero, D. (2009). “Indigenist” collaborative research efforts in Native American 
communities. In A. R. Stiffman (Ed.), The field research survival guide. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Wilson, P. (2002). Book review of Nancy L. Gallagher, Breeding better Vermonters: The 
eugenics project in the Green Mountain State . Bulletin of the History of Medicine,  76, 
840–841.
Yellow Bird, M. (1998). A model of the effects of colonialism . Lawrence: University of 
Kansas, Office for the Study of Indigenous Social and Cultural Justice. 
KATIE JOHNSTON-GOODSTAR is an assistant professor, School of Social Work, 
University of Minnesota.