<<<PAGE=1>>>
The Journal of Values-Based Leadership The Journal of Values-Based Leadership 
Volume 13 
Issue 1 Winter/Spring 2020 Article 8 
January 2020 
Helping Leaders Grow Up: Vertical Leadership Development in Helping Leaders Grow Up: Vertical Leadership Development in 
Practice Practice 
Hannah E. Jones 
hannahelisejones@gmail.com 
Julie A. Chesley 
julie.a.chesley@gmail.com 
Terri Egan 
Pepperdine University, terrieganprof@gmail.com 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/jvbl 
 Part of the Business Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Jones, Hannah E.; Chesley, Julie A.; and Egan, Terri (2020) "Helping Leaders Grow Up: Vertical Leadership 
Development in Practice," The Journal of Values-Based Leadership: Vol. 13 : Iss. 1 , Article 8. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.22543/0733.131.1275 
Available at: https://scholar.valpo.edu/jvbl/vol13/iss1/8 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the College of Business at ValpoScholar. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in The Journal of Values-Based Leadership by an authorized administrator of ValpoScholar. 
For more information, please contact a ValpoScholar staff member at scholar@valpo.edu.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
1 
 
Helping Leaders Grow Up:  
Vertical Leadership Development in Practice 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This research reinforces arguments for the use of adult vertical development theory to transform 
traditional leadership development practices to prepare  leaders for the volatile, uncertain, 
complex, and ambiguous (VUCA) world. Vertical leadership development strategies and practices 
were assessed in fifteen large organizations. Multiple factors impacted implementation of vertical 
development practices.  The primary factor was the overall leadership development mindset (the 
organization’s learning strategy and its theory of individual change). Secondary factors include 
senior leader engagement, space for openness and vulnerability, capability and experience of 
practitioners, alignment in business processes, and expanded understanding of risk-taking.  Our 
results illustrate that acce lerating leadership capacity through the implementation of vertical 
development practices requires significant personal and organizational commitment.  
 
 
Introduction 
Global changes have transformed the demands placed on leadership and are reshaping what 
it means to be a successful leader. We have long associated character and values with 
leadership capacity (Bass & Steidlmeier, 1999). Over time, social and organizational sciences 
have sought to define leadership as specific traits and values so that leaders can be identified 
and trusted (Gini & Green, 2013; Kouzes & Posner, 2012 ). However, as our global and 
organizational environment becomes more volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous 
(VUCA), a high degree of character/virtue is no longer sufficient for leadership success (Ko & 
Rea, 2016 ). To address today’s VUCA world, leaders need the capacity for enhanced 
perspective taking that comes with adaptability, self -awareness, boundary spanning, 
collaboration, and network thinking (Petrie, 2014a).  
 
HANNAH ELISE JONES 
UBER TECHNOLOGIES 
SAN FRANCISCO, CA USA 
 JULIE A. CHESLEY, PHD 
PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY 
MALIBU. CA USA 
 TERRI D. EGAN, PHD 
PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY 
MALIBU. CA USA
<<<PAGE=3>>>
2 
 
Unfortunately, research suggests that most leaders are unprepared and fall short in these 
essential areas, creating a gap between the leadership we have and the leadership we need 
for the future (Ghemawat, 2012; Weiss & Molinaro, 2005). As our social ideas about fairness 
and justice evolve and the role organizations play in society becomes increasingly 
interconnected and complex, this gap will likely continue to grow. Trait or character -based 
notions of what makes an effective leader will not be sufficient for effective  ― let alone 
transformational ― leadership. We propose that helping leaders increase their mental 
complexity, the domain of vertical development theory provides the means  to close the 
development gap.  
 
Vertical development interventions prepare leaders to continuously learn and develop in 
accordance with  the changing demands of the environment concomitantly increasing self-
awareness. Vertical leadership development provides a philosophy that moves from focusing 
on what leaders know towards understanding how leaders make sense of knowledge 
acquired. This difference in philosophy illustrates why despite “widespread investments in 
management and leadership education, companies still are not able to deal with  the 
‘leadership crisis’ in their organizations” (Kegan & Lahey, 2010). These investments are 
focused too much on skills individuals possess and insufficiently on the development of the 
individuals themselves.    
 
Understanding Vertical Development and the Need for Change 
Vertical development refers to an individual’s progressive growth through stages of increasing 
socio-emotional and cognitive sophistication, shaping how they interpret and interact with 
their environment (Cook-Greuter & Miller, 1994; Kegan, 1982; Petrie, 2014b; Torbert, 1987). 
With each stage, individuals develop an increasingly complex and inclusive point of view. This 
contrasts with traditional horizontal development which focuses on the development of skills 
and abilities from a technical perspective  and supplies useful strategy when problems and 
their correlating approaches for resolution are clearly defined (Petrie, 2014b). 
 
Vertical development has its genesis in constructivist developmental theories (Loevinger, 
1963), largely situated within the domains of psychology and moral philosophy (Kohlberg, 
1976). This work rarely crosses disciplinary boundaries and has not been widely integrated 
into leadership development research and practice. Despite this divide, two models of adult 
vertical development have begun to permeate organizational discourse: Kegan’s Orders of 
Consciousness and Torbert’s Action Logics.  
 
Kegan refers to his stages of vertical development as Orders of Consciousness, identifying 
five distinct levels of development: Impulsive Mind, Imperial Mind, Socialized Mind, Self -
Authoring Mind, and Self-Transforming Mind (1982, 1994). Progressing through higher orders 
requires a more sophisticated sense of self in relation to others and other per spectives. 
People at higher levels of development have a greater ability to learn and solve complex 
problems. They can question their own assumptions about the world and are more likely to 
accept paradox while remaining centered and confident in their ability to take action. Kegan 
found that less than thirty four percent of adults ever reach the Fourth Order while three to six 
percent were in various phases of transitioning between the Fourth Order and Fifth Order with 
no individuals fully attaining the Fifth Order (1994).   
Torbert’s Action Logic model highlights seven levels of leadership: Opportunist, Diplomat, 
Expert, Achiever, Individualist, Strategist, and Alchemist. The levels are distinguished by
<<<PAGE=4>>>
3 
 
differences in how a leader perceives the world an d processes information. An Opportunist 
sees the world through a lens of power and seeks personal gain. A lternatively, an Alchemist 
moves away from viewing the world in artificially segregated categories, and begins to 
understand the complexity and temporal nature of events (Torbert, 1987). Similar to Kegan’s 
Orders of Consciousness, research has found only four percent of the studied population had 
reached the Strategist level while less than one percent attained the Alchemist stage (Rooke 
& Torbert, 2005). Table 1 compares the two models.  
 
Table 1: Comparison of Adult Vertical Developmental Models 
 
 Kegan’s Orders of Consciousness 
(Cognitive Development) 
% 
of 
pop 
Torbert’s Action Logics (Ego 
Development)  
% 
of 
pop 
Pre-Conventional   First Order: Impulsive Mind - Unable 
to understand self in relation to other 
objects; subject to impulses and 
perceptions of the world 
   
Second Order: Imperial Mind - 
Develops greater control over impulses 
but is subject to needs and desires; 
relationships represent a transactional 
way to meet needs  
6% Opportunist - Wins in any way possible. Self-
oriented; manipulative; “might makes right” 
5% 
Conventional 
Third Order: Socialized Mind - 
Develops an understanding of needs and 
desires as separate from the core self; is 
subject to the interpersonal relationships 
through which the self is defined; seeks 
external validation of the self 
58% Diplomat - Avoids overt conflict. Wants to 
belong; obeys group norms; rarely challenges 
the status quo 
12% 
Expert - Rule by logic and expertise; seeks 
rational efficiency 
38% 
Achiever - Meets strategic goals. Effectively 
achieves goals through teams; juggles 
managerial duties and market demands 
30% 
Post- Conventional 
Fourth Order Self-Authoring Mind - 
Develops an understanding of self outside 
of relationships; is subject to ideologies 
and values systems; shapes a more 
nuanced and values-based understanding 
of the world  
35% Individualist - Interweaves competing 
personal and company action logics. Creates 
unique structures to resolve gaps between 
strategy and performance  
10% 
Strategist - Generates organizational and 
personal transformations. Exercises the power 
of mutual inquiry, vigilance, and vulnerability 
for both the short and long term 
4% 
Fifth Order Self-Transforming Mind - 
Develops an understanding of the limits 
of self; begins to view others separate 
from themselves; views their ideologies 
as limited; develops a greater ability to 
hold paradox, but is subject to the 
dialectic between ideologies  
1% Alchemist - Generates social transformations. 
Integrates material, spiritual, and societal 
transformation  
 
1% 
 
Vertical Development in Practice    
To stimulate vertical growth, a few models designed for practical organizational application 
have emerged. Petrie (2015) suggests a framework for creating developmental experiences 
that encourage vertical growth naming three primary conditions: Heat Experiences (Initiation  
— The What), Colliding Perspectives (Enablement  — The Who), and  Elevated Sensemaking 
(Integration — The How). Heat Experiences are events that disrupt the individual’s habitual
<<<PAGE=5>>>
4 
 
way of doing things and open the individual’s mind to search for new and better ways. Colliding 
Perspectives occur when the individual is expo sed to people with different worldviews, 
opinions, and backgrounds which challenge the individual’s mental models and encourages 
the leader to think more extensively. Finally, Elevated Sensemaking refers to the individual’s 
process of integrating and makin g sense of new perspectives to develop a larger and more 
advanced perspective.  
 
While Petri’s conditions are helpful in thinking about specific practices in an organization, 
Kegan and Lahey take the implementation of vertical development further with thei r 
Deliberately Developmental Organization™ (DDO™) framework (Kegan et. al., 2016). Inspired 
by the potential indicated in adult vertical development, Kegan and Lahey expanded their 
research to organizations that were intentionally creating environments which supported 
vertical development. Their research shares case studies of organizations that have 
successfully created these environments and provides a framework highlighting three 
essential dimensions needed to create and sustain a developmental environme nt: Edge 
(Aspiration), Groove (Practices), and Home (Community).  
 
For an organization to begin its transition to a DDO™, the work of creating Community can be 
the most effective and challenging first step. Kegan and Lahey (2016) emphasize the 
importance of Community by saying that “growth can happen only through membership in 
workplace communities where people are deeply valued as individual human beings, 
constantly held accountable, and engaged in real and sustained dialogue” (p. 108). As a 
baseline, organizations aspiring to become a DDO™ must prioritize trust and safety in their 
culture; otherwise, employees may not have the support necessary to engage in the 
meaningful and challenging work required for their personal development.  
 
Aspiration refers to the core philosophy and strategy of the organization. For any organization 
seeking to become a DDO™, a deep belief in individual development as a critical component 
to business success must be part of the core operating system. An “organization can sign on 
to the principle in spirit, value it as a nice to have, and even make investments to promote 
more of it — but this is very different from asking, ‘From the ground up, have we designed our 
organization so that it supports the growth of its members…?’” (Kegan, Lahey et. al., 2016, p. 
88).  
 
Once a supportive community and strategy have been cultivated, deliberate Practices help 
the developmental vision extend throughout the organization in a way that people, managers, 
and individual contributors alike can understand and foster reaction when warranted. When 
taken together, these three components support an organization that strives to vertically 
develop its people in the process of running a successful business.   
 
As these models suggest, vertical development requires a different approach than traditional 
skills-based views of leadership development. For organizations to effectively develop the 
leaders with the mindsets required for a VUCA world, they must think differently about what 
leadership looks like and how they can support their people to evolve accordingly. While some 
organizations have begun exploring vertical development in practice, to our knowledge this 
study is the first that examines the extent to which vertical strategies fo r growth are present 
in organizations  while identifying which barriers and enablers exist to support the 
implementation of vertical development.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
5 
 
Methods   
Data Collection 
This study used a qualitative approach, with data collected through hour-long, semi -
structured, one -on-one interviews (Maxwell, 2013). This approach was chosen to better 
understand the experience of practitioners engaged in leadership development activities and 
how principles of vertical development were being used. Interv iew questions were designed 
and modeled after Kegan and Lahey’s framework for Deliberately Developmental 
Organizations™ (DDO™), and Petri’s conditions for vertical development (Kegan, Lahey, Miller, 
Fleming, & Helsing, 2016; Petri, 2015). These frameworks were used to ensure that all 
components of the vertical development experience were addressed in the interviews. The 
interview questions were tested and refined through peer review by two practitioners familiar 
with theories of vertical development. A comprehensive literature review and subsequent peer 
review served to establish the face validity of the instruments. 
 
To identify and solicit interview participants, this study used a purposive and convenience 
sampling approach (Creswell, 2014). Nineteen internal practitioners came from fifteen large 
(over 1,000 employees) organizations in the technology, professional services, manufac -
turing, healthcare, and government/philanthropy industry sectors. These respondents held a 
strategic-level position that allowe d them to understand the leadership strategy of the 
organization. In two cases respondents represented global manager development, and two 
respondents oversaw executive development specifically. Other respondents had titles such 
as Global Talent Officer, C hief Learning Officer or Vice President of Learning and 
Organizational Effectiveness. Additionally, six respondents were external leadership 
development consultants, all running their own consulting or coaching firm.1  
 
Data Analysis  
Each interview was taped and transcribed and the data was analyzed and deductively coded. 
In the first phase of analysis , all interview transcripts were read and initial organizing ideas 
were identified. These ideas were used to begin open coding. Codes were a word, phrase, 
sentence, or multiple sentences that offered insight or knowledge regarding the application 
of vertical development theory. Coding was performed iteratively until the coded data reflected 
the underlying raw data. The resulting code was organized into macro a nd micro codes that 
formed the backbone of the analysis.  Initial coding was verified by a second rater, and the 
data exhibited an inter-rater reliability of 90%. After validation, the language was refined and 
content was organized to more effectively reflect and communicate the state of practice.   
 
In addition to the coding of key factors influencing the implementation of vertical 
development, analysis of the interview data also produced themes related to the 
organization’s leadership development mindset. This was based on data that reflected the 
organization’s learning strategy and how that strategy was enacted.  
 
 
1 The intention behind our qualitative paper was not to generalize, but rather to gather rich information about this new area of 
study.  Our approach was to interview a homogenous group of people in a particular position in an organization — in our case 
nineteen individuals who held a  strategic-level position (e.g.,  Directors of Development) in organizations that have over  1,000 
employees. To support that data, we also interviewed  6 external practitioners who work in these organizations to give us 
saturation.  While there are a number of ideas around saturation , Guest, Bunce, and Johnson (2006) propose that saturation often 
occurs around 12 participants and Latham (2013) suggested 11 participants.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
6 
 
Results  
The results of the study show that the degree to which an organization implemented vertical 
development depends largely on the organization’s leadership development mindset  as well 
as upon a number of secondary factors: senior leader engagement, space for openness and 
vulnerability, capability and experience of practitioners, alignment in business processes, and 
expanded understanding of risk-taking.  Additionally, the results of this research illustrate that 
accelerating leadership capacity of an organization through the implementation of vertical 
development requires significant organizational commitment and change.  
 
Organizational Leadership Development Mindset  
A key factor that differentiated the 15 organizations was the mindset they used to 
conceptualize and communicate leadership development. The overall mindset was comprised 
of two important components: 1) the organization’s learning strategy, and 2) the 
organization’s theory of individual change. The learning strategy refers to how the organization 
articulated leadership and what is required to develop it. Three distinct learning strategies 
emerged: Skill-Based Prescriptive, Values-Based Prescriptive, and Core Principles. 
 
Within these categories it was clear that the strategies differed further, depending on whether 
the organization was intentionally using vertical development principles or horizontal 
development principles. This nuance resulted in the leadership developmen t mindset 
framework (see Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1: Organizational Leadership Development Mindset 
 
Organizations characterized as having a Skill -Based Prescriptive learning strategy  identify 
skills and competencies that tend to be role -specific. Their frameworks largely focus on the 
tactical aspects of leadership versus relational or personal characteristics. For example, one 
organization using a Skill -Based Prescriptive mindset had five leader “qualifications” that 
were subdivided into competencies; a qualification was being “ Results Driven” and the key 
competencies identified were “ Accountability, Problem Solving, and Decisiveness .” Other 
organizations differentiate sub -competencies according to various positions in the 
organization. One participant from a Skill -Based Prescriptive organization explained the use
<<<PAGE=8>>>
7 
 
of competencies “to design training…to frame performance reviews where we look at who is 
ready now, who will be ready in a c ouple of years, and what kind of developmental plan do 
they need to have based on the competencies.” 
 
Organizations having a Values -Based Prescriptive learning strategy  use a leadership 
framework rooted in their core organizational values. These frameworks emphasize behaviors 
that are less technical than those seen in the skills -based category and include more 
interpersonal behaviors, imbued with a substantial emphasis on what it means to be a leader 
in the unique cultural context of the organization. For e xample, one organization articulated 
collaborating with others, including others, establishing trust, and having fun as competencies 
required to support their organizational value of “Partnership.” 
 
Additionally, both values - and skills -based strategies tended to be more complex, using 
frameworks that consisted of multiple levels of sub-competencies, behaviors, or metrics. One 
participant from a Values-Based Prescriptive organization described how their values pervade 
employee development, providing “a set of management and leadership competencies that 
roll out of those core values  … We assess managers and leadership around those 
competencies.” 
 
The Core Principles learning strategy present in six of the participating organizations 
emphasizes the foundat ional truths of the organization versus the detailed behaviors 
expected of leaders. All organizations using this strategy had no more than three principles. 
For example, one organization projected three broad principles: “ Create Clarity , Generate 
Energy, and Deliver Success.”  Each of these was accompanied by three independent 
sentences describing the principle.  
 
In addition to the organization’s learning strategy , organizations differed in  their theory of 
individual change . The theory of individua l change refers to how the organization views 
individual change, either horizontally or vertically. While both aim to create shifts in behavior 
that stimulate growth and development, they do so in different ways. Organizations using a 
horizontal theory of individual change have specific behaviors that are identified, tracked, and 
measured to stimulate growth. Organizations with vertical theories of individual change use a 
broader set of tools to engage individuals in deeper levels of personalized change. 
Participants using this theory spoke more about the individual leader, the significance of self-
awareness, the long-time horizon, and the challenge of measuring progress. One participant 
using a vertical theory of individual change described it in this way:  
 
As you look at the research and the more you talk to practitioners about this idea of 
adopting a new mindset or elevating your thinking from vertical, is that it takes a multi -
year, multi-stage process, that cannot and should not necessarily be solved th rough any 
type of specific program. It could be introduced in a programmatic way but really 
articulated in a long-term focus of recurring practices.  
 
Across the 19 internal participants, 14 utilized a horizontal approach, while 5 utilized a vertical 
approach. All six external participants used a vertical approach. T he continuum in Figure 2 
shows how the components of t he leadership development mindset relate to one another 
across the organizations represented in the data.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
8 
 
Figure 2: Organizational Leadership Development Mindset Continuum 
Notable in this categorization is the fact that all participating organizations intentionally using 
vertical development practices were employing a Core Principles learning strategy, and a 
vertical theory of individual change. Importantly, none of these in tentionally developmental 
organizations in the top half of the continuum outlined detailed behaviors, measures, 
outcomes, or expectations for leaders. They instead provided a narrative of the foundational 
principles of the organization, which in many cases they expected all employees to adhere to, 
including leaders. One organization in this category explicitly distinguished its use of both 
vertical and horizontal development, the vertical focused on leadership and the horizontal 
focused on requisite job ski lls. This distinction created space in the framework for both the 
necessary specificity of role -specific skills and a more open description of leadership that 
makes room for different kinds of individual leadership growth.  
 
However, using a Core Principle s learning strategy  to inform leadership in an organization 
does not ensure  the implementation of vertical leadership development . Two organizations 
utilized a Core Principles strategy but did not have a vertical theory of individual change as is 
demonstrated in the bottom right of Figure 2. These two organizations eliminated their 
traditional leadership competency frameworks, but still upheld a more tactical and data -
driven approach to behavior change. Hallmarks include specific connections between 
leadership expectations and performance reviews, enterprise goal setting, and pre -
determined learning paths for leaders. Our d ata did not find any organization using a 
prescriptive learning strategy that also employed a vertical theory of individual change . Only 
organizations that had transitioned away from using specific and detailed views of leadership, 
as seen in the two prescriptive strategies, created room for vertical practices to emerge.  
 
Secondary Factors Influencing the Implementation of Vertical Practices  
In addition to the organization's leadership development mindset, our interviews indicated  
that an organization’s ability to develop leaders and make the essential shifts required for 
vertical development depend in large part on these five factors: 1) senior leader engagement 
(mentioned by all 25 participants), 2) making space for openness and vulnerability 
(mentioned by all 25 participants), 3) capability and experience of practitioners (mentioned 
by 19 participants), 4) creating alignment in bu siness processes (mentioned by 15 
participants), and 5) an expanded understanding of risk -taking (mentioned by 14
<<<PAGE=10>>>
9 
 
participants). These critical factors were present in all organizations, irrespective of their 
leadership development mindset , but as the foll owing examples show, the impact they 
generate and the way in which they are managed are unique in organizations using a vertical 
theory of individual change . Vertically developmental organizations understand clearly how 
these factors impact leadership development, while other organizations in the research were 
just gaining awareness and struggling with how to manage some of these factors.  
 
Senior Leader Engagement.  A major organizational factor that supports an organization’s 
capacity to adopt a vertical approach to leadership development is the engagement of senior 
leaders. Respondents discussed senior leader engagement in three key ways: investment and 
sponsorship, role modeling behaviors, and setting the tone. 
 
Senior leaders’ engagement often determines what can be done by practitioners. The topic of 
investment and sponsorship was prevalent in conversations about behavioral role modeling 
and setting the tone as much of that behavior is derived from whether or not the leaders are 
personally committed to supporting the work of vertical development themselves. When 
asked what would produce the most significant difference in their ability to more effectively 
develop leaders, nine respondents specifi cally stated that  support from the top of the 
organization was key. One response is shared below: 
 
I mean, if you ask [senior leaders] to come kick off something, they will come, they will say 
the right things, but in terms of practice it is still a challenge … You can talk about 
leadership, but as long as people are still approaching it from their technical skills, staff in 
general will pay more attention to technical skills than leadership skills. 
 
Notably, all but one of the organizations using ver tical development principles discussed the 
high level of involvement of their senior leaders and their CEO. Overall, when discussing the 
participation of senior leadership teams, the tone of developmental organizations was much 
more positive than horizonta l organizations, many of whom felt they had little meaningful 
support from the top.  
 
The importance of role modeling by senior leaders emerged specifically in six interviews, from 
two vertical external consultants and from four horizontal organizations. R ather than 
emphasizing the role modeling of competency-aligned behaviors, vertical respondents spoke 
of the significance of leaders’ role modeling developmental work. This includes being open in 
front of others about the developmental work they are doing p ersonally. The following 
response offers one example of awareness of developmental work: 
 
And, of course, it is very powerful when senior leaders in the room begin to see something 
in their thinking that they begin to perceive as limited and they share it. That is a very 
powerful moment. There is a collective exhale in the room. Employees see something 
shifting at the top and they say ‘Okay, I guess this is real. We are not just playing games 
here.’ 
 
Even in companies that described themselves as l ess hierarchical ― without controlling top 
teams ― the influence of senior leaders was still an essential ingredient to successful 
leadership development. In both concrete and less tangible ways, senior leaders are the 
lynchpin to having vertical development embraced in organizations.  
 
Making Space for Openness and Vulnerability.  Another organizational factor influencing the 
adoption of vertical leadership development practices is the organization’s ability to make
<<<PAGE=11>>>
10 
 
space for openness and vulnerability. All 25 interview participants expressed that their 
organizations or clients are challenged or inhibited by personal vulnerability and emphasized 
the importance of managing this perceived hindrance  in order to enhance leadership 
development. For practitioners employing vertical development, increasing the level of 
openness and vulnera bility in their organizations and their clients is a main area of focus. 
They acknowledged that the lack of openness in organizations is not just preventing leaders 
from developing, but it is preventing them from being themselves, with serious consequences. 
One respondent articulated the significance of this cultural dynamic: 
 
Most leaders are not in psychologically safe environments, so they can’t show up fully... 
There are leaders who are DEEPLY hungry for someone to be able to fully meet them, 
intellectually, emotionally, in their messiness —and it needs to be more than a coaching 
relationship that happens once a week. 
 
The way that senior leaders are able to show up with openness and vulnerability in their own 
organizations impacts them psychologically; it also impacts the way that leadership is viewed 
in the rest of the organization. This can limit the range of acceptable behaviors and 
development activities in the organization. When asked what one thing she would change to 
make leadership development more effective, one participant in a horizontally developmental 
organization said: “I wish our leadership could let their walls down. I wish that they could feel 
that it is okay to want and need development  ... So for me the walls would be the one thing 
that I would want to crumble down first .”  Another commented: We are terrible at [leaders 
being open about their development] ...Two years ago when we got rid of ratings we turned on 
a feature in Workday on how to give feedback. We were trying to drive transparency, openness 
and a little bit of vulnerability and it was SUCH a hot topic.”  
 
Capability and Experience of Practitioners. The next most frequently referenced organizational 
factor that influenced the adoption of vertically developmental practices w as the capability 
and experience of practitioners. This factor had three sub -themes: 1) understanding of the 
theory, 2) an ability to translate the theory and show impact, and 3) experience with their own 
personal vertical development. 
 
Some practitioners said understanding the theory of vertical development was a significant 
challenge for their organizations. One participant said that finding people to build his team 
and do vertical work in the organization was his biggest barrier to more effectively developing 
leaders. He said, “The capability and skills of the people on my team…I need to have someone 
who understands the [vertical] field and is also an A business player and I can’t find them .” 
Another respondent, when asked about why he thoug ht so few people are familiar with 
theories of vertical development, responded in the following way:  
 
I think it is really a failure of academia…How many Harvard Business Review articles have 
spoken explicitly about adult development? … Why isn't Fast Company talking about it? ... 
Where are the New York Times best-selling business books on vertical development? They 
don't exist! 
 
In addition to understanding the theories of vertical development, practitioners must also be 
able to effectively translate this  to organizational practice. While this is a challenge in all 
organizations, translating and showing the impact of vertical development is far from 
mainstream leadership development conversation. Where this challenge was discussed, 
respondents from all four vertically developmental organizations said that the best way to get
<<<PAGE=12>>>
11 
 
leaders to understand and support the topics is to engage them in the work and help them 
understand ideas of vertical development through their own experiences. They also expressed 
challenges with proving the impact of leadership development interventions of all kinds. One 
vertical practitioner discussed how she coaches leaders to see and understand the positive 
impacts of their development by focusing on measurable business outcomes: 
 
Some of them really struggle with it in the beginning, so I have to logically line it out for 
them. So then we have a measurable business outcome and could show ROI to the 
business. And they [the leaders] feel more invested  … they feel more proud in looking at 
the impact of how they are growing into their work. 
 
While individuals can work with coaches to track changes associated with their own growth, 
as described above, a more substantial challenge is showing impact on the business at large 
when only  these personalized approaches exist. No respondents had an answer for the 
challenge of measurement, and many noted that while one can observe trends, it is virtually 
impossible to show more than just correlation. One respondent attributed her organization ’s 
lack of focus on leadership development to this issue, saying that even when focus is found, 
the organization rarely sustains it, instead developing other models in a constant search for 
something that the business will readily adopt. All of this, she said, stems from the inability to 
measure or prove the impact of leadership development work, which for developmental 
practitioners is compounded by the lack of availability of vertical development assessments. 
Even if leaders are to accept the concept of v ertical development, measuring progress or 
conducting pre- and post- assessments is a challenge. 
 
Adding to the challenge of identifying practitioners and demonstrating impact is the 
importance of practitioners having experienced the work personally. This final sub-theme was 
unique to vertical development practitioners. In describing the importance of personal work 
one said, “The client can only go so far as you have gone within yourself …They are not going 
to go there if you won’t go there yourself.” Another respondent described, “ Practitioners 
sometimes get in the bad habit of saying oh you should do all these things but they themselves 
haven't actually gone through that process or that inquiry and there is a hypocrisy in that, you 
know ...The power of this work comes from it actually transforming yourself first.” 
 
Given the lack of awareness of the theories of vertical development in general, finding people 
with meaningful personal exper ience in vertical development is a barrier to more 
organizations adopting vertical approaches. The challenge of finding practitioners who have 
a mastery of all three of these things — vertical theory, ability to translate and apply that theory, 
and experience with their own development — is a pervasive impediment to bringing theories 
of vertical development into organizational leadership development in a sustainable and 
effective way. 
 
Creating Alignment in Business Processes . Creating process alignment across the 
organization, from the smallest practices to fundamental ways of working together, is another 
organizational challenge to the adoption of vertical development.  Frequently cited in this 
context were performance reviews  and promotions. Respondents highlighted that their 
performance review  process challenged leadership development because it focused on 
technical aspects of the job without rewarding other skills and capabilities. One participant 
from a values -based horizontal organization gave this example of how her organization’s 
performance management process is inhibiting leadership development:
<<<PAGE=13>>>
12 
 
We have some challenges in our performance review process. It asks employees to rate 
themselves and for others to rate them based on only one half, and what impact they 
made that half. It is not rewarding any long -term changes. And there is nothing on ther e 
about “How did you learn? How did you fail?  
 
While performance processes and general integration were the main focus of responses from 
horizontal organizations, vertical organizations took the idea of integration further, raising the 
idea that the entire organizational system might be contributing to the struggles of effectively 
developing leaders. All internal practitioners who utilized a vertical theory of individual change 
spoke about how the entire talent process, including performance management and 
promotion, has traditionally been an impediment to leadership development. Instead of 
working around these traditional methods, t hey are trying to use more developmental 
approaches to career progression, including getting rid of job descriptions and ranking 
processes, and encouraging employees to identify roles they are interested in instead of 
following a predetermined promotion path.  
 
Beyond these examples, all responden ts characterized as vertical cited the challenge of 
working within larger systems that do not hold the same developmental values. The sentiment 
was that the system often restricts individuals from engaging more fully in their own vertical 
development. One respondent explained, “ Say a team is really progressive, doing all of this 
stuff, but they are still caught within the larger system of performance management, of 
promotions, these things that can be a lower level design. That is a whole, huge OD change.”  
Another commented, “ When we look at the individual we need to look at the team and we 
need to look at the organization. It is very systemic... there are a lot of good leaders out there 
and they are not able to move into their fullest potential because of the limitations of the 
organization.” 
 
Expanded Understanding of Risk -Taking. Fourteen respondents indicated that their 
organizations did not provide safe spaces for experimentation and risk, thus impeding the 
growth of leaders. Changing a culture of risk-aversion is not easy, and one participant from a 
vertical organization described it as the most important breakthrough they needed to enhance 
leadership development: 
 
We are described as a gathering of valedictorians. Extremely high achieving. ..there is 
always having to have the right answer, and having to be ready at a moment’s not ice to 
give that right answer and give it in an eloquent, McKinsey bullet-pointed kind of way. And 
so that [culture] is an enormous impediment to vertical development. 
 
Another participant in a self -described risk-averse organization said, “ You get rewarded for 
having all the answers so that [being right] becomes really important, and there is a big identity 
piece around that for our leaders.” Another participant referenced fear-based leadership and 
its impact: “It really relates to speaking up. To lead from a confidence-based map rather than 
a fear-based map. There is a lot of aversion to risk in that respect.” 
 
The concept of innovation came up frequently in conversations about risk. Organizations want 
to encourage risk in service of more effective innovation, but for many organizations not used 
to risk taking, this is a big step. One participant described this frustration:   
 
I think we should be coming up with ways to talk about risk taking…One of [our] Leadership 
and Management principles is about being innovative…Implicit in that principle is some 
amount of acceptance that risk taking is a good idea.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
13 
 
 
Participants also discussed innovation as part of their leadership competencies or 
organizational values, a critical ability for employees and leaders alike. Several examples were 
shared of organizations trying to support innovation in their business practices  — hiring 
innovation officers, creating incubators, conducting after-action reviews, and teaching design 
thinking tools. However, when asked about how these practices impact the organization 
beyond research and development or other technical functions, the examples lacked detail or 
were absent altogether.  
 
Vertical practitioners spoke of the need to support risk -taking in terms of not only 
organizational innovation but also of personal growth, and in a far more integrated way than 
those using a horizontal model. In the work they are encouraging leaders to undertake, these 
practitioners talked about how to steer leaders toward their “ growing edge,” “ as close as 
possible to the friction,” by finding the right combination of “ commitment — almost fear, but 
excitement.” This difference in tone illustrates how developmentally minded practitioners see 
risk-taking. The vertical perspective moves risk away from the possibility of being wrong to the 
potential of learning and growth. One participant reflected,  “One of our mindsets is innovate 
everywhere, so there is some tension  between, ‘I am not allowed to fail here’ and then ‘My 
CEO is saying innovate everywhere. ‘But we can't innovate unless we fail sometimes so there 
is some real tension there.” 
 
In summary, the data from this study, as presented here, produced two key findings:  
 
1. Organizations that are more successful integrating vertical development theory have 
a specific leadership development mindset that includes a non -prescriptive learning 
strategy and a vertical approach to individual change. 
  
2. Organizational factors that have long impeded leadership development are still 
present for those integrating vertical development, and pose a challenge to the 
success of vertical development practices at the systemic and cultural levels .  
 
Implications for Practice 
As this paper and others before it demonstrate, leaders lack the capacity need ed to tackle 
today’s complex challenges (Leslie, 2009; Weiss & Molinaro, 2005). Many have critiqued the 
leadership development industry and asserted that its failure to adapt and evolve its methods 
have contributed to this critical capacity gap (Avolio et. a l., 2005; Bolden, 2006; Kellerman, 
2004, 2012; Pfeffer, 2015). To cultivate new ways of effective leadership development, this 
field needs to surpass just a change of approach and seek a transformation of how it thinks 
about leadership development (Kellerman, 2012; Leslie, 2009; McGuire & Rhodes, 2009). 
Transformation must transcend horizontal skill development to include vertical development, 
which supports the development of an increasingly complex and inclusive point of view 
(Kagen, 1982; Petrie, 2014b; Torbert, 1987). As this research has illustrated, practitioners 
interested in introducing vertical development to their organizations will, for the most part, be 
pioneering in their work. They will face more complex variations of traditional challenges that 
have plagued the development industry, as well as deeper and more systemic challenges 
driven by the culture and processes of their organizations.  
 
The implications and recommendations articulated here are intended for those practitioners 
who are pioneer ing in the field of vertical development, working to bring these concepts to 
their organizations or clients. Successful implementation of vertical development practices
<<<PAGE=15>>>
14 
 
requires both an individual and organizational level approach. At the individual level,  this 
research has shown that practitioners of vertical development must have had developmental 
experiences themselves. Therefore, practitioners should assess their own developmental 
experience, asking how they could deepen their personal work to show up more effectively in 
their organizations. At the organizational level, our research has shown that there are 
significant organizational impediments to successfully implementing vertical development. 
Given the systemic nature of these impediments, we recommen d that practitioners take an 
incremental approach to changing their organization's practices to become more vertically 
developmental over time. See Tables 2 and 3 for suggested approaches at both the individual 
and organizational level that will support vertical growth.  
 
Table 2: Recommendations at the Individual Level for Implementation of Vertical Development 
 
Criteria Questions Examples from Developmental Practitioners  
Heat Experience What does the edge of my comfort zone 
look like?  
 
What would it look like to step into a 
learning experience or development 
experience that pushes me out of my 
comfort zone? 
 
How can I step into my own discomfort?  
There are significant heat experiences that emanate from 
bold risks, or large planned initiatives, but often just as 
much heat can be generated in the small moments of our 
everyday work. One practitioner discussed how they are 
bringing more challenge to individual growth goals 
through a cohort -based learning experience where 
leaders share their experiences with others. 
 
Colliding 
Perspectives How often do I seek out viewpoints that 
contradict my assumptions and beliefs? 
 
What would it look like to cast my net 
wider and gather more perspectives?  
There are many ways to acquire new and different 
perspectives, but developing a strong practice for 
reaching beyond your current thinking can help you 
regularly return to the process of seeking out new 
perspectives. One practitioner discusses how he uses 
frameworks to help leaders test their own ways of 
thinking and strengthen their perspective-taking muscles.  
Elevated 
Sensemaking What do I do to pause and reflect on 
situations that I encounter?  
 
How often do I make time for reflection 
and integration of new perspectives? 
 
Am I aware when I’m on autopilot? 
Consider incorporating activities that support your own 
reflective practices. One developmental coach  discussed 
how he works with leaders to solidify their reflection 
practices, that overtime help them to be able to 
meaningfully reflect on their behavior in real time.  
 
Table 3: Recommendations at the Organizational Level for Implementing Vertical Development  
 
 Questions to Consider Examples from Developmental Practitioners  
Leadership 
Development Mindset  How prescriptive is the organization in its 
definition of what leadership is and how it 
is developed/measured?  
 
How does the organization view the process 
of leadership development? 
A key part of the developmental process is shaping your 
organization’s leadership development mindset. One 
practitioner discussed how he is working to move his 
organization away from prescribed behaviors toward a 
developmental approach by showing senior leaders the 
vertical research and helping them create succession and 
development plans based on this developmental approach.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
15 
 
Leadership Support  Does everyone in the organization 
recognize the importance of vertical 
development, including the senior leaders?  
 
Is there a commitment of time and 
resources to support leadership 
development at all levels of the 
organization?  
 
Do leaders model their own development 
for others? 
Find ways to give current senior leaders a voice and a 
platform to talk about their own development in a way that 
opens the door for others, like this impressive program 
where leaders publicly discuss their developmental 
opportunities and respond to feedback.  
Openness and 
Vulnerability  Are weaknesses seen as an asset and errors 
as opportunities?  
 
Is it culturally acceptable for people to talk 
about their development and ask for help?  
 
Do people feel safe expressing their 
concerns, feelings, and needs? 
Think about how you could support practices that help 
teams become more open about their development with 
one another, bringing a growth mindset to their day-to-day 
work and interactions. One practitioner shared a tool they 
made for their team leaders to facilitate growth-oriented 
conversations on their teams.  
Business Practice 
Alignment  
Is there an alignment between 
developmental strategies and performance 
review and compensation practices?  
 
Are assignments and career pathing based 
on what people are prepared for or what 
would be growth opportunities or 
aspirational paths? 
 
Do your organizational processes support 
individual development?  
 
Consider what tools or frameworks your organization is 
using across the business and how they could put more 
emphasis on development. One practitioner approached 
this by breaking down barriers between the OD, Learning 
and Development, Change Management, and HR functions 
in his organization and emphasized the use of a common 
set of tools across all the teams.  
 
Tolerance for Risk 
Taking 
Is the organization willing to sacrifice 
short- term gain for long-term growth that 
results from new ways of thinking and 
acting? 
 
Is everyone at all levels empowered to take 
risks that support their growth?  
 
Is there a process for vetting experiments 
that challenge existing ways of doing 
things?  
 
Give your leaders experiences that have real risks 
involved, like one where a set of leaders were chosen to 
create a new business strategy for the organization.  
 
Discussion and Conclusion 
Practitioners intentionally using vertical development struggle to persuade leaders and teams 
to prioritize the time required for development, which, for meaningful vertical development, is 
often a greater investment than a skills-based approach requires. From initial assessment to 
coaching conversations to personal reflection and follow -up, the comprehensive process of 
vertical development demands quality time from those engaged in the process. Practitioners 
implementing vertical development referenced the challenge of time ― as well as the sense 
of being overwhelmed that leads people to believe they don't have time  ― as a barrier to 
development throughout the process. 
       
Additionally, vertical development inherently requires a deeper level of long-term engagement 
from leaders. In the context of this long -term development, vertical practitioners still have to
<<<PAGE=17>>>
16 
 
identify ways to create a meaningful transfer of learning, moving away from static 
interventions to more deeply embedded practices (Avolio, 2005). This often requir es more 
support from others throughout the business and a deeper integration of developmental 
philosophies into the day-to-day work of the organization. This kind of support can be doubly 
challenging for developmental practitioners who face even greater ob stacles to measuring 
progress than some traditional leadership development methods.  They still struggle with 
measuring impact and proving ROI, for individuals and for the business (Kellerman, 2012). 
 
Those seeking to implement vertical development face added challenges of creating business 
alignment, expanding risk -taking, and making space for openness and vulnerability. These 
challenges illustrate the deep, systemic, and cultural challenges to vertical development that 
are embedded in the way organizations have always operated. 
 
Finally, a willingness not only to self -reflect, but to engage in deep reflection with others, is 
essential to vertical leadership development. Organizations that do not support a culture of 
openness and vulnerability will not be able to become fully developmental.  
 
Those who are committed to implementing vertical development in their practice can find 
examples in pockets.  Nevertheless, practitioners who choose to implement vertical 
development will, for the most part, be pioneering  in their work. Furthermore, practitioners 
seeking to make these profound changes will face more complex variations of traditional 
challenges within the industry, as well as deeper and more systemic challenges driven by the 
culture and processes of the org anization. The acceleration of effective and sustainable 
integration of vertical development will require transformation at the organizational level. 
Despite new and improved theories, in order to make meaningful change, practitioners can 
no longer look at  leadership development in isolation. Every piece must be examined in 
relationship to the broader system. 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
Avolio, B. (2005). 100 year review of leadership intervention research: Briefings Report.  
 
Bass, B. M.  and Steidlmeier, P. (1999). Ethics, character, and authentic transformational 
leadership behavior. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 181-217. 
 
Carrol, B., Singaraju, R., and Park, E. (2015). Corporate learning factbook 2015: Benchmarks, 
trends, and analysis of the U.S. training market. Bersin by Deloitte. Retrieved from 
http://www.bersin.com/Practice/Detail 
 
Cook-Greuter, S. and Miller, M. eds. (1994). Transcendence and mature thought in Adulthood: 
The further reaches of adult development. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. 
 
Ghemawat, P. (2012). Developing global leaders. McKinsey Quarterly , 3. Retrieved from 
mckinsey.com/insights 
 
Gini, A. and Green, R. M. (2013). 10 virtues of outstanding leaders: Leadership and character. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
17 
 
“Global Human Capital Trends 2016.” (2  February 2016). Deloitte United States. Retrieved 
March 18, 2017, from https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Docu 
ments/HumanCapital/gx-dup-global-human-capital-trends-2016.pdf 
 
Global Leadership Program: Levels of Leadership Development . (2017). Retrieved April 20, 
2018, from https://www.gla.global/the-glp/levels-of-leadership-development/ 
 
Guest, G., Bunce, A., and Johnson, L. (2006 ).  How Many Interviews Are Enough?: An 
Experiment with Data Saturation and Variability, Field Methods, Sage. 18 (1), 59-82. 
 
Kegan, R. (1994). In Over Our Heads: The Mental Demands of Modern Life. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Kegan, R. (1982).  The Evolving Self: Problems and Process in Human Development. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
 
Kegan, R. and Lahey, L. (2010). Adult Development and Organizational Leadership. Handbook 
of Leadership Theory and Practice: An HBS Centennial Colloquium on Advancing 
Leadership. ed. Nohria, N., and Khurana, R. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press. 
 
Kegan, R., Lahey, L. L., Miller, M. L., Fleming, A., and Helsing, D. (2016). An Everyone Culture 
Becoming a Deliberately Developmental Organization . Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
Review Press. 
 
Kellerman, B. (2012). The End of Leadership. New York: Harper Business. 
 
Ko, Ia and Rea, Peter. (2016), Leading with Virtue in the VUCA World, in (ed.) Advances in 
Global Leadership (Advances in Global Leadership, Volume 9) Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited, 375 – 397. 
 
Kohlberg, L. (1976). Moral Stages and Moralization: The Cognitive-Developmental Approach. 
In T. Lickona (Ed.), Moral Development and Behavior: Theory, Research, And Social issues 
(31-53). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
 
Kouzes, J. M. and Posner, B. Z. (2007). The Leadership Challenge. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass. 
 
Latham, R. (2013). A framework for leading the transformation to performance excellence 
part 2:  CEO perspectives on leadership behaviors, individual leader characteristics, and 
organization culture. Qualitative Management Journal 20 (3), 19-40.  
 
Leslie, J. (2009). The leadership gap: What you need and don’t have when it comes to 
leadership develo pment. Center for Creative Leadership . Retrieved from https:// 
www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Leadership-Gap-What-You-Need.pdf 
 
Loevinger, J. (1969). Theories of Ego Development. Clinical-Cognitive Psychology: Models and 
Integrations, 83-135. 
 
Maxwell, J.A. (2013). Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive Approach. Thousand Oaks, 
CA.: Sage Publications. 
 
Petrie, N. (2014a). Future trends in leader development. Center for Creative Leadership . 
Retrieved from http://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/futureTrends.pdf
<<<PAGE=19>>>
18 
 
Petrie, N. (2014b). Vertical leadership development –Part 1: Developing leaders. Center for 
Creative Leadership . Retrieved from http://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/ 
04/VerticalLeadersPart1.pdf 
 
Petrie, N. (2015). The How-To of Vertical Leadership Development  — Part 2: 30 Experts, 3 
Conditions and 15 Approaches . Center for Creative Leadership . Retrieved from 
http://www.ccl.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/verticalLeadersPart2.pdf 
 
Pfeffer, J. (2015). Leadership BS: Fixing Workplaces and Careers One Truth at a Time. New 
York, NY: Harper Business, an imprint of HarperCollins. 
 
Rooke, D. and Torbert, W. R. (2005). Seven transformations of leadership. Harvard Business 
Review, 83, 66. 
Rowland, D. ( 14 October 2016). Why Leadership Development Isn ’t Developing Leaders . 
Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2016/10/why-leadership-development-isnt-developing-
leaders 
 
Torbert, W. R. (1987). Managing the Corporate Dream: Restructuring for Long-Term Success. 
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin. 
 
Weiss, D. S. and Molinaro, V. (2005). The Leadership Gap: Building Leadership Capacity for 
Competitive Advantage. New York: Wiley. 
 
 
 
 
About the Authors 
 
Hannah Elise Jones is a member of the Talent Strategy team at Uber Technologies, where she 
works cross-functionally to solve some of the company’s largest people and organizational 
challenges. Prior to joining Uber, Hannah worked as an OD consultant, partnering with 
organizations on culture, leadership, and talent management practices. In conjunction with, 
and alongside her professional work, Hannah has conducted research on the impacts of 
effective leadership and how to better develop it in organizations. Hannah is passionate about 
the intersection between individual development and organizational transformation, and is 
currently exploring this relationship through further research on vertical development, 
individual development practices, and organizational leadership. Hann ah obtained her 
Masters of Science in Organization Development from Pepperdine University’s Graziadio 
Business School (2018) and her Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies from UC Berkeley 
(2014).  
 
Ms. Jones can be contacted at hannahelisejones@gmail.com 
 
Julie A. Chesley, PhD is Practitioner Faculty of Organization Theory and Management at Pepperdine 
University.  Julie’s teaching focuses on personal and group transformation as well as the critical 
thinking and analysis required to successfully lead large scale change. Julie has also been on the 
faculty at the United States Air Force Academy and at Colorado College. In addition to her academic 
practice, Julie has over thirty years ’ experience implementing, teaching and researching 
organization management, including twenty years of service to the United States Air Force retiring
<<<PAGE=20>>>
19 
 
as a Lt Colonel. Julie has numerous publications and presentations including articles in California 
Management Review, Journal of Change Management, Journal of Business Research  and the  
Journal of Leadership Studies, as well two texts: Applied Project Management for Space Systems 
and Strategic Thinking: Today’s Business Imperative. Julie holds a B.S. in Management from the 
United States Air Force Academy, and an M.B.A and Ph.D. in Organization Theory and Management 
from the Leeds School of Business at the University of Colorado.   
 
Dr. Chesley can be contacted at julie.a.chesley@gmail.com 
 
 
Terri D. Egan, PhD, is an Associate Professor of Applied Behavioral Sciences at the Pepperdine 
Graziadio School of Business. She has taught graduate and executive courses in personal 
development, lea dership, team effectiveness, organizational change and development, 
creativity and innovation and international organization development. Her award -winning 
research has been published in a number of journals including Administrative Science 
Quarterly, Orga nization Science, Journal of Public Administration, The Information Society, 
Human Relations, and the Appreciative Inquiry Practitioner. Dr. Egan’s current research and 
practice focus on integrating neuroscience discoveries into organization and leadership  
development theory and practice. She is the co -founder of The SyncUp Leadership Group 
(http://syncupleadership.com/). She holds an interdisciplinary degree in Social Sciences, an 
M.B.A. and a Ph.D. in Organizational Behavior all from the University of California, Irvine and 
is a guild certified practitioner of the Feldenkrais® Method of Somatic Education. 
 
Dr. Egan can be contacted at terrieganprof@gmail.com