<<<PAGE=1>>>
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2016), 89, 249–277
© 2015 The British Psychological Society
www.wileyonlinelibrary.com
The effectiveness of workplace coaching:
A meta-analysis of learning and performance
outcomes from coaching
Rebecca J. Jones 1*, Stephen A. Woods 2 and Yves R. F. Guillaume 3
1University of Worcester, UK
2University of Surrey, UK
3Aston University, Birmingham, UK
This study presents a meta-analysis synthesizing the existing research on the effectiveness
of workplace coaching. We exclusively explore workplace coaching provided by internal
or external coaches and therefore exclude cases of manager –subordinate and peer
coaching. We propose a framework of potential outcomes from coaching in organiza-
tions, which we examine meta-analytically ( k = 17). Our analyses indicated that coaching
had positive effects on organizational outcomes overall ( d = 0.36), and on speciﬁc forms
of outcome criteria (skill-based d = 0.28; affective d = 0.51; individual-level results
d = 1.24). We also examined moderation by a number of coaching practice factors (use of
multisource feedback; type of coach; coaching format; longevity of coaching). Our
analyses of practice moderators indicated a signiﬁcant moderation of effect size for type of
coach (with effects being stronger for internal coaches compared to external coaches)
and use of multisource feedback (with the use of multisource feedback resulting in smaller
positive effects). We found no moderation of effect size by coaching format (comparing
face-to-face, with blended face-to-face and e-coaching) or duration of coaching (number
of sessions or longevity of intervention). The effect sizes give support to the potential
utility of coaching in organizations. Implications for coaching research and practice are
discussed.
Practitioner points
/C15Our meta-analysis supports the positive effects of workplace coaching as an approach to employee
learning and development in organizations, with a variety of criteria.
/C15Our ﬁndings indicate that coaching was more effective when conducted by internal coaches and when
multisource feedback was excluded.
/C15Workplace coaching was effective whether conducted face-to-face or using blended techniques (i.e.,
blending face-to-face with e-coaching).
Is workplace coaching effective in terms of delivering individual learning and develop-
ment, and improvements in performance and results for organizations? Despite the huge
growth in the use of coaching as a strategy for employee learning and development (ICF,
2012), there remains a paucity of scientiﬁc evidence examining its beneﬁts for
organizations, coupled with a generally poor speciﬁcation of the types of outcomes that
*Correspondence should be addressed to Rebecca J. Jones, University of Worcester, Castle Street, Worcester WR1 3AS, UK
(email: rebecca.jones@worc.ac.uk).
DOI:10.1111/joop.12119
249
<<<PAGE=2>>>
can be expected from coaching. In this study, we report a meta-analysis of the effects of
coaching on performance, and other learning and development outcome criteria. We also
examine moderators of these effects, focusing on the techniques and features of speciﬁc
coaching interventions. Our systematic review of studies evaluating the beneﬁts of
coaching in organizations advances the literature in three main ways. First, we address
problems of criterion speciﬁcation in the coaching literature by proposing and examining
a framework of coaching outcomes aligned to the learning, training, and development
literature. Second, unlike previous studies (e.g., Theeboom, Beersma, & van Vianen,
2014), we clarify the effectiveness of workplace coaching speciﬁcally by focusing our
analyses exclusively on organizational (and not general or educational) samples, and on
coaching provided by practitioner coaches (and not managers or peers), closing an
important empirical gap in the ﬁeld. Finally, we examine a number of practice moderators
of the effectiveness of coaching, analyses of which have important implications for
practitioner coaches concerning the effectiveness of speciﬁc coaching tools and
techniques.
Workplace coaching
Workplace or executive coaching (hereafter referred to as ‘coaching’) is a one-to-one
learning and development intervention that uses a collaborative, reﬂective, goal-focused
relationship to achieve professional outcomes that are valued by the coachee (Smither,
2011). Coaching has typically been perceived as an ‘executive’ development activity, but
it need not necessarily be limited to managers and executives in organizations. Although
the term coaching may be used to refer to a variety of one-to-one development activities,
there is some emerging consensus about what constitute the core features or elements of
coaching (e.g., see Bono, Purvanova, Towler, & Peterson, 2009; Smither, 2011). These are
(1) formation and maintenance of a helping relationship between the coach and coachee;
(2) a formally deﬁned coaching agreement or contract, setting personal development
objectives; (3) the fulﬁlment of this agreement (i.e., achievement of the objectives)
through a development process focusing on interpersonal and intrapersonal issues; (4)
striving for growth of the coachee by providing the tools, skills, and opportunities they
need to develop themselves and become more effective (Bonoet al., 2009; Kilburg, 1996;
McCauley & Hezlett, 2002; Peterson & Hicks, 1996; Smither, 2011; Witherspoon & White,
1996).
The coaching relationship is one that the coachee enters into for the speciﬁc purpose
of fulﬁlling development objectives. It is important to differentiate coaching from other
forms of developmental relationships in the workplace. Conceptually, it may ﬁrst be
distinguished from mentoring relationships (see Brockbank & McGill, 2012 for a review).
A mentoring relationship is conventionally long term between a highly experienced
mentor and an inexperienced mentee. The mentor is assumed to be highly experienced in
the discipline or ﬁeld in which the mentee is working, and in the workplace, the mentor
typically provides guidance on career development and networking (Ebyet al., 2013). In
a coaching relationship, there is no such expectation that the coach has expertise or
experience of the coachee’s area of work, and the term of the relationship is rather guided
by speciﬁc objectives.
Similarly, there are relative status prerequisites in ‘peer coaching’ (Parker, Hall, &
Kram, 2008; Parker, Kram, & Hall, 2013), in which development is a two-way reciprocal
process between people of equal status in an organization. Peer coaching aims to provide
mutually supportive personal and professional development of both people in the
250 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
peer-coaching dyad. The developmental focus in coaching, by contrast, is solely the
coachee, and the relationship is free from the inﬂuence or boundaries of organizational
status structures.
The coaching relationship is also typically considered to be distinct from
formalized organizational performance management relationships (e.g., supervisor –
subordinate; Feldman & Lankau, 2005). For example, there exists a power relationship
between line managers and their subordinates, which is absent in the helping
relationship a coachee would have with an independent coach. Managers and
supervisors might propose coaching as a developmental intervention for their staff
(and in this sense, coaching might be considered a part of performance management
processes), but to ﬁt with the relational deﬁnition of coaching, the developmental
relationship that facilitates learning and development would be with a coach, rather
than the manager or supervisor.
In this study, we conceptualize coaching as distinct from these other forms of
developmental relationship. Correspondingly, in our analyses, we speciﬁcally focus on
studies of coaching and exclude studies of other relationships (e.g., mentoring, supervisor
coaching, and peer coaching).
In terms of practical utility, keeping coaching distinct from other organizational
performance management and development relationships offers potential advantages.
Sherman and Freas (2004) report that the relational nature of coaching provides an
individual, customized feel to coaching, with coaches providing candour, and honest
feedback to the coachee in relation to their performance and behaviour. This is frequently
supplemented with feedback from the coachee’s organization (e.g., through multisource
feedback). However, the privacy, non-judgmental perspective, and conﬁdentiality of the
coaching session provide a safe environment for the coachee to reﬂect on that feedback
and work on improving areas of weakness. The coach may discuss suggested tools and
techniques to help the coachee develop and improve, the content of which is dependent
on the background and approach of the coach. However, coaches generally avoid
providing instructional or prescriptive solutions to coachees, because as highlighted
above, they are often not technical experts in the coachee’s occupational area of specialty
(McAdam, 2005).
In the context of human resource management (HRM), coaching represents an
approach to employee learning, training, and development, and although there
remains lack of consensus about the core processes of coaching as a development
intervention (a point that we return to later), coaching sessions are frequently
characterized either directly or indirectly with a number of performance-promoting
features.
First, coaches apply goal-setting: Well established as a technique of performance
improvement (e.g., Locke & Latham, 1990, 2002; Morisano, Hirsh, Peterson, Pihl, & Shore,
2010; Wegge, Bipp, & Kleinbeck, 2007). Second, goals generally feature activities
undertaken whilst at work, promoting experiential forms of practice and learning (e.g.,
Kolb, 1984). Related to this and thirdly, by encouraging learning through practice at work,
coaching rather directly promotes translation of learning to work performance behaviour,
addressing the issue of transfer, often cited as a barrier to performance beneﬁts of training
(e.g., Baldwin & Ford, 1988). In this respect, the personalized nature of coaching may
provide a high-ﬁdelity form of workplace learning (Kozlowski & DeShon, 2004; van der
Locht, van Dam, & Chiaburu, 2013).
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 251
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Coaching effectiveness
In the literature to date, the case has been building, based primarily on anecdotal evidence
and uncontrolled studies, that coaching is effective at improving work-based outcomes
including goal accomplishment (Fischer & Beimers, 2009), professional growth (McGuf-
ﬁn & Obonyo, 2010), improved professional relationships (Kombarakaran, Yang, Baker, &
Fernandes, 2008), greater managerial ﬂexibility (Jones, Rafferty, & Grifﬁn, 2006),
increased productivity (Olivero, Bane, & Kopelman, 1997), and improved resilience and
workplace well-being (Grant, Curtayne, & Burton, 2009). Coaching is also aligned with
recent emergent interest in active rather than passive learning, by which employees take
responsibility for shaping their own learning processes (Bell & Kozlowski, 2008).
Coaching is led by the coachee, giving them control over their learning and development,
and the increasing popularity of coaching in organizations may therefore reﬂect a more
general trend away from ‘one size ﬁts all’ approaches to training (Salas & Kozlowski,
2010).
Despite the apparent potential advantages of coaching, research has not kept pace
with its growth in practice, and the lack of conclusive evidence regarding the
effectiveness of coaching is one of the most frequently cited problems in the ﬁeld (Grant,
Passmore, Cavanagh, & Parker, 2010). Shortcomings in the research evidence base for
coaching include problems of empirical research design and criterion measurement in
evaluation studies (Grant, Passmore,et al., 2010).
Recognizing the need for systematic evidence in this ﬁeld, Theeboomet al. (2014)
reported a meta-analysis of the effects of coaching on several outcome criteria. Using
Hedges’g, which corrects for potential bias due to overestimate of population effect size
when small samples are included in the analysis (Hedges, 1981), they reported positive
overall effects of coaching with aggregated outcomes (g = 0.66), and with speciﬁc kinds
of criteria: Performance and skills (g = 0.60); well-being (g = 0.46); coping (g = 0.43);
work attitudes (g = 0.54); and goal-directed self-regulation (g = 0.74). Positive effects
were moderated by research design (within-subjects research design studiesg = 1.15,
compared to mixed design studies g = 0.39). Moderator testing also showed no
moderation by number of coaching sessions leading Theeboomet al.(2014) to conclude
that the number of coaching sessions is not related to the effectiveness of the intervention.
Whilst the meta-analysis of Theeboomet al.(2014) represents an important advance
in the evidence base for coaching generally, the implications for coaching in organizations
speciﬁcally are less clear. This is because in their analyses, Theeboomet al. (2014)
compute effect sizes which are derived from studies of coaching in a variety of contexts.
For example, results from studies of workplace coaching are combined with results from
studies of coaching conducted for different purposes (e.g., of the 18 studies included in
the analyses, six report the results of general life coaching, and one reports results of
health coaching). Moreover, Theeboomet al. (2014) mix studies using organizational
samples with studies based on educational and general non-organizational samples (e.g.,
seven of the 18 primary studies included were conducted in non-organizational samples
such as student or general population convenience samples). As a consequence, the
implications of the meta-analysis for organizations applying coaching as part of HRM, for
performance improvement at work, are confounded and therefore inconclusive.
The problem of applying the ﬁndings of Theeboomet al.(2014) to the literature on
learning, training, and development in organizations is further compounded by issues of
criterion speciﬁcation. Although ﬁve categories of criteria were analysed (performance/
skills; well-being; coping; work attitudes; goal-directed self-regulation), they appear to
have been deﬁned bottom-up (i.e., based on those criteria measured in the included
252 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
studies) instead of top-down (i.e., by applying systematic criterion framework to classify
outcomes). Uncertainty about the speciﬁc nature of the work outcomes from coaching
that might be expected (e.g., Bennett, 2006; Brotman, Liberi, & Wasylyshyn, 1998;
Lowman, 2005) therefore remains unaddressed in the literature.
To address these limitations, in our study, we seek to more clearly integrate the
literature on coaching with wider literature on employee learning, training, and
development at work. We therefore focus exclusively on studies using organizational
samples that examine work-relevant outcomes (i.e., excluding variables such as general
life satisfaction). This approach is consistent with recent calls in the organizational
behaviour literature to consider more carefully the context and setting of research studies
(Brutus, Gill, & Duniewicz, 2010; Stone-Romero, 2008). Moreover, we propose and
examine a criterion framework of coaching outcomes at work, derived from existing
criterion models in the learning, training, and development literature. This provides a
more robust classiﬁcation of criterion effects and enables our ﬁndings to be better
integrated with evidence from industrial, work and organizational psychology, and HRM
research on training effectiveness. Finally, addressing the need for research on the
features and techniques of coaching that make it more or less effective (Grant, Passmore,
et al., 2010; Swart & Harcup, 2013), and adding to the practical utility of our study for
coaching practice at work, we also test several coaching practice moderators that may
inﬂuence the effectiveness of coaching.
Outcome criteria of coaching and their measurement
There is little consensus in the literature regarding the most appropriate outcome criteria
for evaluating coaching (Grant, Passmore,et al., 2010; MacKie, 2007; Smither, 2011). To
advance in this respect, it is possible to draw on established criterion models from the
literatures on learning, training, and development to propose a criterion framework for
evaluating coaching.
The ultimate aim of learning, training, and development is to maximize the
effectiveness of an organization’s human capital (Ford, Kraiger, & Merritt, 2010) by
improving performance at the individual level, on the assumption that this will
subsequently result in organizational-level improvements (Swart & Harcup, 2013).
Learning, training, and development interventions are therefore positioned as a central
function of HRM, integrated with performance management processes more widely (e.g.,
Murphy & DeNisi, 2008). Coaching is compatible with this conceptualization because the
aim of coaching is to aid the achievement of individual goals for improvement, in order to
positively contribute to organizational-level goals and objectives. Given this compatibility,
outcome criteria for training effectiveness may represent a sensible foundation for
modelling the potential outcomes of coaching.
In the training literature, Kirkpatrick (1967) model of evaluation criteria proposes that
the evaluation of training should be performed at four levels: Reactions, learning,
behaviour, and results. Kirkpatrick’s model is widely applied in research and practice
(e.g., Alliger, Tannenbaum, Bennett, Traver, & Shotland, 1997; Arthur, Bennett, Edens, &
Bell, 2003; Powell & Yalcin, 2010; Tharenou, Saks, & Moore, 2007) and represents a
logical organization and progression of outcomes from basic individual reactions to
training through to training transfer and organizational results. Kraiger, Ford, and Salas
(1993) argued that when evaluating training, it was necessary to examine learning-based
outcomes in a more sophisticated way, rather than combining learning and transfer
outcomes as in the Kirkpatrick levels. Kraigeret al. (1993) proposed a model of three
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 253
<<<PAGE=6>>>
classes of learning outcomes that occur following training: Cognitive; skill-based, and
affective outcomes. This three-component model of learning outcomes has been applied
in numerous studies (e.g., Kalinoskiet al., 2013; Mesmer-Magus & Viswesvaran, 2010;
Taylor, Russ-Eft, & Chan, 2005).
Based on these existing criterion frameworks, we propose that the outcomes of
coaching be modelled in the following ways. With respect to the Kraigeret al. (1993)
three-component classiﬁcation, we propose that the potential outcomes of coaching
are similarly separated into cognitive, skill-based, and affective outcome criteria.
Examples of cognitive outcomes from coaching include new declarative and
procedural knowledge which could be acquired by self-directed learning and
problem-solving (guided by goal-setting). The work-based application of improvement
and development activity that is encouraged in coaching is likely to promote skill
acquisition and enhancement, effectively resulting in skill-based outcomes. In addition,
many of the intended beneﬁts of coaching represent affective outcomes, such as the
development of self-efﬁcacy and conﬁdence, reduction of stress, and increased
satisfaction and motivation.
We also note the aims of coaching to contribute to achievement of organizational-
level goals and objectives (e.g., Sonnentag & Frese, 2002). By aligning individual goal-
setting to these organizational-level goals and objectives, coaching may impact
performance, making it sensible to include some measure of results, as per
Kirkpatrick’s model (Kirkpatrick, 1996). Results might be measured in terms of
impact on individual-, team-, and organizational-level performance. Our proposed set of
evaluation criteria for coaching is summarized in Table 1. Drawing on Kraigeret al.
(1993) and Kirkpatrick (1996), we also specify acceptable measurement methodology
for assessing these outcome criteria, which were applied in our coding of studies for
the meta-analysis.
Given its role as a learning and development intervention, we expected coaching to
inﬂuence all of our proposed evaluation criteria. However, in our meta-analysis, we were
only able to test effects of coaching on affective, skill-based, and individual-level results
outcomes. We return to this point in our discussion of ﬁndings.
H1: Coaching will demonstrate positive effects for affective, skill-based, and individual-
level results outcome criteria.
Table 1. Summary of proposed coaching evaluation criteria
Outcome criteria Description Measurement methodology
Affective outcomes Attitudes and motivational outcomes
(e.g., self-efﬁcacy, well-being, satisfaction)
Self-report questionnaires
Cognitive outcomes Declarative knowledge; procedural
knowledge; cognitive strategies
(e.g., problem-solving)
Recognition and recall tests
Skill-based outcomes Compilation and automaticity of new skills
(e.g., leadership skills, technical skills,
competencies)
Behavioural observation in
the workplace (e.g.,
multisource feedback
questionnaire)
Results Individual, team, and organizational
performance
Financial results, objective
or goal achievement,
and productivity
254 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Research design
Alongside the nature of coaching outcome criteria, a further methodological
consideration for studies examining the effects of coaching is the research design
employed to measure those criteria. Within-subjects research design has frequently
been utilized by other researchers in the ﬁeld of training evaluation (e.g., Dierdorff,
Surface, & Brown, 2010; Franke & Felfe, 2012; Patrick, Smy, Tombs, & Shelton, 2012).
Effect sizes in within-subjects designs represent the differences between measure-
ments of criteria taken before and after the coaching has taken place (with varying
duration of time between measurements depending on the number and schedule of
coaching sessions). An alternative design is the between-subjects design (e.g., Ayres &
Malouff, 2007; Holladay & Qui ~nones, 2003; Neal et al., 2006; Orvis, Fisher, &
Wasserman, 2009). In these studies, effect sizes represent the differences between
control and experimental (i.e., coaching) groups measured after the coaching has
taken place.
In our meta-analysis, we adopt a position that these two methodologies (within-
subjects and between-subjects) both represent acceptable and robust designs for studies
of coaching outcomes. We therefore only include studies that adopt one or other of these
designs in our meta-analysis. For analytic completeness, we compare the effect size of
coaching in studies that adopt each methodology. Theeboomet al.(2014) found stronger
effects for within-subjects designs compared to between-subjects designs and speculated
that this may be due to the increased level of control over potential bias and confounds in
between-subjects designs, reducing the magnitude of effects compared with within-
subjects designs. For example, inclusion of control groups allows for control of the natural
maturation of participants over time and selection effects in sampling. Following this
reasoning, we hypothesize:
H2: Coaching will demonstrate stronger positive effects on overall outcomes in
studies using within-subjects research designs compared to between-subjects
designs.
Practice moderators of coaching effectiveness
In addition to the meta-analyses of the effectiveness of coaching in relation to speciﬁc
criteria, we further extend the scope of our study by examining potential practice
moderators of coaching effectiveness. There are a variety of possible tools and
techniques that speciﬁc coaches may use, which might be considered method factors
in the practice and implementation of coaching. As with studies of training
interventions (e.g., Bell & Kozlowski, 2010), it is reasonable to assume that these
method factors in coaching have some impact on its effectiveness. Such factors
therefore represent moderators of the beneﬁts of coaching on the outcome criteria
we have identiﬁed. In our meta-analysis, we were able to test how four coaching
method factors (use of multisource feedback; coaching delivery format; internal vs.
external coach; longevity of coaching) moderate the beneﬁts of coaching. We
selected these moderators based on their coverage in the practical literature on
coaching and because our literature search yielded studies that permitted their
analyses. However, we do acknowledge that these are not the only potential practice
moderators in the practice of coaching, a point that we develop further in our
discussion of ﬁndings.
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 255
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Multisource feedback
Coaching is frequently accompanied by multisource feedback in the research literature.
Coaching is often used to facilitate the interpretation of multisource feedback (Luthans &
Peterson, 2003; Smither, London, Flautt, Vargas, & Kucine, 2003), and in some studies
(including some in our meta-analysis), changes in multisource evaluations over time serve
as an outcome measure for coaching (Kochanowski, Seifert, & Yukl, 2010). Previous
research has shown that multisource feedback can be an effective method of improving
work performance in its own right (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Smither, London, & Reilly,
2005). The utility of multisource feedback may also be considered in relation to evidence
that feedback more generally has performance beneﬁts. For example, performance
feedback has been shown to inﬂuence goal regulation. Ilies and Judge (2005) and Johnson
(2013) found that both evaluative and objective feedback had signiﬁcantly positive
impacts on task performance. Seifert, Yukl, and McDonald (2003) found that feedback had
a positive impact on outcomes when given in conjunction with a facilitator during a
workshop rather than as written feedback alone.
Given that the purpose of coaching is to facilitate self-insight and reﬂection, it seems
logical that combining coaching with multisource feedback is likely to lead to a greater
impact on outcomes than coaching alone. Moreover, the discursive exploration that
comes from coaching is likely to represent a more effective presentation of the
multisource feedback than simple written results, further enhancing the beneﬁts to the
coaching intervention. We hypothesize that:
H3: Coaching utilizing multisource feedback as part of the coaching process (rather than
solely as an outcome measure) will demonstrate a larger effect size than coaching
without multisource feedback.
Format of coaching
Coaching is most commonly conducted face-to-face; however, the use of alternative
formats such as videophone, telephone, and internet coaching is also prevalent
(collectively referred to as e-coaching; the use of technology to conduct coaching).
Research in the ﬁeld of health psychology has found that telephone discussion is an
effective way of delivering coaching for lifestyle change in older men (Aoun, Osseiran-
Moisson, Shahid, Howat, & O’Connor, 2011) and for reducing people’s health risks (Terry,
Seaverson, Staufacker, & Gingerich, 2010). However, a study by Yan, Wilber, and
Simmons (2011) found that when compared to telephone-delivered health coaching, face-
to-face coaching was more effective at improving exercise performance in high-risk older
adults.
A study by Wentz, Nyden, and Krevers (2012) demonstrated that internet-based
coaching led to improvements in self-efﬁcacy and subjective quality of life in a sample of
young people with autism spectrum disorder and/or attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. Also focusing on the use of internet-mediated development, research has
demonstrated the utility of e-mentoring for a variety of outcomes (Ensher, Heun, &
Blanchard, 2003; Ensher & Murphy, 2007). For example, in a student sample, de Janasz
and Godshalk (2013) found that e-mentoring was positively related to a variety of learning
outcomes and Kyrgidou and Petridou (2013) found that e-mentoring of a sample of
women entrepreneurs had a positive impact on mentees’ knowledge, skills, and attitudes.
Although these ﬁndings taken together suggest the developmental support can be
effective when provided in a variety of formats, there are no studies that directly compare
256 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
delivery formats for workplace coaching. Indeed, studies often combine approaches such
as telephone and face-to-face, such that the format of the coaching may be considered
mixed method or ‘blended’ format (e.g., Bozer & Sarros, 2012). We have earlier
emphasized the dependence of coaching on the formation of a helping relationship,
which must be established without a priori foundations (i.e., there is no existing
relationship or power or status dynamic on which to build). We therefore propose that the
relational nature of coaching is likely to be more effectively fostered in a face-to-face
personal environment than in e-coaching formats. Studies in our meta-analyses enabled us
to compare face-to-face with blended formats (which all comprised a mixture of face-to-
face and telephone coaching). We therefore hypothesize:
H4: Face-to-face coaching will demonstrate a larger effect size than blended (i.e., blending
face-to-face with telephone coaching).
Type of coach
Coaches may either be external or internal to the coachee’s employing organization.
Internal coaches are different from managers and supervisors (who may also give
performance feedback and suggest ways to improve as part of performance management)
because they do not have supervisory responsibilities for the coachee. External coaches
are often engaged as consultants to the organization to work with speciﬁc employees.
Whilst again there are no published organizational studies of this method factor, a study by
Sue-Chan and Latham (2004) in an educational context found that students receiving
coaching from an external coach achieved signiﬁcantly higher course grades than
students who had been coached by a peer. Students also rated the external coaches as
more credible than the peer coaches.
In the context of work, Higgins and Kram (2001) propose that the changing nature of
careers is an underlying reason why individuals are likely to need to seek developmental
support from outside the organization. As careers become more protean, acquisition of
skills and perspectives from outside the employing organization becomes more critical.
This is underscored by Arthur, Khapova, and Wilderom (2005) who identify the
importance of extra-organizational support (through coaching or mentoring) in career
success from the boundaryless career perspective. External coaches have the advantage in
this respect of offering the coachee support that is not restricted to the boundaries of the
employing organization.
A counterview from the mentoring literature rather supports the superiority of internal
mentors. Haggard, Dougherty, Turban, and Wilbanks (2011) suggest that mentors
working externally to the mentees organization cannot provide the full range of career
assistance functions that an internal mentor could. In particular, the external mentor is
unlikely to be able to provide sponsorship, protection or challenging assignments for their
mentees. This observation was supported by Murrell, Blake-Beard, Porter, and Perkins-
Williamson (2008) who suggest that despite the beneﬁts of external mentors, an internal
mentor provides a number of functions such as opportunities for exposure, visibility to
key management and coaching around political landmines in a way that an external
mentor could not. However, it is questionable whether these beneﬁts necessarily transfer
to coaching. Unlike mentoring, coaching does not rely on the organizational and career
experience and expertise of the coach with respect to the work of the coachee, and so
effective achievement of development objectives is not necessarily predicated on
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 257
<<<PAGE=10>>>
knowledge of the internal workings of the organization. The advantages of working with
an external coach may therefore outweigh the beneﬁts afforded by an internal coach.
We propose that compared to those working with internal coaches, coachees who
receive coaching from an external coach may feel more conﬁdent in the wider credibility
and perspective of the coach, and also that the coaching is more likely to be conﬁdential.
Releasing development from the boundaries and constraints of organizational politics and
barriers may also be beneﬁcial in working through development objectives. In
combination, these factors are likely to have a positive impact on the outcomes of the
coaching. We hypothesize that:
H5: Coaching provided by an external coach will demonstrate greater effect sizes than
coaching provided by an internal coach.
Coaching schedule
Research examining the effects of the number of coaching sessions or the overall
longevity of coaching interventions is limited. This is despite calls to address these
questions (e.g., Smither, 2011). Theeboomet al.(2014) tested for the moderation of the
number of coaching sessions in their meta-analysis on coaching and found that a greater
number of coaching sessions did not signiﬁcantly impact on outcomes. Theeboomet al.
propose that this counterintuitive effect may be due to individuals with less serious or less
complex issues needing fewer coaching sessions and experiencing more positive effects
of coaching than individuals with more serious or complex issues. These ﬁndings are
consistent with the mentoring literature. Ensher, Thomas, and Murphy (2001) found that
the longevity of the mentoring relationship had a small but signiﬁcant association with
social support, but found no relationships with vocational support, role-modelling
support, reciprocity (i.e., level of give and take between mentor and mentee), satisfaction
with mentor, job satisfaction, and perceived career success. A possible explanation for
this is that the mentor themselves (i.e., their success and expertise) is more important than
the longevity of the relationship (Tonidandel, Avery, & Phillips, 2007).
Notably, the above studies tested only for linear effect of coaching schedule variation
(number of sessions and longevity of the relationship). This would prevent detection of
nonlinear relationships, which may occur if, for example, the impact of number of
sessions or longevity plateaus after a certain point. The weight of the research evidence
suggests on balance that coaching schedule does not have an impact on coaching
outcomes, but nevertheless we tested for moderation (including for curvilinear effects) in
our analyses. Given that we did not expect to observe effects, we did not set a hypothesis
regarding these moderation analyses.
Method
Literature search
A range of search strategies were utilized to identify relevant published and unpublished
studies (including doctoral dissertations). Firstly, various electronic databases were
searched including ProQuest, EBSCO, Emerald Full Text, JSTOR Business, SAGE Journals
Online, ScienceDirect, SwetsWise, Taylor and Francis, Wiley Online Library, and Oxford
Journals. The following search terms were used: ( coaching) and (effectiveness or
outcome or impact or inﬂuence or evaluation). In addition to this database search,
258 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
frequent contributors to coaching research literature were contacted directly by e-mail to
ensure that any unpublished data or work in progress were included in the meta-analysis.
Finally, a manual review of the reference lists of all of the articles identiﬁed in the database
search and also the reference list of all relevant reviews was completed. This initial search
identiﬁed a total of 54 studies.
Criteria for inclusion
To be included in the meta-analysis, studies had to meet six criteria. First, the study had to
examine workplace coaching effectiveness (i.e., studies in which coaching was provided
with the objective of generating affective, cognitive, skill-based or results outcomes at
work). Studies were included if they adequately described coaching activity (i.e., one-to-
one development intervention based on a coach–coachee relationship) in a work context,
and evaluated that activity in terms of its effectiveness. Studies that measured the impact of
coaching on non-work outcomes (such as exercise or healthy eating) were excluded, as
were studies where coaching was provided by a line manager. Secondly, we included only
studies that evaluated coaching using the within- and between-subjects designs we
reviewed earlier. Thirdly, studies had to have been conducted within an organizational
setting, to ensure all participants were employed working adults. Fourthly, studies needed
to report sample sizes. Fifthly, ad statistic or other statistic (e.g., means and standard
deviations) that could be converted into ad statistic must have been reported between
coaching and the outcome variable. Finally, the dependent variable or coaching outcome
had to be measured at the individual level of analysis.
Data set
Of the 54 studies identiﬁed in the literature search, 17 met our inclusion criteria
(n = 2,267 individuals). The average sample size of these studies was 133 with a range
from 14 to 1,361. Seven studies were conducted in the United States; two in the United
Kingdom; three in Australia; two in Norway; one in Egypt; one in Israel; and one in
Denmark. The studies were conducted in different organization types and industries
including service, manufacturing, construction, and public/government sectors. Occu-
pations of participants were varied; however, the majority held senior management
(k = 5, n = 1,527) or management roles (k = 5, n = 326). Other occupations were
nurses (k = 1, n = 120), high school principals (k = 1, n = 8), teachers (k = 1, n = 44),
construction foremen (k = 1, n = 51), and various occupations within single studies
(k = 2, n = 69). The earliest study was reported in 1997, and the other studies were
reported after 2003 (2003 = two studies; 2005 = two studies; 2006 = one study;
2007 = one study; 2009 = three studies; 2010 = four studies; 2011 = one study and
2012 = one studies). All studies included in the meta-analysis are summarized in Table 2
and listed in the references marked with asterisks (*).
Description of variables
All useable studies were coded on a number of speciﬁc variables including source of study,
sample size, year of publication, occupation of coachee, and organizational context. In
addition, we developed a coding scheme to code for the moderators highlighted in our
hypotheses. Firstly, research design was coded for (i.e., between-subjects design, 14
studies; within-subjects design, three studies). In between-subjects studies, outcome data
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 259
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Table 2. Summary of coaching effectiveness studies included in the meta-analysis
Authors Sample Country
Organizational
context
Occupation of
participants
Outcomes
measured Research design
Coaching
technique
Longevity of
intervention
(weeks)a
Duration of
sessions (min)
Number of
sessions
b
Multisource
feedback
Format of
coaching
Type of
coach
Bozer and
Sarros (2012)
96 Israel Various Management Affective
Skill-based
Between-subjects Cognitive-
behavioural
15.2 30 –120 6 –8 Not
speciﬁed
Face-to-face,
telephone
and e-mail
External
Bright and
Crockett (2012)
115 United States Various Various Affective Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 4 30 1 No Telephone External
Cerni et al. (2010) 14 United States Education Principals Skill-based Between-Subjects Epstein’s
constructive
thinking
programme
(1998)
10 60 10 No Face-to-face External
Evers et al. (2006) 60 United States Government
Agency
Management Affective Between-subjects GROW model
(Whitmore,
1992)
17.3 Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed No Not speciﬁed External
Finn (2007) 17 Australia Not speciﬁed Senior
management
Affective
Skill-based
Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 12 60 6 Yes Face-to-face
and telephone
External
Grant et al. (2009) 41 Australia Health Executives and
senior
managers
Affective
Results
Between-subjects Cognitive-
behavioural
solution
focussed
(Grant, 2003)
GROW model
(Whitmore,
1992)
10 Not speciﬁed 4 Yes Face-to-face
and telephone
External
Grant, Green,
et al. (2010)
44 Australia Education Teachers Affective
Skill-based
Results
Between-subjects Cognitive-
behavioural
solution
focussed
(Grant, 2003)
GROW model
(Whitmore,
1992)
20 Not speciﬁed 10 Yes Face-to-face External
Gyllensten and
Palmer (2005)
31 United
Kingdom
Finance Not speciﬁed Affective Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 34.7 Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed No Face-to-face Internal
Kines et al. (2010) 51 Denmark Construction Construction
foremen
Skill-based Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 42 Not speciﬁed 8 No Face-to-face External
Kochanowski
et al. (2010)
30 United States Retail Store managers Skill-based Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 6 30 –60 6 Yes Face-to-face
and telephone
External
20 United States Manufacturing Various Within-subjects Not speciﬁed 13 Not speciﬁed 1 Yes Face-to-face External
Continued
260 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Table 2. (Continued)
Authors Sample Country
Organizational
context
Occupation of
participants
Outcomes
measured Research design
Coaching
technique
Longevity of
intervention
(weeks)a
Duration of
sessions (min)
Number of
sessions
b
Multisource
feedback
Format of
coaching
Type of
coach
Luthans and
Peterson (2003)
Affective
Skill-based
Moen and
Allgood (2009)
127 Norway Not speciﬁed Executives and
managers
Affective Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 52 Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed No Not speciﬁed Not
speciﬁed
Moen and
Skaalvik (2009)
19 Norway Not speciﬁed CEOs Affective Between-subjects Not speciﬁed 13 60 –90 7 No Face-to-face
and telephone
External
Olivero et al. (1997) 31 United States Health Management Results Within-subjects Not speciﬁed 8.7 60 8 No Face-to-face Internal
Smither et al. (2003) 1,361 United States No speciﬁed Senior managers Skill-based Between-subjects Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed 2 –3 Yes Face-to-face External
Taie (2011) 120 Egypt Health Nurses Skill-based Between-subjects Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed No Face-to-face Internal
Toegel and
Nicholson (2005)
89 United
Kingdom
Finance Senior managers Skill-based Within-subjects Not speciﬁed 39 90 2 Yes Face-to-face
and telephone
External
Note.
aWhere the longevity was speciﬁed in months, we converted to weeks based on an assumption of average 4.33 weeks per month. For our analyses, if a range of l ongevity was reported, we coded as the mid-point of the range.
bWhere a range of number of sessions was reported (e.g., 6 –8), we coded the data as the mid-point of the range (e.g., 7).
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 261
<<<PAGE=14>>>
were collected for all participants at time 1. The coaching group then received the
coaching intervention, whilst the control group received no coaching. Outcome data
were then collected for all participants at time 2. Between-subjects studies compared the
change in outcomes from time 1 to time 2 for both groups (e.g., Evers, Brouwers, & Tomic,
2006; Kochanowskiet al., 2010; Taie, 2011). In within-subjects studies, all participants
received coaching and outcomes were recorded before and after the coaching. Within-
subjects studies examined the change in outcomes from time 1 to time 2 (e.g., Luthans &
Peterson, 2003; Oliveroet al., 1997; Toegel & Nicholson, 2005).
We also coded for classiﬁcation of outcome in accordance with the model outlined
earlier, and summarized in Table 1: Outcome measures were classiﬁed as affective (e.g.,
job satisfaction; Luthans & Peterson, 2003) (10 studies), skill-based (e.g., competency
skills; Taie, 2011) (10 studies), or results (e.g., productivity; Oliveroet al., 1997) (three
studies). All three studies within the results category measured individual-level rather than
team-level or organizational-level results. Note that some studies utilized multiple
outcome measures falling within different outcome categories. Further, we coded for
whether coaching was accompanied by multisource feedback. Studies were classiﬁed as
either utilizing multisource feedback as part of the coaching process (e.g., Smitheret al.,
2003) or coaching where multisource feedback was not used (e.g., Bright & Crockett,
2012). Studies that utilized multisource feedback solely as an outcome measure and not
part of the coaching process were included in the latter category as the details of the
multisource feedback were not disclosed to the coachee (e.g., Cerni, Curtis, & Colmar,
2010). We coded the coach as either external to the organization (e.g., a consultant as a
coach; Grant, Green, & Rynsaardt, 2010) or internal to the organization (e.g., Gyllensten &
Palmer, 2005). In the instances where an internal coach was used, the coach did not have
line management responsibility for the coachee. Our coding for coaching format classiﬁed
coaching as either face-to-face (e.g., Kineset al., 2010) coaching or ‘blended’ coaching
format. Blended coaching format was the category created for any format not solely face-
to-face. Studies were grouped in this way due to the small number of studies present that
used a format other than traditional face-to-face. Five studies utilized a combination of
telephone with face-to-face coaching (Finn, 2007; Grantet al., 2009; Kochanowskiet al.,
2010; Moen & Skaalvik, 2009; Toegel & Nicholson, 2005), and one study used a
combination of telephone, face-to-face, and email coaching (Bozer & Sarros, 2012).
Finally, we coded for the number of coaching sessions (mean= 5.56; median = 6.00;
SD = 3.18; range = 9) and the longevity, in weeks, of the coaching intervention
(mean = 18.80; median = 12.00; SD = 13.85; range = 44). We also coded for the
duration of each coaching session; however, we did not explore this variable as Table 2
shows the duration of coaching sessions was relatively invariant.
Coding accuracy and inter-rater agreement
All studies were coded independently by two coders. The ﬁrst was the ﬁrst author, and the
second, a doctoral student with experience of meta-analytic techniques (who was briefed
on the coding procedure, and provided with the coding scheme and instructions). No
discrepancies between coders were encountered.
Meta-analytic procedure
The meta-analysis relied on the widely used Hunter and Schmidt (1990, 2004) approach: A
random effects model that accounts for sampling bias and measurement error. We
262 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
calculated sample-weighted effect sizes and corrected for reliability of dependent
variables. Given that we were interested in the treatment effects of coaching, we
converted all effect sizes obtained from the primary studies tor, conducted a meta-analysis
on r, and then converted the ﬁnal results tod (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004). Missing artefact
values (i.e., reliability of dependent variables) were estimated by inserting mean
values across the studies where information was not given or could not be obtained
from the authors after contacting them, as recommended by Hunter and Schmidt (2004).
Objective performance data were not corrected for unreliability because it has been
frequently argued that measures based on objective performance data are unbiased
(Riketta, 2005), and also as no procedure is currently available to correct for unreliability
of such measures.
Additionally, we report the 90% conﬁdence intervals (90% CI) of the sample-weighted
effect size d, and the 80% credibility intervals (80% CV) of the corrected populationd
statistic d. Conﬁdence intervals estimate variability in the sample-weighted effect size that
is due to sampling error, whereas credibility intervals estimate variability in the individual
correlations across studies that are due to the moderator variables (Whitener, 1990). If the
90% conﬁdence interval of the sample-weighted effect size does not include zero, we can
be 95% conﬁdent that the sample-weighted effect size is different from zero. Conﬁdence
intervals can also be used to test whether two estimates differ from each other; two
estimates are considered different when their conﬁdence intervals are non-overlapping.
If the 80% credibility interval of the corrected population effect size is large and
includes zero, it indicates that there is considerable variation across studies and
moderators are likely operating. To further corroborate that moderators are present, we
assessed whether sampling error and error of measurement accounted for more than 75%
of the variance between studies in the primary estimates (Hunter & Schmidt, 1990). To do
this, we report the percentage of variance accounted for in the corrected population
effect size by sampling and measurement error (% VE). Moderators are assumed to be
operating when sampling and measurement error account for<75% of the variance. The
majority of the moderators in our study are categorical moderators (only the number of
coaching sessions and longevity of the intervention were continuous moderators). The
categorical moderators were computed using Hunter and Schmidt (1990, 2004) subgroup
analyses techniques by conducting separate meta-analyses at each of the speciﬁed
moderator level. To examine whether there is signiﬁcant difference between the mean
corrected effect sizes of sublevels of the hypothesized moderator variable, we compared
their conﬁdence intervals as discussed above. To test the continuous moderators, we
conducted weighted least squares (WLS) regression as suggested by Steel and Kammeyer-
Mueller (2002). Unlike subgroup analysis of moderators as suggested by Hunter and
Schmidt (2004), this approach avoids artiﬁcial categorization of continuous moderator
variables. For the WLS regression, we have regressed the uncorrected correlations of
overall coaching effectiveness in SPSS on each moderator variable using the inverse square
root of the sampling error for each correlation as the weighting factor (as speciﬁed by Steel
& Kammeyer-Mueller, 2002) to see whether the moderator explained variance in the
uncorrected correlations of overall coaching effectiveness.
Results
Table 2 presents an overview of the coaching effectiveness studies included in our
analysis. We report our results in two sections. Firstly, we report overall coaching
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 263
<<<PAGE=16>>>
effectiveness and with respect to different outcome criteria. This is followed by
exploration of the impact of moderator variables.1
Criterion effects of coaching
Coaching had a positive effect on all outcomes (supporting hypothesis 1). As can be seen
in Table 3, none of the 90% CI included zero and coaching had a positive effect on overall
outcomes (d = 0.36, 90% CI [0.16, 0.50]).
We distinguished between affective, skill-based, and individual-level results outcomes
in our analyses. Table 3 suggests that coaching had positive effects on affective outcomes
(d = 0.51, 90% CI [0.17, 0.78]), skill-based outcomes (d = 0.28, 90% CI [0.07, 0.44]), and
individual-level results outcomes (d = 1.24, 90% CI [0.88, 1.47]). The non-overlapping
conﬁdence intervals of these three outcomes suggest that coaching has a stronger effect
on individual-level results outcomes than on affective and skill-based outcomes. There are
no differences with regard to affective and skill-based outcomes.
The low amount of variance accounted for by artefacts, and the large credibility
intervals around the effects of coaching on overall outcomes (17.68%, 80% CV [/C00.16,
0.97]) suggest that moderating variables are operating.
Moderators of coaching effectiveness
Research design
Most of the studies within our sample were between-subjects design (k = 14, n = 2,109).
A small group of studies used a within-subjects design (k = 3, n = 158). Coaching had a
positive effect on outcomes for both types of research design. Table 3 suggests that
coaching had a greater effect on outcomes for within-subjects (d = 0.57) compared to
between-subjects design (d = 0.35). However, the 90% CI were overlapping ([0.43, 0.62];
[0.12, 0.51]), which suggests that the two effects are not different; therefore, research
design does not appear to moderate the effects of coaching on outcomes (therefore,
hypothesis 2 was not supported).
Multisource feedback
We examined the effects of whether the coaching included multisource feedback as part
of the coaching process. Table 3 suggests that coaching had a positive effect on outcomes
for both groups; however, this effect was greater on outcomes when coaching was
provided without multisource feedback (d = 0.88 vs. d = 0.21). The non-overlapping
conﬁdence intervals suggest that coaching has a stronger effect when it is provided
without multisource feedback ([0.40, 1.29]; [0.12, 0.26]); therefore, hypothesis 3 was not
supported.
1 An anonymous reviewer of an earlier draft of our paper rightly noted that one study (Smitheret al. , 2003) had a markedly high
sample size compared to others in our meta-analysis. Based on the idea that there is a trade-off between weighting individual
effect sizes by their sample size and individual effect sizes obtained from very large samples overly inﬂuencing the weighted
average effect size, it has been suggested to limit theN of any primary study to 500, and to substitute any sample size with a value
larger than that with 500 (Riketta, 2005). When we applied this modiﬁcation, the effect sizes for the analyses that included the
Smither et al. study increased slightly. However, we observed no other changes, and our conclusions regarding our hypotheses
were unaffected. Parsimoniously, we therefore report the meta-analytic results with the original sample size for the Smitheret al.
study.
264 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Table 3. Meta-analytic results
Variable kn d
90% CI
d SDd % Var. acc. for
80% CV
Lower Upper Lower Upper
Overall effectiveness 17 2,267 0.33 0.16 0.50 0.36 0.42 17.68 /C00.16 0.97
Affective outcomes 10 592 0.46 0.17 0.78 0.51 0.55 22.84 /C00.15 1.39
Skill-based outcomes 10 1,784 0.26 0.07 0.44 0.28 0.35 19.02 /C00.16 0.76
Individual-level results outcomes 3 116 1.15 0.88 1.47 1.24 0.00 100.00 1.25 1.25
Research design
Overall outcomes – between-subjects 14 2,109 0.31 0.12 0.51 0.35 0.44 14.88 /C00.20 0.99
Overall outcomes – within-subjects 3 158 0.53 0.43 0.62 0.57 0.00 100.00 0.56 0.56
Multisource feedback (MSF)
Overall outcomes – MSF not used 9 569 0.80 0.40 1.29 0.88 0.82 12.53 0.00 2.73
Overall outcomes – MSF used 7 1,620 0.19 0.12 0.26 0.21 0.00 100.00 0.20 0.20
Format of coaching
Overall outcomes – face-to-face coaching 8 1,691 0.27 0.06 0.48 0.29 0.36 15.49 /C00.16 0.80
Overall outcomes – blended coaching 6 274 0.25 0.09 0.43 0.28 0.00 100.00 0.24 0.24
Type of coach
Overall outcomes – external coach 13 1,958 0.18 0.11 0.26 0.20 0.00 100.00 0.20 0.20
Overall outcomes – internal coach 3 182 1.27 0.65 2.36 1.40 0.89 14.23 0.54 3.81
Note. k = number of studies; n = number of respondents; d = sample-weighted mean effect size; 90% CI = 90% conﬁdence interval of the d; d = corrected
population d statistic; SD
d = standard deviation of the corrected population d statistic; % var. acc. for = percentage of variance attributed to sampling error and
artefact corrections; 80% CV = 80% credibility interval of the d.
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 265
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Format of coaching
We compared the effects of coaching provided in the face-to-face format with blended
formats. Table 3 shows that both effect sizes were positive and neither coaching format
demonstrated stronger criterion effects; the two effects on outcomes are similar and their
90% CI are overlapping (d = 0.29, [0.06, 0.48] vs. d = 0.28 [0.09, 0.43]; therefore,
hypothesis 4 was not supported).
Type of coach
We examined effects for coaches that were employed internally by the organization, and
compared with effects for external consultant coaches. Table 3 shows that the effects of
coaching on outcomes were weaker when the coach is external to the organization
(d = 0.20 vs. d = 1.40) and that the 90% CI were non-overlapping ([0.11, 0.26]; [0.65,
2.36]). This suggests that contrary to our prediction, the effects of coaching on outcomes
were weaker for external coaches in comparison with internal coaches (therefore,
hypothesis 5 was not supported).
Coaching schedule
We tested whether the longevity in weeks of the coaching intervention and number of
coaching sessions moderated overall coaching effectiveness. As longevity of the
coaching intervention and number of coaching sessions might have a decreasingly
positive effect on coaching effectiveness, we tested for both linear and curvilinear
effects. To test for linear effects, we entered the moderator variable as predictor
variable, and to test for curvilinear effects, we entered the moderator variable and the
squared term of the moderator variable as predictor variables. None of the effects
were signiﬁcant (linear effect of longevity in weeks of the coaching intervention:
B = .01, SE = 0.00, ns, R
2 = .14; curvilinear effect of longevity in weeks of the
coaching intervention: B = .00, SE = 0.00, ns, R2 = .18; linear effect of number of
coaching sessions: B = .01, SE = 0.02, ns, R2 = .01; curvilinear effect of number of
coaching sessions: B = .01, SE = 0.01, ns, R2 = .07). Therefore, neither longevity in
weeks of the coaching intervention nor number of coaching sessions moderated
overall coaching effectiveness.
Discussion
In the present study, we reported results of a meta-analysis to synthesize the existing
research on coaching effectiveness at work in order to understand the impact that
coaching has on a variety of workplace outcomes. We examined outcome criteria
classiﬁed on a framework modelled on the learning, training, and development
literature and tested whether particular techniques or tools of coaching moderated its
effectiveness. Our analyses demonstrated that for all outcomes, coaching had a
positive impact. Effect sizes nevertheless varied for different types of outcome
criteria, and based on some speciﬁc applied method features of coaching.
Collectively, our ﬁndings have important implications for research and practice of
coaching.
266 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Criterion effects of coaching
To align our analyses with literatures on training and development, and HRM, we
proposed a criterion framework for the outcomes of coaching. We hypothesized that
coaching would have an overall positive impact on all outcome criteria, speciﬁcally in our
meta-analyses for affective, skill-based, and individual-level results outcomes. We found
that in the combined analyses of all 17 studies, coaching demonstrated a positive impact
on outcome criteria (d = 0.36). Within this ﬁnding, there was variation for different types
of outcome criteria ranging from 0.28 to 1.24. These effect sizes appear to be comparable
to those obtained for other types of organizational interventions. For example, in their
meta-analysis of the training effectiveness literature, Arthuret al.(2003) obtained effect
sizes ranging from 0.60 to 0.63, whereas Powell and Yalcin (2010) found a smaller effect
size of 0.24 for managerial training interventions. Looking at wider interventions, ﬁndings
from Arthuret al.(2005), Smitheret al.’s (2005) meta-analysis of multisource feedback
on performance reported much smaller effect sizes ranging from 0.05 to 0.15. Therefore,
compared to the impact of a popular intervention such as multisource feedback, coaching
appears to have larger and more consistent positive effects on outcome criteria.
Interestingly, the largest effect size in our study (1.24) was observed for individual-
level results outcomes, a key organizational focus representing translation of learning
through to performance beneﬁts. Evidence that coaching has a signiﬁcantly positive
impact on individual-level results in particular indicates that businesses can expect
positive performance and impact improvements from investment in coaching. By
contrast, Powell and Yalcin (2010) reported the smallest effects for results criteria in their
meta-analysis of managerial training interventions explaining their ﬁndings with reference
to potential issues in training transfer, leading to a smaller impact of training on results
outcomes. We earlier described how coaching encourages development activities that are
personalized to individual need, and carried out in day-to-day work. These may therefore
serve to promote development that is directly relevant to the workplace, and is therefore
more straightforward for the coachee to implement in their performance behaviour.
These processes may promote transfer of learning to work activity resulting in improved
performance results, a proposition that appears to be supported in our ﬁndings,
representing a potential advantage of coaching over other forms of training.
We did not ﬁnd moderation of the criterion effects of coaching by research design,
contrary to our hypothesis 2, and the results of Theeboomet al. (2014). Although the
effect size for within-subjects designs was higher than for between-subjects designs, the
difference was non-signiﬁcant. We must conclude therefore that whilst there is some
evidence that research design may inﬂuence criterion effect sizes in studies of coaching,
the speciﬁc nature or importance of those effects remains to be conﬁrmed.
Practice moderators of coaching criterion effects
Coaches often employ different practice factors in the form of techniques or tools into
their coaching approaches, and we tested the moderating effects of some of these in our
analyses. Firstly, our analyses revealed that when controlling for moderation effects of
these practice factors, the positive effects of coaching were maintained. Moreover, we did
not ﬁnd signiﬁcant moderation by the use of face-to-face compared to blended coaching.
This ﬁnding, although contrary to our original prediction, is consistent with ﬁndings from
the ﬁeld of e-mentoring (de Janasz & Godshalk, 2013; Kyrgidou and Petridou (2013) who
demonstrated that e-mentoring has a positive impact on academic and workplace
outcomes. This ﬁnding has positive implications for the practice of coaching. One of the
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 267
<<<PAGE=20>>>
main advantages of providing coaching in alternative formats such as telephone or e-mail
is the efﬁciencies in terms of cost and time commitment. Our ﬁnding that both face-to-face
and blended coaching were effective provides some justiﬁcation for applying blended
formats in order to extend its accessibility to a wider audience. Notwithstanding this
point, our data do not permit us to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of e-coaching
(i.e., the use of technology such as internet or telephone to conduct coaching) alone. Only
one study used solely e-coaching (in which coaching was conducted exclusively by
telephone), so we were unable to compute a meta-analytic effect. Future research on the
effectiveness of e-coaching is therefore clearly warranted.
Our analysis showed that there was no signiﬁcant moderation of outcomes by the
number of coaching sessions or the longevity of the coaching intervention, consistent
with the previous ﬁndings of Theeboomet al.(2014). Our tests for curvilinear effects also
indicated that there is not a plateauing of the impact of coaching (by which additional
sessions or weeks of intervention would make an impact up until a certain point, after
which more coaching would cease to result in improved impact). Taken together, our data
indicate that even short-term coaching has a beneﬁcial impact. These ﬁndings once again
have positive implications for the practice of coaching as they suggest that shorter and
potentially more cost effective coaching interventions are likely to be effective. However,
like previous studies (e.g., Theeboomet al., 2014), we caution that future research should
qualify this ﬁnding by factoring in the severity of the presenting employee development
issues at the outset of coaching. Some employee development issues may require a greater
number of sessions, and a longer term coaching intervention than others. Data analysed in
this study did not permit this possibility to be tested.
Two signiﬁcant moderator variables were identiﬁed in our meta-analyses: Use of
multisource feedback, and type of coach. In both cases, the results ran counter to our
hypotheses.
We hypothesized that coaching combined with multisource feedback would have a
greater effect on outcomes. However, our ﬁndings showed that coaching without
multisource feedback actually had a signiﬁcantly stronger positive impact on outcomes.
This ﬁnding may possibly be explained by previous research ﬁndings on the impact of
feedback (including multisource feedback) on performance. For example, in their meta-
analysis of the effects of performance feedback, Kluger and DeNisi (1996) reported that
whilst on average feedback interventions resulted in higher performance, over a third of
the studies included in their analyses actually reported that feedback resulted in lower
performance. They concluded that their ﬁndings were meaningful, and could not be
explained by sampling error, feedback sign or existing theory, but speculated that
attentional processes may help to explain the negative impact of feedback on
performance. In the context of coaching, feedback (especially negative feedback)
received by the coachee in the coaching session may divert attention so that the coachee
becomes pre-occupied with the content of the feedback. This could leave insufﬁcient
attentional resources to engage in the subsequent coaching process, limiting the positive
beneﬁts of the session. An additional factor may be the content of the multisource
feedback. Such instruments are often focused on leadership behaviour, which may be
rather distal from the development objectives of the coachee. Collectively, these
potentially negative mechanisms associated with feedback and its content, may explain
why in our meta-analyses, we observed weaker performance beneﬁts when multisource
feedback was combined with coaching.
We also hypothesized that external coaches would have a greater impact on outcomes
as they would provide an external perspective, unrestricted by the constraints of the
268 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
employing organization, and more consistent with contemporary boundaryless models of
work and careers. This was not conﬁrmed in our ﬁndings, which rather showed that
although coaching by both internal and external coaches was beneﬁcial for learning and
performance, the effects of coaching by internal coaches had a stronger effect compared
to external coaches. This is an interesting ﬁnding given the growing scale of the coaching
industry, which is strongly based around a model of contracted external (e.g., consulting)
coaches. Some potential explanations as to why internal coaches appear to be more
effective than external coaches are provided by Strumpf (2002), who questions the
assumption that bringing in an external coach is necessarily the best option for
organizations. Strumpf suggests that the choice to use either an internal or external coach
is dependent on a number of factors. These factors include a cultural bias and readiness, as
some organizations prefer to use ‘homegrown’ solutions versus those generated by
external consultants and a strong, strategically placed head of human resources who may
provide an excellent role model for internal coaches and consequently increase the
credibility of an internal coach. A further potential explanation is that internal coaches
inevitably have a better understanding of the organization’s culture and climate and may
therefore be better placed to enable the coachee to be more productive in their speciﬁc
workplace (i.e., by setting goals in such a way that organization-speciﬁc barriers or
facilitators to their achievement are realistically discussed, addressed and incorporated
into development). Our earlier arguments that an internal perspective would be less
critical for coaching as compared to mentoring, for example, are not borne out in the data
we analysed. Our interpretations here should be viewed appropriately cautiously given
the relatively low number of studies using internal coaches.
Implications for research and future directions
Our study represents an important advance in the evidence base for the effectiveness of
coaching in organizations. To consider the implications of our ﬁndings for future research,
we highlight three themes emerging from our analyses: (1) criterion effects measured in
primary research on coaching; (2) practice methodology in studies of coaching; (3)
theoretical explication of the processes of coaching.
Considering ﬁrst the criterion effects of coaching, we propose that our framework of
criterion effects could be used by researchers to organize more clearly the criteria that are
measured in coaching evaluating studies. We presented some methods of measurement
for each of the criteria we include in our framework, which could guide researchers in
choosing measurement methods. Our framework also highlighted gaps in the literature
for certain kinds of outcome criteria. Speciﬁcally, none of our included studies examined
cognitive, or team or organizational-level results outcome criteria, areas where further
studies are clearly warranted. Moreover, future research might examine how the relative
impact of coaching on different kinds of criteria, and compare this with other forms of
learning and development intervention (e.g., training).
Second, we acknowledged earlier that our selection of practice moderators was
somewhat governed by those factors that were described and operationalized in the
studies we examined. This observation speaks to a broader limitation of many studies of
coaching effectiveness, namely a lack of detail in the descriptions of coaching
interventions employed. Failing to completely describe coaching techniques and
approaches employed in empirical studies prevents later classiﬁcation in meta-analyses
such as ours. We therefore encourage greater thoroughness on the part of researchers in
this area to specify precisely the nature and format of coaching employed in empirical
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 269
<<<PAGE=22>>>
studies. Such speciﬁcation should include description of who provided coaching, to
whom, in what format, for how long, over how many individual sessions, using which
coaching approaches or models, and including which (if any) tools or techniques.
Greater level of detail in the speciﬁcation of coaching undertaken in empirical
studies is also essential for the development of theory and understanding of the
processes of coaching. Like Theeboomet al. (2014), and echoing similar observations
for all training and development intervention literatures (Fordet al., 2010), we strongly
feel that there is a need for the development of theory concerning why, how and in
what ways coaching leads to the positive effects we reported in this study. We earlier
argued that potential processes that are common features of coaching are goal-setting
(Locke & Latham, 2002), encouragement of experiential learning (Kolb, 1984), and
setting of development activities that are completed in day-to-day work activity.
Coaching may therefore be considered to be a high-ﬁdelity form of training and
development intervention (e.g., Baldwin & Ford, 1988). However, it remains impossible
to test these or other processes in meta-analyses because individual studies do not
consistently describe, for example, if objectives or goals were set, what kind of
development or learning activities were recommended, or how they were formulated.
There are of course methodological challenges to adequately describing multiple
sessions with multiple clients, but failure to address these will continue to hold back
development of the coaching literature.
With regard to future research directions, the implications of these observations are
twofold. First, there is a need for experimental studies that manipulate the features of
coaching to examine directly the impact of particular coaching processes. Theoretical and
conceptual development should clearly accompany or precede such research. Second, all
empirical studies of coaching should adequately describe in detail any particular general
processes that applied to the coaching sessions under study.
Applied implications for organizations and coaches
Our study has a number of implications for practitioners and coaches in organizations.
Firstly, our meta-analysis demonstrated that coaching had a positive effect on all outcome
criteria we examined, providing an evidence base from which practitioners can draw
conﬁdence.
Second, our proposed framework of outcome criteria from coaching provides
researchers and organizations with a method of categorizing the types of outcomes that
can be expected from coaching. These can be applied in evaluation studies by
practitioners, or by organizations to examine the impact of coaching.
Finally, our ﬁndings are informative for decisions about using particular tools and
coaching techniques. Although our results show that overall, coaching appears to be
effective irrespective of the format of the coaching and the longevity of the coaching
intervention (including number of sessions), practitioners and organizations should
consider carefully the use of multisource feedback, and the engagement of external
coaches, both of which resulted in smaller positive effects of coaching. If multisource
feedback is used, practitioners should review and apply evidence in the literature about
the determinants of effective use of feedback. When engaging external coaches,
organizations could ensure that a thorough familiarization process is undertaken to enable
coaches to have a full and complete understanding of the organizational context of
employee learning and performance.
270 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Limitations and strengths
There are a number of limitations of our study. First, with respect to the coding of data, due
to incomplete reporting of sample characteristics and coaching variables, a number of the
coded variables had to be listed as either unspeciﬁed or, in the case of reliability data,
estimated. Although estimation from means is consistent with recommendations for
replacing other forms of missing data (e.g., Hunter & Schmidt, 1990), such replacements
are less satisfactory than reported data. In some cases, lack of reporting in research articles
meant that we did not have enough studies in each group to fully analyse moderators. In
addition, as we comment on earlier, incomplete reporting meant that the moderators we
were able to explore were limited to those included in the primary studies.
Second, due to the relatively nascent nature of coaching research, our meta-analysis
included a relatively small number of studies. Whilst the number of studies included in our
analyses is similar to some other meta-analyses in work and organizational psychology
(e.g., Riketta, 2008), some caution is warranted in interpreting and generalizing from our
results, which invite replication as the number of research studies in this area grows.
Alongside these limitations, our study has a number of signiﬁcant strengths. Ours is the
ﬁrst systematic examination of the effectiveness of coaching to exclusively focus on
coaching in organizations, marking an important advance in the literature on coaching at
work. The positive ﬁndings prompt future development of the coaching literature, and
coaching practices. Moreover, we align our analyses of coaching outcomes with existing
taxonomies of outcomes from learning, training, and development, making our ﬁndings
easy to view alongside these literatures. Our examination of moderators is particularly
informative for practising coaches to understand the impact of particular tools and
techniques of coaching, enabling them to make informed choices about their work.
Conclusion and ﬁnal comments
At the outset of this study, we asked whether workplace coaching was effective in terms of
delivering individual learning and development, and improvements in performance and
results for organizations. Our meta-analysis has made signiﬁcant steps in addressing the
lack of systematic scientiﬁc evidence about the beneﬁts of coaching for organizations. Our
ﬁndings suggest that the answer to our question is yes, and our analyses indicated that
coaching resulted in a number of key positive effects for learning and performance
outcomes in the studies we examined. Our study gives support to the further
development of coaching research and practice, providing evidence of the potential
utility of coaching at work.
References
*Studies marked with an asterisk contained data used in the meta-analysis.
Alliger, G. M., Tannenbaum, S. I., Bennett, W., Traver, H., & Shotland, A. (1997). A meta-analysis of
the relations among training criteria.Personnel Psychology, 50, 341–358. doi:10.1111/j.1744-
6570.1997.tb00911.x
Aoun, S., Osseiran-Moisson, R., Shahid, S., Howat, P., & O’Connor, M. (2011). Telephone lifestyle
coaching: Is it feasible as a behavioural change intervention for men?Journal of Health
Psychology, 17(2), 227–236. doi:10.1177/1359105311413480
Arthur, W., Bennett, W., Edens, P. S., & Bell, S. T. (2003). Effectiveness of training in organizations: A
meta-analysis of design & evaluation features.Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 234–235.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.2.234
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 271
<<<PAGE=24>>>
Arthur, M. B., Khapova, S. N., & Wilderom, C. P. M. (2005). Career success in a boundaryless career
world. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 177–202. doi:10.1002/job.290
Ayres, J., & Malouff, J. M. (2007). Problem-solving training to help workers increase positive affect,
job satisfaction, and life satisfaction. European Journal of Work and Organizational
Psychology, 16, 279–294. doi:10.1080/13594320701391804
Baldwin, T. T., & Ford, J. F. (1988). Transfer of training: A review and directions for future research.
Personnel Psychology, 4,6 3–105. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1988.tb00632.x
Bell, B. S., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (2008). Active learning: Effects of core training design elements on
self-regulatory processes, learning, and adaptability.Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 296–
316. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.93.2.296
Bell, B. S., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (2010). Toward a theory of learner-centered training design: An
integrative framework of active learning. In S. W. J. Kozlowski & E. Salas (Eds.),Learning,
training, and development in organizations(pp. 3–64). New York, NY: Routledge.
Bennett, J. L. (2006). An agenda for coaching-related research: A challenge for researchers.
Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 58, 240–249. doi:10.1037/1065-
9293.58.4.240
Bono, J. E., Purvanova, R. K., Towler, A. J., & Peterson, D. B. (2009). A survey of executive coaching
practices. Personnel Psychology, 62, 361–404. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2009.01142.x
*Bozer, G., & Sarros, J. C. (2012). Examining the effectiveness of executive coaching on coachees’
performance in the Israeli context.International Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and
Mentoring, 10,1 4–32.
*Bright, D., & Crockett, A. (2012). Training combined with coaching can make a signiﬁcant
difference in job performance and satisfaction.Coaching: An International Journal of Theory,
Research and Practice, 5(1), 4–21. doi:10.1080/17521882.2011.648332
Brockbank, A., & McGill, I. (2012).Facilitating reﬂective learning: Coaching, mentoring and
supervision. London, UK: Kogan Page.
Brotman, L. E., Liberi, W. P., & Wasylyshyn, K. M. (1998). Executive coaching: The need for
standards of competence.Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice & Research, 50,4 0–46.
doi:10.1037/1061-4087.50.1.40
Brutus, S., Gill, H., & Duniewicz, K. (2010). State of the science in industrial and organizational
psychology: A review of self-reported limitations. Personnel Psychology, 63, 907–936.
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01192.x
*Cerni, T., Curtis, G. J., & Colmar, S. H. (2010). Executive coaching can enhance transformational
leadership. International Coaching Psychology Review, 5,8 1–85.
de Janasz, S. C., & Godshalk, V. M. (2013). The role of e-mentoring in Prot/C19eg/C19es’ learning and
satisfaction. Group & Organization Management , 38, 743 –774. doi:10.1177/
1059601113511296
Dierdorff, E. C., Surface, E. A., & Brown, K. G. (2010). Frame-of-reference training effectiveness:
Effects of goal orientation and self-efﬁcacy on affective, cognitive, skill-based, and transfer
outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 1181–1191. doi:10.1037/a0020856
Eby, L. T. D. T., Allen, T. D., Hoffman, B. J., Baranik, L. E., Sauer, J. B., Baldwin, S., & Evans, S. C.
(2013). An interdisciplinary meta-analysis of the potential antecedents, correlates, and
consequences of prot/C19eg/C19e perceptions of mentoring.Psychological bulletin, 139, 441–476.
doi:10.1037/a0029279
Ensher, E. A., Heun, C., & Blanchard, A. (2003). Online mentoring and computer-mediated
communication: New directions in research.Journal of Vocational Behavior, 63, 264–288.
doi:10.1016/S0001-8791(03)00044-7
Ensher, E. A., & Murphy, S. E. (2007). E-mentoring: Next generation research strategies and
suggestions. In B. R. Ragins & K. E. Kram (Eds.),Handbook of mentoring(pp. 299–322).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ensher, E. A., Thomas, C., & Murphy, S. E. (2001). Comparison of traditional, step-ahead, and peer
mentoring on prot/C19eg/C19es support, satisfaction, and perceptions of career success: A social
272 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
exchange perspective. Journal of Business and Psychology, 15, 419–438. doi:10.1023/
A:1007870600459
Epstein, S. (1998).Constructive thinking: The key to emotional intelligence. London, UK: Praeger.
*Evers, W. J. G., Brouwers, A., & Tomic, W. (2006). A quasi-experimental study on management
coaching effectiveness.Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 58, 174–182.
doi:10.1037/1065-9293.58.3.174
Feldman, D. C., & Lankau, M. J. (2005). Executive coaching: A review and agenda for future research.
Journal of Management, 31, 829–848. doi:10.1177/0149206305279599
*Finn, F. A. (2007).Leadership development through executive coaching: The effects on leaders’
psychological states and transformational leadership behaviour (Unpublished doctoral
thesis). Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
Fischer, R. L., & Beimers, D. (2009). “Put me in, Coach” a pilot evaluation of executive coaching in
the nonproﬁt sector. Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership, 19, 507–522. doi:10.1002/
nml.234
Ford, J. K., Kraiger, K., & Merritt, S. M. (2010). An updated review of the multidimensionality of
training outcomes: New directions for training evaluation research. In S. W. J. Kozlowski & E.
Salas (Eds.),Learning, training, and development in organizations(pp. 3–64). New York, NY:
Routledge.
Franke, F., & Felfe, J. (2012). Transfer of leadership skills: The inﬂuence of motivation to transfer and
organizational support in managerial training.Journal of Personnel Psychology, 11, 138–147.
doi:10.1027/1866-5888/a000066
Grant, A. M. (2003). The impact of life coaching on goal attainment, metacognition and mental
health. Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal, 31, 253–264. doi:10.2224/
sbp.2003.31.3.253
*Grant, A. M., Curtayne, L., & Burton, G. (2009). Executive coaching enhances goal attainment,
resilience and workplace well-being: A randomised controlled study.The Journal of Positive
Psychology, 4, 396–407. doi:10.1080/17439760902992456
*Grant, A. M., Green, L. S., & Rynsaardt, J. (2010). Developmental coaching for high school teachers:
Executive coaching goes to school.Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 62,
151–168. doi:10.1037/a0019212
Grant, A. M., Passmore, J., Cavanagh, M. J., & Parker, H. (2010). The state of play in coaching today: A
comprehensive review of the ﬁeld.International Review of Industrial and Organizational
Psychology, 25, 125–167. doi:10.1002/9780470661628
*Gyllensten, K., & Palmer, S. (2005). Can coaching reduce workplace stress? A quasi-experimental
study. International Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring, 3,7 5–85.
Haggard, D. L., Dougherty, T. W., Turban, D. B., & Wilbanks, J. E. (2011). Who is a mentor? A review
of evolving deﬁnitions and implications for research.Journal of Management, 37, 280–304.
doi:10.1177/0149206310386227
Hedges, L. V. (1981). Distribution theory for Glass’s estimator of effect size and related estimators.
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 6, 107–128. doi:10.2307/1164588
Higgins, M. C., & Kram, K. E. (2001). Reconceptualizing mentoring at work: A developmental
network perspective. Academy of Management Review , 26, 264 –288. doi:10.5465/
AMR.2001.4378023
Holladay, C. L., & Qui~nones, M. A. (2003). Practice variability and transfer of training: The role of self-
efﬁcacy generality. Journal of Applied Psychology , 88, 1094 –1103. doi:10.1037/0021-
9010.88.6.1094
Hunter, J., & Schmidt, F. (1990).Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting for error and bias in
research ﬁndings. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J., & Schmidt, F. (2004).Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting for error and bias in
research ﬁndings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ilies, R., & Judge, T. A. (2005). Goal regulation across time: The effects of feedback and affect.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 453–467. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.3.453
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 273
<<<PAGE=26>>>
International Coach Federation (2012).2012 ICF global coaching study: Executive summary.
Retrieved from http://www.coachfederation.org/coachingstudy2012
Johnson, D. A. (2013). A component analysis of the impact of evaluative and objective feedback on
performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior Management, 33,8 9–103. doi:10.1080/
01608061.2013.785879
Jones, R. A., Rafferty, A. E., & Grifﬁn, M. A. (2006). The executive coaching trend: Towards more
ﬂexible executives. Leadership & Organization Development Journal , 27, 584 –596.
doi:10.1108/01437730610692434
Kalinoski, Z. T., Steele-Johnson, D., Peyton, E. J., Leas, K. A., Steinke, J., & Bowling, N. (2013). A meta-
analytic evaluation of diversity training outcomes.Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34,
1076–1104. doi:10.1002/job.1839
Kilburg, R. R. (1996). Toward a conceptual understanding and deﬁnition of executive coaching.
Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice & Research , 48, 134 –144. doi:10.1037/1061-
4087.48.2.134
*Kines, P., Andersen, L. P. S., Spangenberg, S., Mikkelsen, K. L., Dyreborg, J., & Zohar, D. (2010).
Improving construction safety through leader-based verbal safety communication.Journal of
Safety Research, 41, 399–406. doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2010.06.005
Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1967). Evaluation of training. In R. L. Craig & L. R. Bittel (Eds.),Training and
development handbook(pp. 87–112). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1996). Great ideas revisited.Training and Development, 50,5 4–59.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A
historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory.Psychological
Bulletin, 119, 254–284. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.119.2.254
*Kochanowski, S., Seifert, C. F., & Yukl, G. (2010). Using coaching to enhance the effects of
behavioral feedback to managers.Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 17, 363–
369. doi:10.1177/1548051809352663
Kolb, D. A. (1984).Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kombarakaran, F. A., Yang, J. A., Baker, M. N., & Fernandes, P. B. (2008). Executive coaching: It
works!. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 60,7 8–90. doi:10.1037/1065-
9293.60.1.78
Kozlowski, S. W. J., & DeShon, R. P. (2004). A psychological ﬁdelity approach to simulation-based
training: Theory, research and principles. In E. Salas, L. R. Elliott, S. G. Schﬂett, & M. D. Coovert
(Eds.), Scaled worlds: Development, validation, and applications(pp. 75–99). Burlington, VT:
Ashgate.
Kraiger, K., Ford, J. K., & Salas, E. D. (1993). Application of cognitive, skill-based, and affective
theories of learning outcomes to new methods of training evaluation.Journal of Applied
Psychology, 78, 311–328. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.2.311
Kyrgidou, L. P., & Petridou, E. (2013). Developing women entrepreneurs’ knowledge, skills and
attitudes through e-mentoring support. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
Development, 20, 548–566. doi:10.1108/JSBED-04-2013-0061
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990).A theory of goal setting and task performance. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task
motivation: A 35 year odyssey. American Psychologist, 57, 705–717. doi:10.1037/0003-
066X.57.9.705
Lowman, R. L. (2005). Executive coaching: The road to Dodoville needs paving with more than good
assumptions. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice & Research, 57,9 0–96. doi:10.1037/
1065-9293.57.1.90
*Luthans, F., & Peterson, S. J. (2003). 360-degree feedback with systematic coaching: Empirical
analysis suggests a winning combination. Human Resource Management, 42, 243–256.
doi:10.1002/hrm.10083
274 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
MacKie, D. (2007). Evaluating the effectiveness of executive coaching: Where are we now and
where do we need to be? Australian Psychologist , 42, 310 –318. doi:10.1080/
00050060701648217
McAdam, S. (2005).Executive coaching. London, UK: Thorogood.
McCauley, C. D., & Hezlett, S. A. (2002). Individual development in the workplace. In N. Anderson,
D. Ones, H. K. Sinangil & C. Viswesvaran (Eds.), Handbook of industrial, work and
organizational psychology: Personnel psychology(Vol. 1, pp. 313–335). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
McGufﬁn, A. A., & Obonyo, E. (2010). Enhancing performance: A case study of the effects of
employee coaching in construction practice.Construction Management and Economics, 28,
141–149. doi:10.1080/01446190903460672
Mesmer-Magus, J., & Viswesvaran, C. (2010). The role of pre-training interventions in learning: A
meta-analysis and integrative review.Human Resource Management Review, 20, 261–282.
doi:10.1016/j.hrmr.2010.05.001
*Moen, F., & Allgood, E. (2009). Coaching and the effect on self-efﬁcacy. Organization
Development Journal, 27,6 9–82.
*Moen, F., & Skaalvik, E. (2009). The effect from executive coaching on performance psychology.
International Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring, 7,3 1–49.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting, elaborating and
reﬂecting on personal goals improves academic performance.Journal of Applied Psychology,
92, 255–264. doi:10.1037/a0018478
Murphy, K. R., & DeNisi, A. (2008). A model of the appraisal process. In A. Varma, P. S. Budhwar & A.
DeNisi (Eds.),Performance management systems: A global perspective(pp. 81–94). Abingdon,
Oxon, UK: Routledge.
Murrell, A. J., Blake-Beard, S., Porter, Jr, D. M., & Perkins-Williamson, A. (2008). Interorganizational
formal mentoring: Breaking the concrete ceiling sometimes requires outside support.Human
Resource Management, 47, 275–294. doi:10.1002/hrm.20212
Neal, A., Godley, S. T., Kirkpatrick, T., Dewsnap, G., Joung, W., & Hesketh, B. (2006). An
examination of learning processes during critical incident training: Implications for the
development of adaptable trainees. Journal of Applied Psychology , 91, 1276 –1291.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.91.6.1276
*Olivero, G., Bane, K. D., & Kopelman, R. E. (1997). Executive coaching as a transfer of training tool:
Effects on productivity in a public agency. Public Personnel Management, 26, 461–469.
doi:10.1177/0099102609702600403
Orvis, K. A., Fisher, S. L., & Wasserman, M. E. (2009). Power to the people: Using learner control to
improve trainee reactions and learning in web-based instructional environments.Journal of
Applied Psychology, 94, 960–971. doi:10.1037/a0014977
Parker, P., Hall, D. T., & Kram, K. E. (2008). Peer coaching: A relational process for accelerating
career learning.Academy of Management Learning & Education, 7, 487–503. doi:10.5465/
AMLE.2008.35882189
Parker, P., Kram, K. E., & Hall, D. T. (2013). Exploring risk factors in peer coaching: A multilevel
approach. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 49, 361 –387. doi:10.1177/
0021886312468484
Patrick, J., Smy, V., Tombs, M., & Shelton, K. (2012). Being in one’s chosen job determines pre-
training attitudes and training outcomes. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 85, 245–257. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8325.2011.02027.x
Peterson, D. B., & Hicks, M. D. (1996).Leader as coach: Strategies for coaching and developing
others. Minneapolis, MN: Personnel Decisions International.
Powell, K. S., & Yalcin, S. (2010). Managerial training effectiveness: A meta-analysis 1952–2002.
Personnel Review, 39, 227–241. doi:10.1108/00483481011017435
Riketta, M. (2005). Organization identiﬁcation: A meta-analysis.Journal of Vocational Behavior,
66, 358–384. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2004.05.005
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 275
<<<PAGE=28>>>
Riketta, M. (2008). The causal relation between job attitudes and performance: A meta-analysis of
panel studies.Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 472–481. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.6.1057
Salas, E., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (2010). Learning, training, and development in organizations: Much
progress and a peek over the horizon. In S. W. J. Kozlowski & E. Salas (Eds.),Learning, training,
and development in organizations(pp. 3–64). New York, NY: Routledge.
Seifert, C. F., Yukl, G., & McDonald, R. A. (2003). Effects of multisource feedback and a feedback
facilitator on the inﬂuence behavior of managers toward subordinates.Journal of Applied
Psychology, 88, 561–569. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.3.561
Sherman, S., & Freas, A. (2004). The wild west of executive coaching.Harvard Business Review,
82(11), 82–93.
Smither, J. W. (2011). Can psychotherapy research serve as a guide for research about executive
coaching? An agenda for the next decade.Journal of Business Psychology, 26, 135–145.
doi:10.1007/s10869-011-9216-7
*Smither, J. W., London, M., Flautt, R., Vargas, Y., & Kucine, I. (2003). Can working with an executive
coach improve multisource feedback ratings over time? A quasi-experimental ﬁeld study.
Personnel Psychology, 56,2 3–42. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2003.tb00142.x
Smither, J. W., London, M., & Reilly, R. R. (2005). Does performance improve following multisource
feedback? A theoretical model, meta-analysis, and a review of empirical ﬁndings.Personnel
Psychology, 54,3 3–66. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.514_1.x
Sonnentag, S., & Frese, M. (2002). Performance concepts and performance theory. In S. Soonentag
(Ed.), Psychological management of individual performance(pp. 4–19). West Sussex, UK:
John Wiley.
Steel, P. D., & Kammeyer-Mueller, J. D. (2002). Comparing meta-analytic moderator estimation
techniques under realistic conditions.Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,9 6–111. doi:10.1037/
0021-9010.87.1.96
Stone-Romero, E. F. (2008). Strategies for improving the validity and utility of research in human
resource management and allied disciplines.Human Resource Management Review, 18, 205–
209. doi:10.1016/j.hrmr.2008.07.012
Strumpf, C. (2002). Coaching from the inside: When, why, and how. In C. Fitzgerald & J. Berger
(Eds.), Executive coaching: Practices & perspectives(pp. 27–57). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Sue-Chan, C., & Latham, G. P. (2004). The relative effectiveness of external, peer, and self-coaches.
Applied Psychology: An International Review, 53, 260–278. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.
00171.x
Swart, J., & Harcup, J. (2013). ‘If I learn do we learn?’: The link between executive coaching and
organizational learning.Management Learning, 44,3 3 7–354. doi:10.1177/1350507612447916
*Taie, E. S. (2011). Coaching as an approach to enhance performance.Journal for Quality and
Participation, 34,3 4–38.
Taylor, P. J., Russ-Eft, D. F., & Chan, D. W. L. (2005). A meta-analytic review of behavior modeling
training. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 692–709. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.4.692
Terry, P. E., Seaverson, E. L. D., Staufacker, M. J., & Gingerich, S. B. (2010). A comparison of the
effectiveness of a telephone coaching program and a mail-based program.Health Education &
Behavior, 37, 895–912. doi:10.1177/1090198110367876
Tharenou, P., Saks, A. M., & Moore, C. (2007). A review and critique of research on training and
organizational-level outcomes. Human Resource Management Review , 17, 251 –273.
doi:10.1016/j.hrmr.2007.07.004
Theeboom, T., Beersma, B., & van Vianen, A. E. M. (2014). Does coaching work? A meta-analysis on
the effects of coaching on individual level outcomes in an organizational context.The Journal of
Positive Psychology, 9,1 –18. doi:10.1080/17439760.2013.837499
*Toegel, G., & Nicholson, N. (2005).Multisource feedback, coaching, and leadership development:
gender homophily in coaching dyads. Academy of Management Best Conference Paper, MC, F1.
Tonidandel, S., Avery, D. R., & Phillips, M. G. (2007). Maximizing returns on mentoring: Factors
affecting subsequent prot/C19eg/C19e performance.Journal of Organizational Behavior, 28,8 9–110.
doi:10.1002/job.418
276 Rebecca J. Jones et al.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
van der Locht, M., van Dam, K., & Chiaburu, D. S. (2013). Getting the most of management training:
The role of identical elements for training transfer. Personnel Review, 42, 422 –439.
doi:10.1108/PR-05-2011-0072
Wegge, J., Bipp, T., & Kleinbeck, U. (2007). Goal setting via video conferencing.European Journal
of Work and Organizational Psychology, 16, 169–194. doi:10.1080/13594320601125567
Wentz, E., Nyden, A., & Krevers, B. (2012). Development of an internet-based support and coaching
model for adolescents and young adults with ADHD and autism spectrum disorders: A pilot
study. European Child Adolescent Psychiatry, 21, 611–622. doi:10.1007/s00787-012-0297-2
Whitener, E. M. (1990). Confusion of conﬁdence intervals and credibility intervals in meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 315–321. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.75.3.315
Whitmore, J. (1992).Coaching for performance. London, UK: Nicholas Brealey.
Witherspoon, R., & White, R. P. (1996). Executive coaching: A continuum of roles.Consulting
psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 48, 124–133. doi:10.1037/1061-4087.48.2.124
Yan, T., Wilber, K. H., & Simmons, W. J. (2011). Motivating high-risk older adults to exercise: Does
coaching matter? Home Health Care Services Quarterly, 30,8 4–95. doi:10.1080/01621424.
2011.569670
Received 20 August 2014; revised version received 18 March 2015
Effectiveness of workplace coaching 277
<<<PAGE=30>>>
Copyright
of
Journal
of
Occupational
&
Organizational
Psychology
is
the
property
of
Wiley-
Blackwell
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.