<<<PAGE=1>>>
Development in Practice
ISSN: 0961-4524 (Print) 1364-9213 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cdip20
Reﬂections on mentoring experiences for evidence-
informed decision-making in South Africa and Malawi
Sunet Jordaan, Ruth Stewart, Yvonne Erasmus, Louis Maluwa, Janine
Mitchell, Laurenz Langer, Russell Wildeman, Natalie Tannous & Josee Koch
To cite this article: Sunet Jordaan, Ruth Stewart, Yvonne Erasmus, Louis Maluwa, Janine
Mitchell, Laurenz Langer, Russell Wildeman, Natalie Tannous & Josee Koch (2018) Reﬂections
on mentoring experiences for evidence-informed decision-making in South Africa and Malawi,
Development in Practice, 28:4, 456-467, DOI: 10.1080/09614524.2018.1444733
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2018.1444733
Published online: 23 Apr 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 284
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cdip20
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Reflections on mentoring experiences for evidence-informed
decision-making in South Africa and Malawi
Sunet Jordaan, Ruth Stewart, Yvonne Erasmus, Louis Maluwa, Janine Mitchell,
Laurenz Langer, Russell Wildeman, Natalie Tannous and Josee Koch
ABSTRACT
This article is based on the consensus that the availability and utilisation of
research enhances policy discussions. The article reflects on the
experiences within one approach: capacity building through mentoring.
The UJ-BCURE programme aimed to increase the capacity of decision-
makers to use evidence in decision-making via mentoring models.
Mentoring is described as an interactive, facilitated process that
promotes learning. The features of the models that have contributed to
the programme ’s success are orientation workshops with mentees
combined with participatory, needs-led, and flexible approaches. UJ-
BCURE experiences are relevant to the field of evidence-informed
decision-making in an African government context.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 24 November 2016
Accepted 11 October 2017
KEYWORDS
Aid – Development policies,
Capacity development;
Governance and public
policy; Sub-Saharan Africa
Introduction
Evidence-informed decision-making (EIDM) is gaining considerable importance in Africa. It has long
been associated with policy change, and was first used in the health sector where research is used to
advocate for policy change (Punton2016). The growth of the EIDM movement can be linked to an
increased understanding that the availability and utilisation of research enhances the quality of
policy discussions and policy outcomes (Court and Young2003; Datta and Jones2011).
EIDM centres on behaviour change in how decisions are made (Michie, van Stralen, and West
2011). To effect change in any system, three essential conditions need to interact to affect change
in how decision-making happens. The first is capability. Capability captures the individual dimensions
of the person involved: their psychological and physical capacity, knowledge, and skills to engage in
mentorship activities. The second essential condition is motivation. Motivation includes the processes
that energise and direct an individual’s behaviour towards the mentorship programme and EIDM.
These processes include habits, emotions, and analytical decision-making. The third essential con-
dition is opportunity. Opportunity emphasises the importance of factors outside the direct sphere
of influence of an individual that make behaviour change possible or that prompt it.
Programmes working with decision-makers within government to influence the demand for cred-
ible evidence are relatively new and are often referred to as pull initiatives. These pull initiatives have
the potential to complement programmes that focus on the evidence supply side (or push initiatives)
in which the primary focus is on researchers and their research (Landry, Amara, and Lamari2001).
Push initiatives are described as processes where researchers encourage the uptake of academic
research evidence in decision-making, while pull initiatives focus on the needs of policymakers
and consider a wider range of evidence beyond academic research. Pull initiatives are a more colla-
borative effort between the producers and users of evidence. The University of Johannesburg-led
programme to Build Capacity to Use Research Evidence (UJ-BCURE) is one such pull initiative. One
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Sunet Jordaan sunetj@sustainable-social-solutions.co.za
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE, 2018
VOL. 28, NO. 4, 456–467
https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2018.1444733
<<<PAGE=3>>>
of the programme’s unique features was its investment in its mentorship programme. Mentoring can
be described as an interactive, facilitated process that promotes learning and development that is
often used in a work environment, and which can be a formal or informal process (Punton2016).
Mentoring support was pivotal to UJ-BCURE’s approach to increase the use of evidence in
decision-making. In recognition that workshops cannot always fulfil individual or team requirements
for specific and practical EIDM needs and challenges, UJ-BCURE designed a mentorship programme
to offer more tailored support. Between 2014 and 2016, UJ-BCURE implemented four models of men-
torship: group mentoring of individuals (in Malawi); short-term individual mentoring (in South Africa
and Malawi); long-term individual mentoring (in South Africa); and team mentoring (in South Africa).
The programme occupied a unique position for harnessing emergent opportunities and stimulated
South-South learning. The mentoring programme offered by UJ-BCURE put forward a context-specific
approach to supporting the use of evidence in the broader policy-making contexts in South Africa
and Malawi (Stewart2015).
Methodology
The insights in this article are based on reflections among the UJ-BCURE team, strengthened through
a series of team workshops. Routine programme monitoring data have been complemented with
views shared by the programme stakeholders and mentors (UJ-BCURE team2015, 2016b; Stewart
et al. in press).
An external evaluation of the programme has been commissioned separately by the programme
funder (UK Department for International Development (DFID)). UJ-BCURE also conducted an in-depth
review of the mentorship component of the programme using data from October 2014 to March
2016 (Maluwa 2016), as well as a reflection on the mentorship programme report that captured
the mentorship-plus programme experiences until September 2016 (UJ-BCURE Team2016d).
The primary sources of data consist of pre- and post-evaluation questionnaires that mentors and
mentees completed in Malawi and South Africa, as well as key informant interviews with mentees in
Malawi. Other data collection tools included workshop attendance registers, team mentorship work-
shop attendance registers, mentorship-plus agreement forms, mentorship-plus log sheets, and focus
group discussions at the end of the team mentorship relationships (Table 1). The data collection
process was supplemented by telephone and email conversations between UJ-BCURE staff and
the mentorship participants in both countries.
The mentorship close-out workshop also catered for a detailed discussion of the mentorship
process, and outcome diary entries on team mentorships were analysed and included in the reflec-
tion process.
1 This article considers all mentorship-related data and activities between October 2014
and August 2016. Quantitative data were analysed using Excel, and qualitative data were analysed
using content analysis (Busch et al.2005).
Programme description
The Building Capacity to Use Research Evidence (BCURE) programme worked with government offi-
cials and policymakers to increase the use of evidence in decision-making in 12 countries in Africa
and Asia. UJ-BCURE implemented the programme in South Africa and Malawi through a capacity
Table 1.Data collection tools.
Tool Number
Pre-mentorship agreement forms 18
Post-mentorship evaluation forms 15
Key informant interviews in Malawi 4
Mentorship workshop attendance registers 20
Focus group discussion sessions 2
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 457
<<<PAGE=4>>>
development approach that included workshops, mentorships, networking, and cross-government
initiatives.
As part of the comprehensive programme described above, the UJ-BCURE mentorship pro-
gramme focused on increasing the use of research in decision-making through capacity building.
Under the mentorship approach, UJ-BCURE tested an approach to enhance capacity to use evidence
in decision-making and support its application in the work environment. The mentorship activities
were closely matched to pre-specified mentee needs. Through offering dedicated individual, and
later team-based, mentorship support the programme set out to deepen EIDM capacity and the prac-
tical application of these capacities in real world decision-making contexts. Mentorships also offered
an extended, in-depth opportunity for relationship-building between mentors and mentees which
can provide a shift in the EIDM landscape (Langer et al.2016).
UJ-BCURE reached 108 civil servants with its mentorship programme: 85 from Malawi, and 23 from
South Africa. A number of mentorships in South Africa were repeated, resulting in a total number of
46 unique mentorship relationships. A repeat mentorship occurs when the same mentor and mentee
repeat or renew their relationship after the initial six-week period. UJ-BCURE applied four different
models of mentorship in two countries. The models included short-term individual mentoring ,
repeat individual mentoring, group mentoring for individuals, and team mentoring. The general six-
week mentorship approach was specific to the mentee’s workplace setting. This approach was com-
plemented by mentorship-plus: an option to extend the mentorship into the actual workplace
setting. The main objective of the mentorship-plus programme was to provide practical guidance
to civil servants on how to access, appraise, synthesise, and use research evidence in their workplaces.
In South Africa, UJ-BCURE mentees included individuals from the Department for Planning, Monitor-
ing and Evaluation (DPME); the Department of Basic Education (DBE); the Department of Science and
Technology (DST); the Department of Social Development (DSD); the Department of Environmental
Affairs (DEA); the Department of Human Settlements (DHS) as part of the DPME team mentorship; and
the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS). In Malawi, UJ-BCURE’s mentees were members of the
District Monitoring and Evaluation Coordinating Committee (DMECC) structures from the districts of
Mchinji and Ntchisi. The Malawian mentees were all identified by the Ministry of Local Government
and Rural Development (MLGRD) in partnership with the UJ-BCURE local implementing partner.
Model 1: group mentoring of individuals in Malawi
Group mentoring was a type of mentorship in which mentees coordinated their efforts to achieve
individual goals while being mentored as a group (UJ-BCURE2016c). The mentoring model com-
prised different components of EIDM, including accessing information and assessing the quality
thereof, the strengthening of data management systems, research synthesis through cases of
applied learning at district level on particular policy or implementation issues, and mentoring
around greater evidence use during the annual review of District Development Plans (Citizens’
Health 2015). The recruitment of mentees was preceded by four introductory workshops on EIDM
in which 70 civil servants participated (84% male and 16% female). The mentorship support com-
menced with a mapping of desired outcomes, which included improved knowledge of EIDM,
improved research and data management skills, and knowledge on how to develop sectoral data-
bases. A total of 17 group mentoring sessions were completed over the course of 10 months in
which 85 civil servants participated (76% male and 24% female); only 32% of these participants
had attended the introductory workshop. As the mentorships took place after the introductory work-
shops, new civil servants became part of the process through the mentorships.
Results from Model 1
The post-mentorship evaluation indicated that the model has been effective at increasing EIDM
awareness and knowledge among mentees (Citizens ’ Health 2015). Other positive outcomes
included: acquisition of skills in accessing, managing, and using research data; and improved
458 S. JORDAAN ET AL.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
monitoring skills and problem formulation. Most of the desired programme outcomes were achieved
to some extent. The only programme outcome that was not achieved was the acquisition of knowl-
edge on how to develop sectoral databases.
The model did experience certain challenges. DMECCs are by nature intersectoral committees that
are set up by MLGRD and consist of representatives from the fields of health, education, agriculture,
and so on who work at local government level. Although such intersectoral learning is useful,
mentees expressed in the post-evaluation that they needed more specific and extensive sectoral
mentoring. Furthermore, some mentees experienced challenges related to working as an intersec-
toral group and it was highlighted that some mentees are more comfortable with individual mentor-
ing. Consistent attendance was another challenging area as this mentorship model stretched over a
couple of months. The sub-optimal attendance can be partially clarified by the absence within the UJ-
BCURE programme of monetary incentives to encourage workshop attendance in Malawi. Instead,
the programme implemented a different approach to ensure participants did not experience possible
opportunity costs and hosted the events in the district to shorten travelling distances to the sessions
and provided food for participants. Mediating measures to improve inconsistent attendance were not
as successful as had been hoped. An analysis of the mentees’ attendance shows that only 20% of the
mentees in Mchinji attended at least 50% of the mentoring sessions, while in Ntchisi only 30% of the
mentees attended at least 50% of the mentoring sessions offered.
In conclusion, the group mentoring of individuals in Malawi was to a significant extent productive
in achieving positive outcomes. Outcomes can be improved by more frequent introductory work-
shops, balancing group mentoring with sectoral mentoring, ensuring the availability of mentors
with wide-ranging technical expertise, consistent attendance by designing context-specific incen-
tives, an increase in the number of group mentoring sessions, and a commitment by institutions
that mentees are allowed time to attend the sessions.
Model 2: short-term individual mentoring in South Africa and Malawi
The model involves capacity building in EIDM among civil servants in the DPME, the DBE, and DST in a
one-on-one environment, within a one-off period of six weeks. Where feasible, this mentoring model
is complemented with workplace visits (called mentorship-plus visits in the UJ-BCURE programme).
At the start of the mentorship process, all mentees identified a specific output or set of outcomes they
were aiming to achieve. These outputs or outcomes included, among others, an increased use of evi-
dence, development of a new policy framework, development of an implementation plan, or produ-
cing a policy white paper. Mentors were contracted by UJ-BCURE based on their skills and expertise in
the EIDM environment. The matching of mentees with mentors was based on the understanding of
the particular needs of the mentee and the skills and expertise of the mentor (UJ-BCURE2015). A total
of 15 civil servants (13 women and two men) were mentored in South Africa through one-off individ-
ual mentoring. Eight of these mentees were from DBE, three from the DST, three from the DPME, and
one from the DSD. Some mentorship relationships started as soon as the introduction between
mentor and mentee had taken place; others took more time to get started. The programme also
had six individual mentorships in Malawi to ensure the application of learning.
Results from Model 2
Model 2 had mixed outcomes. During the pilot phase of the mentorship process, the programme did
not consistently ensure proper matching between the mentor and mentee. The programme also did
not track the mentorship relationships and specified outputs and outcomes during the pilot phase.
This oversight was rectified with the appointment of a dedicated mentorship manager.
Two mentees had two short-term individual mentorship relationships, but with different mentors,
due to a shift in the mentor’s availability. The mentee expressed the need to continue with the men-
torship, which was supported by the programme. This continued interest in the mentorship pro-
gramme is an indication that mentees experienced a benefit in participating in the mentorship
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 459
<<<PAGE=6>>>
programme. Eight short-term mentorship relationships started late in the programme, and their
effect has not been measured or included here. However, there is a likelihood that some of these
will be renewed to become long-term individual mentorship relationships.
The programme observed a trend indicating that often mentors committed more time to the
relationships than mentees. Mentees regularly mention that work pressure prevented them from allo-
cating adequate time to the relationship. In cases where the mentee allocated sufficient time for the
relationship, the mentorship achieved the desired outcome as defined at the start of the relationship.
It is pivotal that mentees have support from their line managers to allocate adequate time for the
relationship.
The most common methods of communication between mentor and mentee include tele-
phone calls, emails, and Skype. A total of eight short-term relationships included a mentorship-
plus component. The mentorship-plus visits provided a personal context to the mentoring
relationships and ensured that the mentor and mentee work towards a specific outcome as ident-
ified at the start of the mentorship relationship. The mentorship-plus visits also assisted the
mentors to better understand the situational context of the mentee, creating an opportunity
for mentors and mentees to have an in-depth face-to-face discussion about the outcomes they
were working towards.
The short-term individual mentees came from various management levels. More junior staff
members were included when requested by their line managers. The high level of seniority of
mentees (54% of all mentees were from the director or deputy director level) highlighted the
need for support at a senior government level in a trusted environment. Importantly the seniority
of most mentees suggests that Model 2 is a key mechanism for supporting applied adult learning
on EIDM by more senior government officials.
The one-off mentorship relationships that define Model 2 can be very successful if designed and
conceived appropriately from the outset. The success of this model is highlighted by a comment from
a short-term individual mentee in South Africa:“For me, this mentoring relationship was a learning
curve, and it did reach my expectations.” In the UJ-BCURE programme, only a few of the relationships
managed to achieve their desired outcomes. Results can be enhanced by providing orientation work-
shops, careful mentor and mentee matching, a systematic process that defines mentorship goals at
the beginning of the relationship, mutual commitment and interest as well as institutional support,
continuous communication, mentorship-plus visits, and flexibility in the approach to the length of the
mentorship relationship: all underpinned by solid monitoring of the process to allow for adaptation
and learning.
Model 3: long-term individual mentoring in South Africa
Model 3 is a variation of the short-term individual mentoring model and involves the renewal of
a mentorship relationship where the involved mentor-mentee pair has had prior short-term men-
toring engagement (Model 2). This approach worked well and resulted in numerous requests
from mentorship participants to have their mentoring relationships extended beyond the
initial six-week period. The option of renewal was entirely the decision of the mentor and
mentee, and was occasionally suggested by the mentorship manager. Repeat individual mentor-
ships were complemented with at least one mentorship-plus visit per mentoring period where
possible. Specific mentorship goals are defined and agreed upon at the beginning of the
renewed mentorship relationship. As in Model 2 mentorships, matching of a mentor with a
mentee was based on the needs of the mentee and took into account the suitability of the
experience and expertise of the mentor for those needs. A total of 11 individual civil servants
(five women and six men) were mentored through repeat individual mentoring in Model 3;
one mentee had two long-term mentorship relationships with different mentors. Three
mentees were from the DBE, two from the DST, two from the DPME, one from the DSD, one
f r o mt h eD E A ,a n do n ew a sf r o mt h eD W S .
460 S. JORDAAN ET AL.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Results from Model 3
The long-term individual mentorship relationships are one of the most successful models
implemented in the UJ-BCURE programme, based on the EIDM outcomes achieved. The success
can be linked to the fact that renewals were demand driven and indicated commitment and owner-
ship of the programme by participants. Most mentorship relationships had at least one repeat
relationship, with many extended to a relationship of at least a year. Mentorship relationships
were renewed to ensure that the mentoring support in the EIDM work environment was still avail-
able. Renewals also ensured that EIDM identified outcomes were met as often the original outcomes
were not achieved in full during the initial mentorship period, or new outcomes were added by the
mentee and mentor over the course of the initial mentorship relationship. UJ-BCURE was responsive
in setting up renewed mentorship relationships. Some relationships were set up quickly and started
off immediately, while others took much longer to evolve and involved much discussion between the
mentorship manager, the mentor, and the mentee. In some cases, the mentee asked for a short break
between mentorship relationships due to work pressure or other commitments. In other cases, the
outcomes of a mentorship relationship were changed due to work demands.
As was the case with Model 2, the most common methods of communication in Model 3 included
telephone calls, emails, and Skype, with the addition of WhatsApp and text messaging. Proper matching
of mentees and mentors was an important element of the success of Model 3. For example, the expertise
of the mentor as either a methods or subject expert depended on the specific needs of the mentee. Fur-
thermore, the success of Model 3 was also dependent on context-specific timeframes and policy cycles
within government departments. The programme found that the most important contributing factor to
success was the agreement on specific goals and outcomes, even if agreements remained flexible. The
majority of mentees were senior government officials (44% were directors and 18% were chief directors),
with sufficient authority to change work processes so as to foster the use of evidence during decision-
making. The mentorship-plus visits provided a personal context and ensured a longer-term basis for
these mentorships as face-to-face visits led to deeper relationships; both mentors and mentees reported
the benefits of these visits in developing trust and transparency. In some cases, the visits led to insti-
tutional relationships that are still in place after the end of the mentorship programme. While valuable,
mentorship-plus visits are not without their challenges. For instance, when the mentor and mentee were
based in the same province, there was a natural opportunity to meet more frequently– some mentor–
mentee pairs had up to four visits per six-week period. However, out-of-province visits requiring notable
investments in time and travel posed bigger challenges. The success of Model 3 has opened up discus-
sions around the institutionalisation of relationships as an important legacy that assists with the sustain-
ability of the UJ-BCURE programme beyond the scope of donor funding.
In conclusion, the success of Model 3 can be attributed to the opportunity to fine-tune mentorship
relationships over time to achieve better results. Model 3 allows for more time to exchange skills and
to understand the mentees’ work processes and identify opportunities for change. To cement the
success of this model, several conditions should exist. First, commitment and responsive communi-
cation between mentees and mentors is important. Second, orientation about the mentorship pro-
gramme and proper matching of the professional fields, methodological needs, and shared
interests of the mentor and mentee is essential. Third, mutual goal-setting by the mentor and
mentee, institutional support for participation in the programme, and sufficient time to engage in
the mentorship processes are important for overall success. Provision should be made for mentor-
ship-plus visits to extend the learning into the mentees’ workplace. Lastly, the length of the mentor-
ship should be guided by sound monitoring practices.
Model 4: team mentoring in South Africa
Model 4 comprises a type of mentorship in which the team leader expresses the need to have the
EIDM capacity of the team supported, and thus brings in a mentor to extend the reach of individual
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 461
<<<PAGE=8>>>
mentoring to the wider team. This model involved mentoring a team of people in a specific organ-
isational setting, working towards achieving specific departmental outcomes within a pre-agreed
timeframe (UJ-BCURE 2016a). Model 4 is a variation of Model 1, taking the sectoral context into
account. The lead mentor for the team mentorship model was a UJ-BCURE team member and
additional mentors were contracted by UJ-BCURE based on their skills and expertise that would
assist in addressing the specific EIDM needs of the mentee team (UJ-BCURE 2016a). Mentor–
mentee matching was based on the understanding of the needs of the team leader, the EIDM
capacity of the team, and the skills and expertise of the mentor. Model 4 included tailored workshops,
focused clinics, and sustained interaction via Skype calls, emails, and social networks.
Results from Model 4
Teams engaged in Model 4 mentorships all had prior interaction with the UJ-BURE programme before
starting their team mentorships. The setup of Model 4 was demand-driven and all three team leaders
approached UJ-BCURE requesting team mentorships upon realising the EIDM capacity needs within
their teams. The teams’ mentorships centred around different workplace-relevant EIDM tasks; three
examples are provided below.
In the first example, the team conducted a systematic evidence map and developed an interactive
evidence interface to engage decision-makers on a policy issue. Trust, co-production, and a close
relationship were pointed out as the main elements of success in this team mentorship. As a
result of this mentorship, the team now has access to in-house tools and capacity to independently
conduct evidence maps in the future. This increased EIDM capacity within the team has led to further
demands for evidence synthesis by other government departments.
The second example of team mentorships started with a careful and rigorous process of the team
identifying key themes and topics for their team mentorship, using these to tailor their team mentor-
ship around outcome-based monitoring and evaluation systems within a government department.
Most of the mentoring was conducted during workshops designed specifically for the team. It was
agreed that the first of these workshops ought to be broad in scope and that the team and the
mentor would define follow-up work that needed to be done at the end of the workshop. Feedback
from the team indicated that more time was needed to link EIDM concepts to the practical reality,
including the dissection of a theory of change, outcome interrogation, and indicator setting which
would strengthen the overall departmental system.
The last team’s mentorship found its origins in an individual mentorship. The format of this team
mentorship consisted of three workshops that covered various steps in the EIDM cycle, with email
communication between workshops. The focus of this team mentorship was to enhance a specific
policy that was being developed by the team. The mentorship enabled learning from colleagues
with different work roles and perspectives. The team’s success highlights the importance of closely
relating the mentorship to work being undertaken at present, the importance of identifying specific
objectives, the need for all team members to have agreed to the objectives of the mentorship, and
the challenge of being mentored on a topic that is tied to larger institutional timeframes.
In conclusion, Model 4 has shown that one of the major vehicles of change in the UJ-BCURE
mentorship programme was the ability to design strong activities that targeted and built up to
the outcomes that a particular team was working already towards. The mentoring activities,
albeit resource and time intensive, enhanced the most relevant EIDM skills in an applied
manner. Model 4 worked well because it was designed around the needs of the specific teams
and enabled mentees to work towards a common goal. To institutionalise the success, the follow-
ing conditions should exist: commitment from the team members; processes that are tailor-made
to the needs of the team; emphasis on the distinction between mentoring and consultancy or
technical assistance; correct matching of skills and personalities; consistency in participation and
face-to-face interaction; understanding of the political environment; and practical application of
the EIDM methodology.
462 S. JORDAAN ET AL.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Discussion
Lessons learnt and reflected on in this article are relevant to two distinctly different academic fields:
the field interested in the impact and effects of mentoring, and the field interested in enhancing
EIDM. The uniqueness of the UJ-BCURE experience comes from the ability of the programme to
create linkages between these two fields. UJ-BCURE’s mentorship models were part of a wider
approach to capacity building that included inception activities, landscaping reviews, needs assess-
ments, resources development, and the development of networks. Separating the individual contri-
bution of the mentorship models to the overall results of the UJ-BCURE programme is difficult and the
findings of this article should be considered within the wider context of the programme (Stewart et al.
in press). The relevance of the lessons learnt within the mentorship models stem from the fact that
the mentorship models were implemented with a very specific goal: increase the use of evidence in
decision-making.
The key factors of success included the use of orientation workshops, investments in relationships
as a fertile mechanism to facilitate change, the needs-driven nature of the mentorships, the careful
matching of mentees and mentors, the length of the mentorships, and the flexibility within the pro-
gramme to adapt the mentorship approach taken to each specific circumstance. These factors are
expanded below.
Importance of orientation workshops: EIDM capacity-building orientation workshops enhanced the
awareness of and demand for EIDM. Workshops were conceived as a first step in the longer causal
chain of how the evidence use of decision-makers could be supported by external actors. Workshops
were instrumental in starting the mentorship relationships and UJ-BCURE programme has shown that
there is considerable overlap between workshops and mentorships. In the case of team mentorships,
the team leader had prior engagement through the workshop programme, which provided the start-
ing point for negotiating and designing the team mentorship support. The expansion from individual
mentorship to team mentorship represents a significant spill-over effect from the UJ-BCURE
programme.
Relationships as the fertile mechanism to facilitate change: Relationships are paramount in setting
up mentorships as well as in maintaining them. Pre-existing relationships contributed to the
implementation of the various mentorship models. These pre-existing relationships included
trust between the UJ-BCURE team and the various government departments with which they
worked.
Mentorships are needs-driven: Mentorship models were dependent on addressing the specific,
identified needs of mentees in the mentorship relationship. These needs included the necessity of
creating common goals at the start of any mentorship relationship in any of the four models.
Importance of the right mentor and mentee match: Matching of the mentor and mentee is critically
important. Furthermore, matching a team leader with a good mentor is important. Good mentors
possess a balance between soft and technical skills, the ability to build relationships, and an under-
standing of the expectations of the mentees.
Length of mentorship relationships: Knowing when to start a mentorship relationship and for how
long it should continue is challenging. Lengthy mentorships can lead to procrastination and risk
becoming unproductive. General guidance from UJ-BCURE recommends that the focus of the men-
torship should be on achieving the goals and objectives set out at the start of the mentorship
relationship and not on the timing. Furthermore, mentors and mentees should be mindful of each
other’s commitments and time constraints.
Importance of varying the approach of match circumstances: Having processes in place that provide
mentors and mentees with structures and guidance is essential. Guidance was provided by the UJ-
BCURE programme with two sets of mentorship guidelines: one for team mentorships and one for
individual mentorships (UJ-BCURE Team2015, 2016a). These documents guided the responsibilities
of the mentors and mentees involved in the mentorship relationship. However, the mentorship
approach should be adapted to varying circumstances. For example, UJ-BCURE included options
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 463
<<<PAGE=10>>>
to extend mentorship timeframes (longer than the original six-week relationship for individual men-
torships and longer than three months for team mentorships).
The UJ-BCURE programme was donor-funded, which posed challenges to sustainability of the
success of the programme as well as limits to the institutionalisation potential. The programme
has proactively tracked early signs of sustainable change and sustainability of the mentorship pro-
gramme. In light of this, UJ-BCURE has made concerted efforts to embed the various mentorship
models in a collection of government departments, including an option for mentored government
officials to provide mentorship (with internal capacity) to different departments. Furthermore, the
early signs of growing independence in EIDM are noticeable with mentees having become less
likely to need third-party support in their efforts to increase their use of evidence in decision-
making. UJ-BCURE’s experience has highlighted the large demand for evidence maps in other gov-
ernment departments. Under the guidance of the team mentorship, the team has successfully
adapted the methodology developed by International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) to a
South African context and now possesses practical tools, processes, and management knowledge,
as well as an internal information technology platform, to produce evidence maps. The team is in
a well-established position to develop evidence maps without external support and carries a
natural mandate to provide these services to other departments. The learning within the UJ-
BCURE programme has pointed to the various options available for institutionalising mentorship
models. Different formats of coaching, mentoring, and employee career development are already
taking place in various departments. The mentorships can be an extension of current activities, pro-
vided there is leadership within departments that supports this. Mentors need some kind of incentive
to be involved in a mentorship relationship. Furthermore, practical aspects such as transport costs,
Skype calls, and data usage need to be considered. Departments could explore their professional
development budgets for this purpose.
Understanding causality and attribution
UJ-BCURE’s mentorships were purposefully designed to deepen EIDM capacity through the direct
application of learning. It is not possible to entirely separate the impact that mentorships have
had from the influence of workshops attended by mentees. However, through the linked work-
shop-mentorship programme it has been possible to better understand the extent to which UJ-
BCURE capacity building is making a difference.
The mentorships have been popular and the number of mentorships increased drastically over
the final year of UJ-BCURE (2016b). In year one of implementation, there were five individual men-
torship relationships; in year two of UJ-BCURE there were 17 mentorship relationships; and by
August of year three, there were 24 individual mentorship relationships. Mentees also became
more diverse in terms of their departmental affiliation as the programme progressed. This diversity,
together with the growing demand for capacity building in the use of evidence for decision-
making, created the opportunity for UJ-BCURE to expand offers of mentorships to different govern-
ment departments.
The UJ-BCURE programme has documented incremental changes in the capability of mentees.
Mentees have consistently demonstrated capacity to run formal searches on academic databases
when searching for evidence. Mentees highlighted that their improved access to research, with
one mentee having developed a research strategy for her department and another having conducted
a literature review in a more systematic manner. Furthermore, mentees now have the knowledge and
skills to co-produce evidence maps using formal evidence synthesis methods. One team mentorship
co-produced an evidence map during the programme, and the knowledge and skills enhanced to
achieve this are still used after the end of the UJ-BCURE programme. Because of the strengthened
capabilities among mentees of the UJ-BCURE programme, there was an increased use of evidence
in new policies (for instance, by at least one team mentorship and four long-term individual mentor-
ship individuals) development plans, and implementation plans for new policies during the
464 S. JORDAAN ET AL.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
programme implementation period. This established wider application of EIDM provides an oppor-
tunity to further institutionalise relationships with existing mentor organisations.
Factors that have contributed to the success of the various mentorship models include flexibility in
our programme implementation, UJ-BCURE’s expertise, and the way in which the mentorship
relationships were designed. Each factor is explained further below.
Flexibility: The flexibility of the programme has allowed the mentorships to evolve according to the
needs of the mentees. The initial piloted timeframe of six weeks could be adopted as a starting point.
Furthermore, the tools used to facilitate, guide, and structure the mentorships have been kept broad.
This flexibility to adapt to various factors supports successful mentorship relationships. The develop-
ment of guidelines assisted in ensuring that all mentors and mentees understood what was expected
of them. Willingness to refine these guidelines and reduce the bureaucratic burden on participants
for pre- and post-mentorship paperwork was also important.
Leading institutional expertise: The UJ-BCURE team had extensive evidence synthesis experience
and systematic reviews before the start of the programme and from July 2015, the mentorship pro-
gramme had a dedicated manager, which ensured that the mentorship relationships were success-
fully supported. UJ-BCURE’s reputation, experience, and expertise contributed to the acceptability of
the mentorship programme among potential mentees and led to trust in the mentorship models,
which was pivotal to build relationships.
Design of mentorship relationships: UJ-BCURE’s mentorship models have been designed by care-
fully matching the mentor with a mentee, taking various attributes (such as background, availability,
and seniority of position) into account. The programme emphasised the importance of one-to-one
mentoring, mentorship-plus visits, and team mentoring for supporting senior civil servants in dee-
pening and applying their EIDM learning. The design of the mentorship models was accomplished
through establishing specific outcomes from the outset of a mentorship relationship. This specifying
of outcomes not only assisted in ensuring the needs of the mentee were met, but also helped ensure
the mentorship relationship still complied with the remit of the UJ-BCURE programme to build
capacity in EIDM and support the application of that capacity in real-world settings.
In general, the longevity of individual relationships that have been grown in mentorships seems to
support the sustainable application of EIDM in many ways. As trust deepens in the relationships
between mentors and mentees, opportunities for establishing new mentorships, piloting team men-
torships, and submitting joint funding proposals for future work has snowballed from these existing
relationships. Additionally, these mentorship relationships are leading to institutional connections
between the mentor’s organisation and the mentee’s department. The mentorships have led to
new, value-adding opportunities for applied learning, including a chance to explore more technical
issues in evidence use.
Conclusion
The depth and quality of evidence used by decision-makers influences the effectiveness of policies.
The uptake of evidence in policy-making processes is a priority of the global development agenda.
Despite the growing momentum around evidence use, there is a counter-balancing view that
research evidence is a relatively minor factor in most policymakers’ decision-making (Newman
et al. 2013). UJ-BCURE’s experience with capacity building through mentorship provides a bridge
between these seemingly contradictory viewpoints. The assumption made is that if capacity is
built for EIDM, the importance of evidence will be elevated, leading to an increase in the demand
for credible evidence. The overall success of the UJ-BCURE mentorship programme can be associated
with the fact that the mentorships build EIDM capacity as an evidence pull initiative, instead of an
evidence push initiative. UJ-BCURE’s findings are in line with the overall findings from the Science
of Science Use systematic review which finds reliable evidence that interventions like the mentorship
programme which build decision-makers’skills to access and make sense of evidence are effective
ways to increase research use by decision-makers (Langer et al.2016). To be effective in increasing
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 465
<<<PAGE=12>>>
EIDM, interventions need to simultaneously enhance both the capability and motivation of partici-
pants to use research evidence. In UJ-BURE’s case, this capability and motivation-building was accom-
plished through the mentorship-plus visits, the practical orientation workshops, and the application
of evidence synthesis skills and real-world policy tasks.
Note
1. Outcome diary entries systematically record and track incremental changes influenced by the programme.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) under the BCURE Grant: [Grant
Number PO6123].
Notes on contributors
Sunet Jordaanis the Training Manager at the University of Johannesburg’s Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE).
Ruth Stewartis Director of the University of Johannesburg’s Africa Centre for Evidence and chairperson of the Africa Evi-
dence Network.
Yvonne Erasmusis a specialist in evidence-informed decision-making and evidence synthesis at the University of Johan-
nesburg’s Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE).
Louis Maluwawas part of the UJ-BCURE team at the Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE), University of Johannesburg, South
Africa.
Janine Mitchellis part of the UJ-BCURE team at the Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE), University of Johannesburg, South
Africa.
Laurenz Langeris an Evidence Synthesis Specialist at the University of Johannesburg’s Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE).
Russell Wildemanwas part of the UJ-BCURE team at the Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE), University of Johannesburg,
South Africa.
Natalie Tannousis a Researcher at the University of Johannesburg’s Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE).
Josee Kochwas part of the UJ-BCURE team at the Africa Centre for Evidence (ACE), University of Johannesburg, South
Africa.
References
Busch, C., et al.2005. Content Analysis. Fort Collins, CO: Colorado State University.
Citizens’ Health. 2015. UJ-BCURE Mentorship Evaluation Report for Malawi. Lilongwe: Citizens’ Health.
Court, J., and J. Young.2003. “Bridging Research and Policy: Insights from 50 Case Studies.” Working Paper 213. London:
ODI.
Datta, A., and N. Jones.2011. “Linkages between Researchers and Legislators in Developing Countries– A Scoping Study.”
Working Paper 332. London: ODI.
Landry, R., N. Amara, and M. Lamari.2001. “Utilization of Social Science Research Knowledge in Canada.” Research Policy
30: 333– 349.
Langer, L., et al.2016. The Science of Science Use, Researching the use of Research Evidence in Decision Making. London: EPPI
Centre, UCL Institute of Education, University College.
Maluwa, L.2016. Evaluation of UJ-BCURE Mentorship-Plus Programme: 1 October 2014–31 March 2016. Johannesburg: UJ-
BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
Michie, S., M. M. van Stralen, and R. West.2011. “The Behaviour Change Wheel: A New Method for Characterising and
Designing Behaviour Change Interventions.” Implementation Science6: 42.
Newman, K., A. Capillo, A. Famurewa, C. Nath, and W. Siyanbola.2013. Putting Research Knowledge at the Heart of
Development. Oxford: INASP.
466 S. JORDAAN ET AL.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Punton, M. 2016. How can Capacity Development Promote Evidence-Informed Policy Making?Literature Review for the
Building Capacity to Use Research Evidence (BCURE) Programme Section 1. Hove: ITAD.
Stewart, R. 2015. “A Theory of Change for Capacity Building for the use of Research Evidence by Decision Makers in
Southern Africa.” Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice11: 547–557.
Stewart, R. et al. In press.“How to Improve the Acceptability and Potential Impact of EIDM Capacity-Building Programmes:
An Example From South Africa.” Evidence and Policy.
UJ-BCURE Team.2015. Mentorship-plus Guideline. Johannesburg: UJ-BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
UJ-BCURE Team.2016a. Team Mentorship Guideline. Johannesburg: UJ-BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
UJ-BCURE Team. 2016b. Workshop Report: Mentorship Lessons Learned and the way Forward. Johannesburg: UJ-BCURE,
Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
UJ-BCURE Team.2016c. Reflections on Lessons Learned in Capacity Building in South Africa and Malawi. Johannesburg: UJ-
BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
UJ-BCURE Team. 2016d. Reflections on Lessons Learned in Mentorships for Capacity Building in South Africa and Malawi.
Johannesburg: UJ-BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, UJ.
DEVELOPMENT IN PRACTICE 467