<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340527492
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: The Missing Strand in the African
Transformational Development Agenda
Article  in   Open Journal of Social Sciences · January 2019
DOI: 10.12691/wjssh-5-3-6
CITATIONS
21
READS
10,455
3 authors, including:
Kanyamuna Vincent
University of Zambia
30 PUBLICATIONS   271 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Million Phiri
University of Zambia
43 PUBLICATIONS   214 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Million Phiri on 09 April 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2019, Vol. 5, No. 3, 160-175 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/wjssh/5/3/6 
Published by Science and Education Publishing 
DOI:10.12691/wjssh-5-3-6 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: The Missing Strand 
in the African Transformational Development Agenda 
Vincent Kanyamuna1,*, Derica Alba Kotzé2, Million Phiri3 
1Department of Development Studies, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
2Department of Development Studies, School of Social Sciences, University of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa  
3Department of Population Studies, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
*Corresponding author: vkanyamuna@unza.zm 
Received August 10, 2019; Revised September 14, 2019; Accepted September 17, 2019 
Abstract  Today, monitoring and evaluation systems are structural arrangements many governments and other 
development agencies are building and strengthening to enhance their performance and as a way of demonstrating 
results to stakeholders. The systems are also used to meet internal information needs. The practice and commitment 
is more evident in developed than in developing countries. In many African countries, the practice and commitment 
towards implementing functional M & E systems is noticeably on the low side. Most M & E systems in Africa are 
still in their embryonic stage— not able to supply relevant information for stakeholder use. Even worse, the demand 
for M&E information by stakeholders, both internal and external is minimal among and across potential users in 
Africa. We have not seen a transformational resolve and thrive especially by governments and key development 
agencies to sustainably build and strengthen M & E systems in Africa. Nonetheless, for the African continent to face 
and resolve its several social, economic and political challenges, it is inevitable to dedicatedly engage  in a 
transformational development agenda. Despite the gloomy M & E arrangements currently, there are notable efforts 
(though often fragmented) in some countries as well as in the continental and regional development blocs such as the 
AU, SADC, AMU , CEN-SAD, COMESA, EAC, ECCAS, ECOWAS, and the IGAD. This paper contend s that 
commitment by African governments to building and sustaining M&E systems as an instrument of good governance 
should be top on the transformational development agenda — not rhetorically but pragmatically. Identified as the 
missing strand, M&E systems are deemed key to promoting and achieving the desired culture of results across the 
African continent. Troubled with endless and increasing reports on corruption and bad choices in development 
interventions due to lack of strategic prioritisation, M&E systems stand handy to offer evidence-based information to 
support sound decision making, policy formulation and implementation. Consequently, if Africa was not going to 
channel its political, organisational, human, technical, technological and financial resources towards transforming M 
& E in every country, the hope for a better Africa as enshrined in the continental Vision 2063 of the Africa We Want 
will remain a wish, only never to be realised. Essentially, a culture of results is something Africa and its people 
should cherish and pursue without thinking twice. 
Keywords: monitoring, evaluation, M&E system, results-based management, culture of results, evidence-based, 
whole-of-government M&E system, results 
Cite This Article:  Vincent Kanyamuna, Derica Alba Kotzé, and Million Phiri, “Monitoring and Evaluation  
Systems: The Missing Strand in the African Transformational Development Agenda.” World Journal of Social 
Sciences and Humanities, vol. 5, no. 3 (2019): 160-175. doi: 10.12691/wjssh-5-3-6. 
1. Introduction 
Tracking, measuring, learning and improving public 
governance and management of services and goods to 
benefit the majority of people engulfed in abject poverty 
and to sustainably grow economies is the paradox and 
dilemma African countries find themselves today. While it 
may not be contestable with regard to the worth and 
pragmatic opportunity systems for monitoring and 
evaluation would offer to the development discourse, we 
have seen a very slow commitment and investment in 
systems that help to enhance the pursuit of a culture of 
results across the African continent. There could be of 
course a handful of countries in the continent with notable 
effort in this direction, but the majority of them have faced 
this matter with mixed commitment and understanding. 
This article deals with the concept and practice of 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provides a 
comprehensive discussion of ways in which M&E could 
be linked to the good governance agenda  as African 
governments seek to deliver poverty reduction 
programmes, projects and policies. It  articulates the 
general overview of M&E as a contemporary phenomenon 
that governments globally and other development 
organisations have pursued rigorously in their bid to 
implement results -based sustainable development. Here,
<<<PAGE=3>>>
161 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
the meanings of the terms ‘monitoring’ and ‘evaluation’ 
are defined and  discussed. Further, the paper  considers a 
historical perspective of the notion of M&E by discussing 
the evolution of the concepts as they are currently 
understood and relevant to the Afri can development goal. 
At the core of the paper is the argument that Africa 
requires functional M&E systems in each and every 
member state and indeed any development agency. This 
will improve the quality of resource management and 
utilisation at all levels of development effort by 
governments and other stakeholders. 
In addition, the paper  discusses the reasons for  African 
governments to build and sustain stronger whole -of-
government M&E  systems (WoGM&ES). The article 
amplifies reasons that successful systems  for M&E are 
inevitable for good governance and sustainable 
development. Functional WoGM&ESs have been argued 
herein as that critical ‘missing strand’ to end the African 
development misfortunes experienced over decades of 
political independence — or at least  to significantly 
contribute to that continental objective. While M&E is 
needed under every development institution and intervention, 
this article focuses on the need to institutionalise M&E in 
government structures and political spaces as well as in all 
other development agencies and stakeholders. A country 
and its people need to be results -oriented for it is the 
pragmatic way to positively impactful societies.  
2. Framework of Analysis 
Countries and their respective governments pursue 
development results meant to improve the well being of 
their citizens. In other words , poverty reduction and 
sustainable development is what governments desire to 
attain through prudence in governance and management of 
public resources. To satisfy these aspirations, a number o f 
approaches, strategies, policies, programmes , projects   
and more importantly systems are employed. Monitoring 
and evaluation ( M&E) systems and the commitment to 
undertaking ‘monitoring’ and ‘evaluation’ functions  
becomes a crucial requirement by any government.  
In the literature of Results -Based Management (RBM) 
and Managing for Development Results (MfDRs) as 
articulated and practiced in the global development efforts, 
country-led national M&E systems have been identified as 
necessary to help implement a  results-focused good 
governance agenda. The Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), Paris Declaration, Monterrey Declaration, and 
the recent Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), to 
mention but a few, have advocated for stronger M&E 
systems at country  level to be used as tools of tracking 
performance for the purposes of accountability, feedback 
and learning to improve current and future development 
interventions.  
It is for the reasons above that African governments and 
countries as a whole are called upon to  pursue pragmatic 
reforms and practices to bring about functionally developed 
WoGM&ESs to help meet the aspirations of the people 
they lead and other key internal and external development 
stakeholders. Thus, the paper focuses on the role of M&E 
systems and how the functions of monitoring and 
evaluation can enhance how countries and governments 
may use them as instruments of performance tracking and 
learning towards alleviating poverty for their masses. 
3. Research Objectives 
The five objectives that guided the study included the 
following: (i) stating the significance of the study;  
(ii) discussing the  notion of monitoring and evaluation;  
(iii) reviewing the historical perspective of monitoring and 
evaluation; (iv) articulating the importance of monitoring 
and evaluation systems, and (v) l inking monitoring and 
evaluation systems to good governance. 
3.1. Research Methodology 
Methodologically, the approach used was mainly the 
review of relevant literature through a desk-based research 
process. Among the docume nts reviewed are national 
development plans, national budgets, country monitoring 
and evaluation policies, frameworks and im plementation 
plans. Other documents such as conference papers, articles 
and reports written about M&E  on Africa were also 
reviewed. In addition, scholarly and expert books, journal 
articles and research papers on international practices  
on M&E were equally consulted.  This triangulation  
of data and information sources was useful to obtain 
dynamic information on African M&E practice —th ereby 
making synthesis, analysis, conclusions and recommendations 
possible. 
3.2. Limitation of the Study 
The evolution of monitoring and evaluation in Africa is 
a contemporary phenomenon (less than three decades ago 
for the majority of countries) . The prac tice of results -
based management (RBM) has however been pursued at 
different levels and commitment by every country. This 
places the level of M&E adoption and implementation by 
countries to be at different phases.  For that reason, the 
study was not able to find the wealth of literature from all 
countries on the subject matter of M&E and its practice  
by African countries. Thus, triangulation was used and  
a case was made that Africa needed to embark on a 
transformational development agenda for championing 
and investing in national systems for M&E. 
3.3. Organization of the Paper 
Structurally, the paper is presented in six (6) parts. First 
is the definition of concepts, second is the articulation of 
the significance of the study and a discussion on the 
notion of monitoring and evaluation is third. The fo urth 
part looks at the historical perspectives of monitoring and 
evaluation. Before conclusion, the fifth part gives a 
detailed discussion on the importance of M&E systems. 
This is discussed with focus on African whole-of-government 
monitoring and evaluation systems (WoGM&ESs).  
4. Definition of Key Concepts  
Monitoring: ‘Monitoring’ refers to the continuous 
process of systematic collection of data on specified
<<<PAGE=4>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 162 
indicators in order to track progress made towards planned 
objectives and to assess the use of resources available [1]. 
Evaluation: Reference [1] defines ‘evaluation’ as the 
systematic and objective assessment of an ongoing or 
completed development intervention, be it a project, 
programme or policy, to ascertain the relevance and 
fulfilment of objectives, development efficiency, 
effectiveness, impact, and sustainability. 
Result: 
A ‘result’, as defined by [1], refers to changes 
in a way, state or condition resulting from a cause -and-
effect relationship. These possible changes are at three 
levels of output, outcome and impact, whenever 
undertaking a development intervention, regardless of 
whether it is a project, programme or policy.  
Whole-of-government monitoring and evaluation 
system: Reference [2,3] defines a WoGM&ES as a  
robust system that not only provides an integrated and  
all-encompassing framework of M&E practices, principles 
and standards to be used throughout government 
institutional structures, but also functions as an apex -level 
system for information and draws from the component 
systems in a framework meant to deliver essential M&E 
products tailored to satisfy information needs of users. 
Good governance:  Good governance means “the 
manner in which power is exercised in the management of 
a country’s economic and social resources for 
development” [4].  
5. Significance of the Study 
The question ‘Why build a strengthened results -based 
WoGM&ES?’ as a public sector management tool for 
Africa is crucial for several reasons. Fundamental 
questions to help policy and decision makers determine 
whether development promises were kept and outcomes 
achieved could be provided by a functional results -based 
M&E system. To demonstrate whether these improvements 
have occurred and the reasons that certain results have 
been achieved, governments and organisations use M&E 
systems [9,10,11].  
This study is topical for all African countries  and is  
being undertaken at a time when there is heightened 
interest in the assessment of government performance, 
locally and internationally  [12,13]. Reference [14]  
stress that “there has been an evolution in the field of 
M&E involving a movement away from traditional 
implementation-based approaches towards new results-based 
approaches”. The importance of national systems for 
M&E in helping governments to improve their service 
delivery to the public has been established, and an effort 
to link M&E to good governance practices has been made. 
For example, in Zambia, according to [15], that is why 
National Development Plans ( NDPs) have detailed M&E 
arrangements to emphasise the linkages between the plans 
and the desired results. When implemented successfully, 
the performance of all government policies, programmes 
and projects would be measurable using a well -organised 
and functioning M&E system [16,17] . Therefore, this 
research stu dy is  significant at various levels of a given 
country’s M&E system particularly at national, line 
ministry or sector, provincial and at decentralised district 
level. Also, the study  provides M&E-related information 
to quasi government and non -state actors such as civil 
society, academia, cooperating partners and research  
institutions. African citizens and others  will utilise the 
findings of this researc h in appreciating the role of M&E 
in nation building and the ways in which the systems for 
M&E can be instrumental to the development discourse.  
Consequently, the research rationale contends that in 
the absence of a robust and functional M&E system across 
any government, organisation and beyond, it is not 
feasible to track performance and learn lessons in future as 
a country. As a result, the country is more likely to spend 
public resources on a 'business as usual' basis, where poor 
accountability, corrupt ion and bad governance prevail 
because a comprehensive M&E system that gives early 
warning signs is not in place. Table 1  demonstrates the 
significance of M&E in measuring development results. 
Table 1. Power of measuring results 
 If you do not measure results, you cannot tell success from failure 
 If you cannot see success, you cannot reward it 
 If you cannot reward success, you are probably rewarding failure 
 If you cannot see success, you cannot learn from it 
 If you cannot recognize failure, you cannot correct it 
 If you cannot demonstrate results, you cannot win public support 
Source: Kusek & Rist, 2004, p. 11. 
 
Therefore, this research study is significa nt and 
justifiable in many ways, in a summary in: 
  Transforming and promoting the results culture in 
Africa 
  Strengthening the monitoring and evaluation 
function at national , sector, regional and district  
level 
  Strengthening M&E functions in other state 
agencies 
  Strengthening M&E linkages and coordination 
  Promoting good governance in public service 
delivery of results  
6. The Notion of Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Today there is greater demand for M&E from many 
aspects of development spheres than ever before  [10,18]. 
The push for functional M&E has been pursued mainly to 
achieve development results. According to [19], policy 
makers and M&E practitioners in developed countries and 
other donor agencies need to evaluate, for instance, 
whether enhancements are taking place as a consequence 
of the intervention. In addition, M&E supports stronger 
governance systems across all government structures, 
thereby enhancing accountability relationships among 
development stakeholders [20]. Further, when implemented 
successfully, M&E has the potential to build a stronger 
basis for achieving intended development results. Thus, 
M&E is considered a good tool for enhancing anti -
corruption crusades in public sector institutions and 
bringing about a positive performance culture that 
promotes better policy making, national planning and 
budgeting processes [21,22,23]. 
The two notions of 'monitoring' and 'evaluation' are 
significantly distinct, but complementar y in application.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
163 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
The concepts are not synonymous, although many people 
use them interchangeably. Nonetheless, the intrinsic value 
is embedded in their differences. For monitoring, [13]  
contend that it is about providing information on ‘where’ a 
given development intervention is in terms of its 
implementation status against targets and outcomes. On 
the other hand, evaluation is about the ‘why’ of 
development interventions, especially whether planned 
targets and desired outcomes have been realised. To that 
extent, evaluations concern themselves with attribution 
and causality [24,25] . Reference [26] also asserts that 
monitoring entails continuously observing the progress in 
a given development intervention, while [27] consider it a 
process of tracking milestones regularly, measuring 
progress against expectations, and determining the 
purposes of compliance and improvements. Evaluati ons, 
on the other hand, are meant to systematically and 
objectively assess ongoing or completed development 
interventions, such as projects, programmes or policies, in 
attaining their design, implementation and results  
[1,28,29,30].  
Therefore, evaluation results complement monitoring 
exercises in many ways. For example, when a monitoring 
system reveals that a certain intervention is off track,  
an appropriate evaluative information would provide 
clarity on the realities and trends observed through the 
monitoring system  [13]. Table 2  presents a conceptual 
illustration of the complementary relationship between the 
functions of monitoring and that of evaluation. 
Table 2. Complementary roles of monitoring and evaluation 
Monitoring  Evaluation 
 Clarifies programmes objectives  
 Analyses why intended 
results were or were not 
achieved 
 Links activities and their resources to 
objectives 
 Assesses specific causal 
contributions of activities to 
results 
 Translates objectives into performance 
indicators and sets targets 
 Examines implementation 
process 
 Routinely collects data on these 
indicators, compares actual results  
 Explores unintended 
results 
 Reports progress to managers and alerts 
them to problems 
 Provides lessons, 
highlights significant 
accomplishment or 
programme potential, and 
offers recommendations for 
improvement 
Source: Kusek & Rist, 2004, p. 14. 
 
‘Monitoring’ refers to a process that offers management 
and stakeholders of any development intervention under 
implementation with indicator information, but also a 
continuous function that uses systematic collection of data 
on specified indicators [1]. On the other hand, ‘evaluation’ 
refers to the systematic and independent assessment of a 
policy, programme or project that is ongoing or has 
already been completed. In particular, evaluations aim to 
meet major objectives, including determining whether a 
given intervention was  relevant, efficient, effective, 
impactful and sustainable, and ultimately whether the 
decision-making processes incorporated lessons learned. 
Reference [31] view the evaluation function as the worth, 
value and significance of an ongoing or completed project, 
programme or policy. 
Furthermore, the functions of monitoring and 
evaluation are self-reinforcing. While monitoring refers to 
a management function that is ongoing, the notion of 
evaluation denotes the post -event functi on and gives 
feedback to management. Typically, when undertaking 
monitoring exercises, one is also carrying out some form 
of evaluating function because one is making an 
assessment about progress achieved and, based on this 
judgement, providing possible solutions. On the other 
hand, when conducting an evaluation, monitoring data are 
being utilised, upon which judgements are made based on 
the insights from the continuous process. Therefore, the 
complementary nature of the two concepts is not linear. 
Instead, the relationship is more dynamic, depending on 
the situation [32]. 
 
7. Historical Perspective of Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Historically, monitoring and evaluation can be traced to 
various points in the past. However, one s till has to 
distinguish between modern -day M&E and traditional 
M&E, which are practised by different generations and 
societies as the world continues to evolve. Every society 
in the past seems to have implemented some form of 
performance-tracking system. I n other words, M&E 
systems have always been on the development reform 
agenda of many governments and institutions. In giving a 
more distant historical perspective of the importance  and 
usefulness of M&E practice, [13] recounted: 
There is tremendous power in measuring performance. 
The ancient Egyptians regularly monitored their country’s 
outputs in grain and livestock production more than 5,000 
years ago. In this sense, M&E is certainly not a new 
phenomenon. Modern government s, too, have engaged in 
some form of traditional M&E over the past decades. 
They have sought to track over time their expenditures, 
revenues, staffing levels, resources, programmes and 
project activities, goods and s ervices produced, and so 
forth. 
From the days of the Ancient Egyptians, there has been 
a great deal of evolution in the philosophical orientation 
and conceptualisation of M&E. For example, in the 1960s, 
M&E practice underwent a substantial paradigm shift, 
which was predominantly quantitative in focus, reflecting 
the social scientific trend of the era. This domination 
continued in the social sciences in the 1970s, putting more 
emphasis on empowerment evaluation. The emphasis on 
empowerment approaches was based on lived experiences 
to represent and  provide a voice to as many stakeholders 
as possible [33]. However, in the decades that followed, 
M&E methodologies shifted from an emphasis on quantitative 
to more participatory approaches and empowerment 
techniques [33,34].  
The increasing demand for M&E, even in contemporary 
governance systems, has resulted because of the critical 
benefits associated with the two notions. For example, 
benefits such as the provision of relevant information 
embedded in good feedback- loop systems are what 
results-based M&E systems offer decision makers and 
other stakeholders. Many governments and organisations 
have tracking systems that form part of their management
<<<PAGE=6>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 164 
toolkits: financial systems, accountability systems, and 
good human resource systems [31]. Earlier development 
management efforts lacked the feedback component, 
which enables the tracking of implementation consequences. 
In that regard, building M&E systems has levera ged 
decision makers in the provision of much-valued feedback 
on policy, programme and project performance as a basis 
for future improvement [35,36,37]. 
In addition, [14] assert that contemporary M&E systems 
have their roots in the Results Based Management (RBM) 
approach, which is a management strategy centred on 
performance and achievement of outputs, outcomes and 
impacts for a policy, programme or project. Reference [1] 
view M&E systems as toolkits of management meant to 
help institutions of development to realise intervention 
effectiveness through the delivery of results. Typically, 
RBM employs traditional tools such as strategic planning, 
results frameworks, monitoring, and programme evaluation 
to improve organisational performance [13,38]. The approach 
was popularised first among private sector organisations, 
development agencies and multilateral organisations, and 
later moved  on to the public sector as part of reform 
efforts in the 1980s and 1990s. Today, most development 
interventions have adopted the RBM approach to inform 
processes such as planning, budgeti ng, implementation 
and M&E [8,33,39]. 
7.1. Monitoring and Evaluation Trends  
at Global Level 
The evolution of contemporary M&E at global level 
could be traced back to the 1980s and later the 1990s. 
Globally, the desire to produce results -oriented M&E 
systems and frameworks emanated from the need to 
determine a country’s progress towards its development 
goals. According to [40] , initiatives such as the UN’s 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper policy, and Country Assistance Stra tegy 
mushroomed, each with a focus on results. Through these 
initiatives, it was desired that citizens of countries should 
obtain accountability feedback from their governments in 
terms of evidence from the implementation of public 
development interventions, especially resource allocation 
and expenditure and expected results.  
For these reasons, it became common in the 1990s and 
increasingly in the 2000s for poverty reduction strategies 
(PRS) to be implemented by many countries, especially 
among the developing ones. The PRS approach was 
designed to provide a strong linkage between public sector 
policies, support from donors and the development 
outcomes required for meeting the MDGs [6,22,40] . Five 
key principles characterised the PRS approach, namely 
promoting national ownership of strategies through  
broad-based participation of civil society, country driven; 
results focused and based on outcomes that would be of 
benefit to the poor; partnership oriented concerning 
coordinated participation of cooperating partners; 
recognising the comprehensive and multidimensional 
nature of poverty; and based on a long-term perspective or 
horizon for poverty reduction. Another prominent feature 
in the PRSP approach involved the recognition tha t the 
implementation of the strategy would demand close 
monitoring, with the national statistical office (NSO) 
playing an important role. The wider role of statistics in 
informing the upstream undertakings of problem 
identification, policy design, setting quantitative targets, and 
allocating resources among competing priorities was 
inevitable [41,42]. Additionally, the PRS approach 
demanded that countries created, implemented and 
sustained viable M&E systems and arrangements, not only 
at national level, but at sub -national level too. However, 
this was an extremely challenging proposition, given the 
low technical capacity obtaining at lower levels in most 
developing countries [6,13,43,44]. 
This M&E evolution in the 1980s, 1990s and early 
2000s escalated in 2005, when the Paris Declaration (PD) 
was signed by developed and developing countries, 
including key bilateral, multilateral, civil society and other 
development agencies. The declaration obligated countries 
and the donor community to aid effectiveness and strengthen 
their management approaches towards development 
results [4,45]. All these efforts were meant to enhance the 
achievement of high -level development results (that is, 
outcomes and impacts) as opposed to focusing on lower 
level processes (that is, inputs, activities or physical 
outputs) [46,47,48].  
The PD was followed by the 2008 Accra Agenda for 
Action (AAA), another res olve by the globe to make 
results orientation through functional M&E mechanisms a 
stamp of sound practice for good governance and 
sustainable development [49,50,51]. The global development 
agenda for both the PD and the AAA  focused on aid 
effectiveness. The common agenda was anchored on the 
five principles of alignment, harmonisation, ownership, 
mutual accountability, and managing for results. 
A more recent global effort to promote strengthened 
M&E was the Fourth High Level Forum (HLF4) in Busan, 
Korea, in 2011. Like the PD and AAA, the Busan 
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation focused 
on aid effectiveness under the principles of ownership, 
focus on results, partnerships, transparency and shared 
responsibility. The principle of focus on results promoted 
working towards a sustainable impact, and adopting this 
as a motivating factor behind investments and efforts in 
the process of policy making [49,52] . These initiatives set 
a high tone on the global requirement for functional M&E 
development, strengthening and sustainability. The efforts 
have continued to provide a basis for enhancing M&E to 
even higher levels across the globe. Table 3 highlights the 
evolution of M&E globally. 
7.2. Monitoring and Evaluation Trends in 
Africa 
Similar to M&E trends globally, the African continent 
has made notable positive experiences in the spread of 
M&E. Generally, the emergence and growth of M&E in 
Africa has been gradual, to the extent that even today a 
number of countries are still in the initial stages of 
building their designated systems for M&E. For a long 
time in Africa, M&E was viewed as agenda driven and 
controlled by donors. However, this view is phasing  
out and co untries are working towards building and 
sustaining their own practices and systems. Currently, 
many African countries have joined their counterpart 
countries in Latin America, including the Caribbean, and
<<<PAGE=7>>>
165 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
Asia in establishing systems for M&E in pursuit of  good 
governance and poverty reduction based on evidence 
[22,51,53]. 
In addition, although formal traces of efforts to  
demand results and accountability in the contemporary 
understanding of M&E on the African context began  in 
the late 1980s, more evidence can be traced in late 1990s 
onwards. In particular, an ambitious seminar was 
convened in Abidjan in 1998. One of the top priorities on 
the agenda was to take stock of progress and M&E 
 capacity status in Africa in the cont ext of public 
service delivery and overall performance. In fact, the 1998 
conference was a follow -up to the earlier meeting of  
1990 in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Suffice to say, it was a 
ground-breaking event in the effort to articulate M&E in 
Africa by bringi ng together participants from twelve 
African nations and 21 international donor agencies. The 
seminar sought to appreciate the status of M&E capacity 
development in Africa with a view to re -engaging in 
innovative ways to grow the M&E function across the 
continent [54,55,56]. 
However, other efforts in M&E had been advanced 
much earlier than the 1998 conference. In March 1987, 
OECD/DAC convened a conference in Abidjan, whose 
agenda was to have donors and beneficiary countries 
discuss the evaluation function in development. Thus, the 
1987 conference birthed the 1990 and 1998 conferences, 
whose focus was on clarifying the needs of evaluation as 
considered by African member states and to explore 
opportunities for enhanced self-evaluation capacity [22,43]. 
Table 3. Summary of major global efforts towards results-based monitoring and evaluation for development (2000 to date) 
Milestone Issues of focus per milestone 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
(2016) 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), otherwise known as the Global Goals, are a 
universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all people enjoy peace 
and prosperity. The 17 goals build on the successes of the eight Millennium Development 
Goals, while including new areas such as climate change, economic inequality, innovation, 
sustainable consumption,  peace and justice, among other priorities. The goals are 
interconnected, often the key to success involving tackling  issues more commonly associated 
with another 
Busan Declaration (2011) 
In Busan, Korea, on the occasion of the Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness (HLF4, 
29 November to 1 December 2011), over 3000 delegates met to review progress on 
implementing the principles of the Paris Declaration. They also discussed how to maintain the 
relevance of the aid effectiveness agenda in the context of the evolving development landscape. 
The forum culminated  in the signing of the Busan Partnership for Effective Development 
Cooperation by ministers of developed and developing nations, emerging economies, providers 
of South-South and triangular co -operation and civil society to mark a critical turning point in 
development co-operation 
Accra Agenda for Action (2008) 
The Accra High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness set out to reform the way developed and 
developing countries work together, to ensure that development assistance is well spent and 
that it helps build sustainable economies that lift people out of poverty. Org anised by OECD 
and the World Bank,  and hosted by  the Government of Ghana, the forum brought together 
ministers, heads of development agencies and civil society organisations from more than 100 
countries. Examining the results of development aid, they examine what needs to change and 
how the international aid system could deliver the ‘best bang for the buck’ 
Paris Declaration (2005) 
The Paris Declaration  (2005) was designed to be a practical, action -oriented roadmap to 
improve the quality of aid and its impact on development. At the Paris meeting, more than 100 
signatories - from donor and developing- country governments, multilateral donor agencies, 
regional development banks and international agencies -  endorsed the Declaration on Aid 
Effectiveness 
Marrakech Memorandum (2004) Better development results required management systems and capacities that put results at the 
centre of planning, implementation and evaluation 
Rome Declaration (2003) 
Participants committed to specific activities to enhance aid harmonisation: 
 Deliver assistance in accordance with partner country priorities 
 Amend policies, procedures, and practices to facilitate harmonisation 
 Implement good practice standards or principles in development assistance delivery and 
management 
 Intensify donor efforts to cooperate at the country level 
 Promote the benefits of harmonisation among staff 
 Provide support to strengthen partner country governments’ leadership and ownership of 
development results 
 Streamline donor procedures and practices 
 Promote harmonised approaches in global and regional programmes 
Millennium Development Goals (2000) 
In a key effort to promote more effective development, in 2000, 189 UN member countries 
agreed to work toward reduction of global poverty and improved sustainable development. 
These global aims are reflected in the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), with 
their 18 targets and 48 performance indicators. The MDGs provided specific, measurable 
targets that were gradually being adapted at the country level as the basis for country outcomes 
and then monitored over time to help gauge progress. In a key effort to promote more effective 
development, in 2000, 189 UN member countries agreed to work toward reduction of global 
poverty and improved sustainable development. 
Source: Adapted from OECD, 2003; OECD & World Bank, 2008; OECD, 2011 & UNDP, 2015.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 166 
Conclusively, the 1998 conference, which was organised by 
the Development Bank of Sout hern Africa (DBSA), in 
collaboration with the African Development Bank (AfDB) 
and World Bank, had these key objectives, which are 
historic in the evolution of M&E on the African continent  
[22]: 
  Providing an overview towards the progress 
made regarding the development of M&E capacities in 
Africa within the specific ambit of the public expenditure 
management framework and broadly the public sector 
reform regime  
  Achieving a common continental position on key 
purposes, elements, including processes of M&E 
that support development  
  Strengthening the M&E supply and demand sides 
by identifying strategies and supporting resources 
for building stronger M&E systems in African 
countries 
  Promoting sharing of lessons learnt and experiences 
concerning M&E capacity development such as 
concepts, successes, challenges, and approaches 
  Investing in tools for use in developing country 
M&E action plans and frameworks - by taking into 
account different circumstances in each individual 
country 
  Creating stronger and effective country -specific  
and regi onal-collaborative integrated networks to 
encourage feedback and learning for all countries 
In addition, the conference report indicated how 
participants were anxious to see African countries take a 
leading role in building their own sustainable systems fo r 
M&E, which would inform government resource 
allocations, permitting greater clarity in decision making 
in the planning and budgeting processes. Further, this 
demand for stronger M&E arrangements in Africa was not 
made by external stakeholders such as development 
partners and civil society alone, but by common citizens 
who perceived governance systems as being negative 
[22,57,58].  
Bad experiences in most African governance systems 
included economic and political disasters,  absence of a 
culture of accountability, lack of ownership, corruption, 
the poor quality of financial and other performance 
mechanisms, and the critical lack of M&E feedback  
loops to inform decision- making processes [22,40, 59].  
As a result of these negative perceptions, from relative 
obscurity the pursuit for good governance has risen to the 
top of Africa’s development policy agenda with M&E 
reforms taking centre stage [43,60].  
An addition al critical aspect of the evolution of M&E  
in Africa has been the constant demand by participants 
and stakeholders for more conferences and increased 
knowledge sharing forums at continental level as well as 
within member countries. There was a proposal to  
establish platforms to be used for building the M&E 
capacity in countries across the continent [6,8,22] . The 
seminar in 2000 for instance emphasised the urgent 
requirement for every African country to develop a 
national eva luation association. Further, the conference 
challenged countries and development partners t o explore 
other regional and international opportunities, especially 
strategic cooperation and collaborations aimed at 
strengthening the transformational M&E agenda  in Africa 
[43]. 
The Third African Evaluation Association (AFrEA) 
Conference, whose theme was ‘Evaluation Matters, Africa 
Matters, Joining Forces for Development’, was held in 
2004 in Cape Town, South Africa. In terms of at tendance, 
450 participants were brought together from 61 countries, 
with a large representation of members from among 
African governments. As part of the capacity -building 
initiative, this conference offered over 20 pre- conference 
training sessions on M&E -related capacity topics.  
In 2005, another development evaluation roundtable 
conference was held in Tunisia, which was attended  
by representatives from up to 21 African countries. The 
Third AFrEA conference was followed by two other 
events, one in Niamey in 2006 (AFrEAIV) and the other 
in Cairo in 2009 (AFrEAV). The AFrEAV event was 
momentous in that here, the AFrEA was formally 
constituted, with the potential to transform into a more 
vibrant African results -oriented association functioning 
beyond the biennial events in which it was most visible  
[59].  
Under the AFrEA umbrella, many meetings and 
conferences have since been convened, all focusing on 
M&E evolution and strengthening in Africa. The latest, 
the Eighth AFrEA Conference, was held in March 2017 in 
Kampala, Uganda. Its aim was to encourage exchanges 
between academia, researchers, emerging evaluators and 
M&E practitioners on demand and supply of credible 
evaluative evidence in support of the Sustainable 
Development Goa ls (SDGs) in Africa. The conference 
also built the capacity of participants in designing, 
managing and utilising evaluation findings to help 
governments achieve their national and international 
development agendas around the SDGs and Africa 
Agenda 2063 [50,61].  
Therefore, the core purpose of AFrEA is to commit to 
developing and strengthening indigenous evaluation 
capacities by providing high -level training across Africa 
by way of national professional associations that conducted 
peer-to-peer training exercises [43]. Consequently, it is 
anticipated that these associations would work with their 
own governments and other stakeholders to articulate 
national evaluation policies and functional fram eworks 
and operational structures. In addition, AFrEA works to 
support the creation and strengthening of M&E policies at 
country level, and promotes awareness of and demand for 
development outcomes and impacts. Other objectives 
were focused on building inf rastructural capacity and 
promoting the utilisation of M&E systems and 
information to meet the increased expectations from 
stakeholders. Through AFrEA, African member states are 
challenged to produce collaborative strategies and 
infrastructure capacities t o support a functional pan-
African M&E network, particularly one focused on 
reviewing good standard evaluation culture and practices 
for implementation in Africa [43] . Although there were 
several additional efforts at domes ticating and localising 
M&E among African governments and other development 
stakeholders, these initiatives are the notable ones. Africa 
is therefore on the right track with regard to e volving 
M&E demand and growth.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
167 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
8. Importance of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems 
An M&E system is a set of organisational or 
institutional arrangements comprising management plans, 
standards, strategies, processes, information systems, 
indicators, reporting lines and accountability relationships, 
which enable national and pr ovincial departments, 
municipalities and other institutions to perform their M&E 
functions successfully [2,59,62]. Thus, the question is: 
Why would governments bother to invest, develop, build 
and sustain stronger whole -of-government (WoG) M&E 
systems? Obviously, this question is complex, but requires 
a comprehensive answer with appropriate justification for 
undertaking ambitious steps towards spending and 
committing huge public resources to building such 
systems. Reference [13] contend that “it is difficult to 
build strong economies based on weak governments”. 
Thus, results- based M&E systems are considered key  
to strengthening such governments by reinforcing the 
focus on demonstrable developm ent results. Governments 
of developing countries may be overwhelmed in implementing 
policies, programmes and projects, without functional 
M&E systems to show what was working effectively and 
what was not [63,64].  
In reality, there are several reasons for governments to 
invest in building functional WoGM&ESs. Factors such 
as internal organisational and political pressure, including 
potential external factors, to build effective M&E systems 
have been critical in demanding for  such systems [53,65]. 
Further, combating corruption, expanding the authority of 
the auditor general, and strengthening the role of the 
parliament have been cited as fundamental internal 
reasons for the demand for M&E systems. Other internally 
generated pressures may arise from political parties in 
opposition to the sitting government, who demand reforms 
in the public sector. External pressures from the international 
aid community, civil society and other stakeholders may 
also compel public sector reforms and create demand for 
M&E systems as tools for better management of public 
affairs [39,48,66].  
Another reason that it is critical to embark on building 
stronger public sector WoGM&ESs is tha t once such 
systems have been suitably institutionalised, they serve as 
an integral aspect of the development policy, programme 
or project cycle. Systems for M&E therefore bring 
improvements in the public sector performance [14]. 
Reference [13] add that good governance is more critical 
for less developed countries to pursue than for their 
counterparts in the developed world. Therefore, for many 
developing countries, M&E presents an opportunit y to 
correct the problem and begin to build systems that will 
contribute to reduced poverty. In fact, it is regarded as an 
emergency for developing countries to create and sustain  
a strong and accountable governance environment.  
That is why [38] stresses that governance mechanisms are 
strengthened by functional M&E systems through improved 
transparency, accountability relationships, and by building 
a performance- based culture in support of better policy 
and budget decision making and management. 
An example from India is apposite. Recently, India 
made an effort to pursue M&E from a practical angle and 
lessons can be learned for other developing countries such 
as those in Africa. According to [67], a surge had occurred 
in India’s public expenditure, driven by growth in the 
national economy, which resulted in increased demand for 
M&E and performance management from central government 
(mainly ministries of finance and planning), programme 
implementers, international donor organisations, and civil 
society. 
Arising from the economic growth, the government of 
India embarked on building a countrywide M&E system. 
This effort was undertaken to establish a firm and more 
institutionalised nationwide setting for results-based M&E 
activities, which were continuous and tied to the planning, 
budgeting and accountability processes. The ministry of 
finance instituted outcome budgeting, and the planning 
commission created an independent evaluation office, 
which w ould subsume the commission’s pre -existing 
programme evaluation organisation. Similarly, the cabinet 
secretariat created the performance management and 
evaluation system [5,21,60]. Indeed, the role of government 
becomes vital in leading the process of building a 
WoGM&ES that will be used to inform public 
management processes in the poverty reduction agenda. 
Such a commitment, though, seems to demand consistencies 
in terms not only of institutional capacity, but also of 
political will even in changes of regimes.   
National M&E systems whose focus is to provide  
all concerned development stakeholders with credible 
information are complex and require careful attention by 
governments that incorporate them. In support of this view, 
[66] added that M&E systems involve institutional 
activities that take the form of data and information 
collection, analysis, dissemination, reporting and feedback 
into policy processes, among others. There are many 
actors on the supply and demand sides of M&E systems 
and these create motivation and incentives to create and 
sustain successful systems. Key actors that benefit from 
M&E information include government-wide line ministries, 
CSOs, NGOs, parliaments, the donor com munity and 
private consultants. Others are research institutions, 
universities and the general public.  
Essentially, building and sustaining a functional M&E 
system should be understood as a process and one that 
takes relatively longer. Reference [68] add that creating an 
M&E system should be considered a means, and not an 
end in itself, and is best linked to the process of public 
policy planning and management. Such a system would 
enjoy a balanced supply of quality information (that is, on 
the supply side) and its utilisation in such processes as 
planning, budgeting and management (that is, on the 
demand side). 
A summary of reasons for building and sustaining 
stronger WoGM&ESs is now given. 
8.1. Tools for Poverty Reduction 
The implementation of stronger M&E functions is 
understood by many stakeholders as being key to 
enhancing poverty reduction efforts because they assist 
inculcating good governance, transparency and accountability 
tenets in development institutions. Reference [38] and [69] 
argue that M&E systems have been demonstrated to be 
useful tools in supporting poverty reduction efforts for
<<<PAGE=10>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 168 
most governments and development organisations. The 
implementation of results -based M&E systems plays an 
important role in providing a feedback loop, which, 
according to [31] , offers a systematic way of tracking 
progress of any given intervention, thereby strengthening 
policy and decision-making processes.  
8.2. Informs National Planning 
Planning is a fundamental requirement for successful 
organisations. When all planning processes are well 
grounded on evidence, development institutions tend to 
thrive by achieving their organisational objectives. In 
addition, when such planning is anchored on clearly 
defined results, stakeholders show support for such 
institutions. Therefore, results -based M&E systems are 
designed to strengthen the planning function [31,37,58,69]. 
Reference [36] observed that ordinary citizens had gone 
to the extent of exerting pressure on their governments to 
demonstrate development results for their work, which 
was often perceived to fall short of people’s expectations. 
In many cases, goods and services delivered by government 
institutions were taken to be of poor consumption quality 
and products of misappropriation of public resources 
causing mass deprivation and poverty. In that regard, 
systems for M&E are  meant to enhance the planning 
function so that priorities and sequencing of development 
choices are done in the most appropriate manner, in the 
spirit of doing more with less  [31]. Therefore, it has 
become difficult for go vernments of developing countries 
to avert these pressures, and the incorporation of M&E 
systems in their mainstream operations has opened  
hope for better implementation of public development 
interventions [69,70,71].  
Further, since national planning does not start and end 
only with local citizens of a country, additional pressures 
arise from the civil society and the donor community. 
Civil society demands that governments should be open to 
all forms of public accountabili ty through the creation  
of forums in which the general public are told how  
public resources are being utilised. Donors also want 
governments to show through results how foreign aid is 
being utilised to improve human lives [6,39,41,72]. 
Thus, in all these situations, M&E systems would help 
governments to generate inclusive development policies, 
strategies, plans, programmes and projects centred on 
national priorities, based on evid ence and incremental 
learning.  
8.3. Enhances Government Transparency and 
Accountability 
Good M&E systems promise enhanced transparency 
and accountability on the acquisition, distribution and 
utilisation of public resources [52]. Similarly, [70] argues 
that governments are able to demonstrate to interested 
stakeholders the attainment of desired development results. 
A further viewpoint is that without strong accountability 
relationships, there would be minimal incentives to 
stimulate performance improvement by organisations and 
governments.  
However, for M&E systems to serve as instruments of 
public transparency and accountability, dissemination 
channels such as regular stakeholders’ forums, reports and 
Internet should be used to increas e the accessibility of 
M&E information produced by the systems [73] . In many 
cases, key stakeholders such as CSOs and donors press 
governments to demonstrate how public resources are 
being utilised in relation to poverty re duction plans. 
Governments may find such stakeholders’ demands 
problematic in the absence of well -functioning M&E 
systems. Reference [6] assert that un -negotiated demand 
for M&E information by different stakeholders is the basis 
for a successful crusade towards meaningful accountability 
and transparency. That way, it is considered an effective 
approach to make those responsible for policy to account.  
Consequently, M&E systems can be used as powerful 
platforms for stakeholder s to hold government leaders 
accountable for the mobilisation, allocation and utilisation 
of public resources. Reference [49] also noted that the 
donor community and taxpayers in aid- dependent poor 
countries have limited means to hold to account those who 
allocate and manage donor resources, even when it is clear 
that such officials have incentives to enhance the 
wellbeing of the poor. In such cases, functioning M&E 
systems would provide performance -based incentives and 
enable donors and other stakeholders to overcome the 
challenges and learn what approaches were suitable for 
certain contexts [62,74,75].  
Further, when information from M&E systems is used 
properly, internally and externally ba sed stakeholders will 
have a clear appreciation of policies, projects and 
programmes statuses [24,54]. As a result, there could be 
increased popular and political support arising from such a 
demonstration of positive development outcomes and 
engagements. Reference [31] subscribe to the idea that 
while there may be risks associated with the implementation 
of results-based M&E systems such as organisational and 
political costs, there are crucia l undesirable implications 
and risks in doing away with such systems.  
8.4. Informs Budget Allocation and Fight 
against Corruption 
Budgets are the main instruments that are used to invest 
in poverty reduction programmes in developing countries 
and elsewher e. Thus, it is important that M&E systems 
should collect complete budgetary data and information to 
inform other development interventions and decision-
making processes. When M&E system findings and 
budget allocations are not integrated, it is difficult to make 
proper linkages between the intended outcomes of 
agencies and programmes and the budget classification 
[73]. These challenges arise from lack of causal chain 
links between M&E and budget processes. One way to 
address this disconnect is to adopt a programme or 
objective-based budget classification. 
Increasing cases of corruption are among the major 
hindrances to the development efforts of many aid-
dependent poor countries [56]. The resou rces that are 
supposed to be invested in transformational policies, 
projects and programmes that are targeted at reducing 
poverty and improving the welfare of the poor majority 
are sometimes mismanaged. Such corrupt practices are of 
concern not only to the  stakeholders and citizens of 
developing countries, but to the international community
<<<PAGE=11>>>
169 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
as well. Therefore, because of this, many stakeholders 
have regarded M&E systems as important tools in the 
anti-corruption crusade [36]. This kind of information 
tracking may lead those in charge of public resource 
management to avoid misapplication and focus on 
operatives that enhance human development. 
8.5. Supports Policy-making and 
Improvement 
In the same manner as projects and program mes are 
used as instruments of development, policies are significant 
vehicles upon which governments and other institutions 
deliver their development aspirations. Reference [72] state 
that M&E systems produce valuable infor mation that 
feeds into development policy and organisational learning, 
and ultimately improves the effectiveness of development 
cooperation. Therefore, governments of aid- dependent 
developing countries would do well to build functional 
M&E systems and use the information to formulate public 
policies that are pro poor and evidence based [42,60,69].  
Socio-economic policies are supposed to be products of 
a well -informed government process to generate positive 
effects on povert y reduction and national growth [76]. 
Since developing countries may not have well-functioning 
M&E systems, their policies may be the products of less 
informed processes [41,64]. It is there fore important to 
build systems that seek to provide this needed information 
to feed into development policies and programmes. Despite 
the weaknesses faced by many developing countries with 
regard to building and sustaining coherent and functional 
M&E systems, there is hope for improvement. Like most 
developed and transition countries, it will be possible for 
aid-dependent countries to show evidence of their social 
and economic achievements.  
In addition, the essence of successful designing of 
results-based M&E systems is to assist in monitoring and 
evaluating development interventions at all levels of their 
implementation. Information and data from a given 
intervention could therefore be collected with matching 
analysis at any stage to offer regular feedback. Consequently, 
M&E functions should be conducted institutionally all 
through the life cycle of a programme, project or policy, 
and after completion of an intervention [31]. 
8.6. Generates Management Information 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems support  
the management function of development institutions  
by providing valuable information that is critical to 
decision-making processes. The systems are used as 
management toolkits for tracking and demonstrating 
progress of a given policy, programme or project against 
expected results. Systems for monitoring and evaluation 
should both be implemented successfully because a 
mismatch between them may lead to the managing of 
programmes and projects being derailing, hence, fai lure to 
track progress becomes a norm [14]. According to the [43], 
M&E is a development management tool whose ultimate 
objective is to promote a culture of futuristic learning  
and improveme nt of organisational policy and decision 
making for various users through the utilisation of 
evidence-based information.  
Developing countries have become aware that to 
achieve meaningful social and economic development, 
prudence in the management of resou rces is essential. 
Therefore, M&E systems have become important factors 
in the development processes of aid-dependent developing 
countries. This is a ‘management challenge function’ that 
M&E systems are designed to offer governments and 
other institutions of development. For [70], it is for that 
reason that M&E systems have been created and 
strengthened by a growing number of governments. Thus, 
the ultimate motivation for creating such systems is 
anchored on performance management for development 
results.  
Reference [25] add that M&E systems help in 
identifying the most efficient use of resources. This 
represents another management function that is attributed 
to systems for M&E. The informatio n about performance 
indicators may be used at various management levels to 
direct resources to needy activities. M&E information 
allows performance comparisons such as benchmarking 
among government structures (that is, administrative units, 
provinces and districts) [31,68]. 
8.7. Promotes Organisational Learning and 
Feedback 
Feedback constitutes an essential component of M&E 
processes through the provision of linkages between 
activities of the past and those in future [77] . In that 
context, well -developed feedback loops are needed for 
results of evaluations to be utilised in future policy and 
programme developments. When well strengthened and 
developed, the learning aspect is fundamental to the  
attainment of sustainability and improvement of M&E 
systems themselves. Usually, this kind of feedback occurs 
during the utilisation of M&E information, especially 
when results are presented [78,79]. Therefore, feedback 
from M&E systems helps managers to promote 
institutional learning, following a cycle that involves 
reflecting on progress and perfecting the course of projects 
or programmes where need is required [13]. 
A well-functioning feedback mechanism operates as an 
early warning system to development management in that 
when problems are identified, questions about the 
assumptions and strategy behind a development intervention 
are raised and possible solutions put in place. In that 
aspect, providing pointers forms the primary function of 
M&E and this improves the understanding of what works 
and what does not work and to some extent why [61,62,80]. 
However, [81] caution that  sustaining the learning 
function of M&E is usually not easy, particularly given its 
complex nature, which involves a process of cultural  
and political dynamics of continuous and systematic 
management of public affairs. These authors contend that 
although it has been demonstrated implicitly that M&E 
functions result in some desired learning and reflection, it 
is not always so, and this requires that organisations regularly 
integrate information in such complex development 
situations [62,82].  
Similarly, [83] argue that the utilisation of evaluation in 
organisations remains unpredictable and hard to sustain 
for several reasons, among them political or contextual, 
technical (that is, methodolog ical) and organisational
<<<PAGE=12>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 170 
bureaucratic dynamics. All these factors are necessary if 
the learning function is to take place successfully. In that 
way, [56] and [84] regard M&E as a management tool  
that supports the quality of information for use in 
decision-making processes, thus helping to build learning 
organisations [85,86].  
9. Linking Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems to Good Governance  
There is an increasing linkage between M&E systems 
and good governance, which comes from providing 
governments and other stakeholders with the desired 
information on the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and 
quality of government policies, projects and programmes 
[43]. Information from M&E systems contributes to the 
enhancement of the public sector’s accountability, feedback 
and learning functions. Here, good governance refers 
broadly to aspects such as accountability, transparency, 
combating corruption, inclusiveness and participation,  
and legal and judicial reforms [22,62] . This increase in 
demand for M&E information can be attributed to the 
increasing demand for good governance from providers of 
goods and services.  
For the past two decades, internal and external 
development stakeholders have pushed their governments 
for results, demanding outcomes and impact of implemented 
policies, programmes and projects. These stakeholders are 
asking for evidence -based feedback on the status of 
current and ongoing development interventions. For 
example, since the mid -2000s, M&E has become more 
popular among international development organisations 
and the focus has since been on results and impact of 
development assistance [13,87].  
An M&E system provides evidence -based information 
that is important in informing development policy processes 
such as planning, targeting, prioritisation, budgeting and 
expenditures [88]. A similar argument is posited by [89]  
and [67] that M&E systems are important and relevant not 
only to individual development agencies, but to many 
institutions and at different levels of development interventions 
and processes, regardless of their size and location. 
As a result, countries around the world seem to have 
consensus on the urgent need for functional WoGM&ES 
as useful tools for promoting good governance and 
poverty red uction. To that extent, observations have 
shown that many countries are building and implementing 
M&E in pursuit of satisfying growing needs from their 
citizens and other interested stakeholders [70]. Although 
these efforts are justifiably being implemented at various 
levels of development owing to divergent in- country 
dynamics, that something was being done signified how 
M&E has been accepted globally as an essential ingredient 
towards improved public sector management, po verty 
reduction and overall sustained good governance practices. 
The benefits associated with M&E come from the use of a 
range of tools that are supposed to be applied appropriately, 
depending on the nature of an intervention. Reference  
[43] points out that M&E uses ongoing or continuing 
performance monitoring, real -time evaluations supporting 
continuous learning at all levels of development, 
performance and financial audits and ex -post evaluations. 
Furthermore, one of the collectively agreed positions in 
the 2000 report titled ‘Can Africa claim the 21st century?’ 
was that improved governance among African countries 
was one of the most basic requirements for fast -tracking 
the African development results -based agenda. The rep ort 
argued in support of improved management, better 
distribution of economic resources, stronger institutions 
and programmes that make it possible to compel 
governments accountable to their citizens [23,90]. 
Good governance is not an abstract notion; it is a way 
of conducting affairs that are in the public interest  
and should be democratically enriching [91]. Good 
governance relates to a way of doing things or conducting 
activities that are  proper, transparent and accountable. 
Furthermore, researchers at the World Bank distinguished 
six dimensions of good governance, namely voice  
and accountability, government effectiveness, lack of 
regulatory burden, rule of law, independence of the 
judiciary, and control of corruption [92].  
M&E thus plays a significant role in the transformation 
process of public sector management systems by inherently 
advancing the ideals of good governance. Reference [62] 
affirms that M&E strengthens concepts of transparency, 
accountability and improvement at strategic and operational 
levels and that these resonate well with the tenets of good 
governance. Further, according to [29,93], M&E has been 
known to support performance management at various 
levels, thereby contributing to a results -focused approach 
by providing methodological options in support of the 
performance management proces s itself. In addition , 
Figure 1 shows fundamental conditions that are useful for 
supporting and measuring good governance, of which 
effective M&E systems is a crucial aspect.
 
 
Figure 1. Fundamental conditions for supporting and measuring good governance (Source: Naidoo, 2011, p.21)
<<<PAGE=13>>>
171 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
10. Conclusion 
The focus of this work was to stress an emphasis that 
African countries and their governments were struggling 
to meet governance and public management expectations 
of different stakeholders on the basis of lacking funct ional 
monitoring and evaluation systems. The paper discussed 
the concepts of ‘monitoring’ and that of ‘evaluation’. It 
articulated M&E in the context of good governance in 
pursuit of a results -based sustainable development. In 
particular, the paper discuss ed reasons for governments, 
particularly of African countries to invest in building and 
sustaining functional and results -based WoGM&ESs to 
give a holistic picture of the experienced and perceived 
benefits of embracing M&E at various levels of governance. 
If governments and their development counterparts fail to 
develop functional syste ms for M&E , the cost would be 
huge. The point was made that governments need to dedicate 
more time and resources to strengthening institutional and 
human capacities towards b uilding stronger and more 
sustainable WoGM&ESs. For African governments and 
other development stakeholders, the paper presented a 
solid foundation on which not only to inculcate M&E 
skills in a few technical people, but to reform the entire 
culture of gove rnance, one that would be driven by 
strengthened WoGM&ESs.  The study concludes that 
functional M&E systems are a missing vital in the African 
transformational development agenda and improving these 
systems will unlock many challenges faced by this 
resource endowed continent.  
11. Recommendations 
African countries and particularly governments and 
citizens will need to grow the demand for development 
results. Suggestions would include the following: 
  Institutionalise M&E championship : The 
responsibility of growing, nurturing and driving the 
culture of results should be rooted in the presidency. 
This should be pursued under the managing for 
development results (MfDRs) approach. The 
presidency would then be seen as giving the 
‘sermons’ to incentivise the rest of the stakeholders 
in the country in supplying quality M&E information 
and creating demand for its utilisation. Sustained 
over successive political administrations, such 
championship at this level will go  a long way 
towards attaining stronger and successful WoGM&ESs.  
  Put in place leadership and ownership of M&E 
systems: M&E champions and other capacities are 
required at country level, particularly in all apex 
institutions. Powerful ministers and other top 
leaders in these institutions will be expected to offer 
support towards the M&E function. Therefore, top 
government leadership will need to spur the spread 
and development of M&E systems at decentralised 
levels.  
  Create common or unified M&E systems within 
and across economic blocs : Starting with th e 
African Union (AU), there is need to put in place an 
M&E framework, with a robust indicator system 
that guides continental development goals and 
objectives. In that regard, each bloc should design 
and implement a framework for M&E that work as 
a mechanis m to implement programmes, projects 
and policies common to the member states in the 
bloc and beyond. Thus, the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC) , Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) , 
Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Community of 
Sahel-Saharan States (CEN -SAD), East African 
Community (EAC) , Common Market for Eastern 
and Southern Africa (COMESA), Economic 
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) , 
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development 
(IGAD) will each need robust M&E arrangements. 
  Introduce stronger laws for M&E : There is need 
for clearer ‘stiffened’ laws in support of M&E and 
results orientation. Starting with national M&E 
policies, there is need for constitutionally supportive 
M&E legislation in all African countries. Th is law 
should be able to capacitate and compel all public 
institutions, including the presidency, national apex 
institutions and decentralised government structures, 
to adhere to RBM through the implementation of  
a stronger WoGM&ES. These laws should incl ude 
freedom of information, which will allow evidence 
to be reported on all development aspects of public 
interest.  
  Create synergies between government and 
training institutions: Capacity-building, especially 
specialised skills in M&E was found to be a  big 
challenge for most Africa countries’ WoGM&ESs. 
Professionals and practitioners of M&E still face 
practical difficulties with regard to provision of 
high quality analysis and complete M&E products 
that satisfy stakeholder information requirements at 
all levels. It is suggested that government will come 
up with stronger and institutionally sustainable 
synergies and collaborations with local training 
institutions to provide skills in evaluation analysis 
and process. In return, training and research 
institutions will be innovative by developing state -
of-the-art programmes and courses meant to meet 
the growing M&E industry in the country. In that 
regard, a policy to guide this process may be 
developed to institutionalise M&E at all critical 
educational level s of the country’s educational 
system. The private sector can too be challenged by 
policy to play a significant r ole of localising and 
building results-oriented culture in Africa. 
  Establish an incentive structure for the 
consumption of M&E information : A lack of 
incentives to stimulate the supply and demand of 
M&E information across the WoGM&ES was 
common. All levels were reported not to have any 
form of incentive in place to promote the use of 
M&E information. Incentives are significant to a 
successful M&E system, particularly in encouraging 
the strengthening of the supply and demand sides. 
Therefore, it will be useful to identify stakeholder -
appropriate incentives that will spur the use of 
M&E information by stakeholders at all levels 
across the WoGM&ES. The incentives will have to 
work at all levels. Regardless of whether they are
<<<PAGE=14>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 172 
carrots, sticks or sermons, they will need to be 
carefully enforced across the WoGM&ES in a  
non-selective and discriminatory manner. A range 
of incentives such as technical, political, financial 
management and skills training could be developed. 
  Reform and transform the national statistical 
function: The transformation of WoGM&ESs will 
be possible only when an equivalent transformation 
takes place under the national statist ical systems. 
Collaboration between WoGM&ESs and statistics 
systems is key. Therefore, governments, working in 
collaboration with stakeholders, will be required to 
invest in  statistical function s and ensure the 
WoGM&ESs and statistics systems  complement 
each other.  
  Create national and sub -national indicator 
systems: Given the complex development work that 
governments have to do, such systems would clarify 
which priority measurement indicators to track at 
national, line ministry, provincial, district and  sub-
district level. In the absence of indicators, i t 
becomes a matter of guesswork as to what informs 
decision and policy making at those levels without 
evidence from M&E systems or national statistical 
systems.  
  Re-engineer the National  Monitoring and  
Evaluation Association s: Some African countries  
have in place communities  of practice (CoP) for 
M&E in the name of national M&E a ssociations. 
Although these are  platforms for practitioners of 
M&E and those interested in the field , they need to 
be anchored  on stronger national level leadership 
(that is, state and non-state). National, line ministry, 
provincial and district level M&E practitioners 
would need to take proactive roles and responsibilities 
in strengthening the M&E function in the country.  
  Enhance the oversight role of parliaments at all 
levels: National Assemblies have a constitutional 
mandate to represent the citizens in issues of 
development and human rights. Parliament makes 
laws and approves government spending. These 
roles and responsibi lities give parliament a unique 
development mandate. For that reason, their M&E 
role across the WoGM&ESs will be crucial. 
Parliaments will need to demand for M&E 
information from across public and private sectors. 
  Avoid implementing parallel donor M&E 
systems: In many African countries, it was reported 
that donors were in the habit of maintaining their 
own parallel M&E arrangem ents. This practice was 
said to weaken WoGM&ES s, whereby, instead of 
collectively supporting the national system for 
M&E, donors spent money on creating ICT -based 
systems that catered only for their work re lated 
information needs. In enhanced WoGM&ES s, 
donors would be expected to work with governments 
through unified national M&E work plans. 
  Transform the education system to bein g results 
focused: Among the key gaps found in most 
WoGM&ESs in Africa are lack of analytical skills, 
inadequate in- depth M&E skills and generally the 
lack of champions for M&E in government. Even 
among non -state actors, the challenges were 
reportedly similar. There was also a lack of results -
based media reporting, particularly media coverage 
that highlights government achievements. Therefore, 
academia has an opportunity to help resolve the gap 
by vigorously introducing programmes and courses 
with developme nt results -based content. This will 
mean developing academic level -specific and 
tailored M&E and RBM programmes and courses 
to address the skill gaps in the country.  
  Create strong competencies in undertaking 
development evaluations: Not only do governments 
undertake limited number of evaluations, but the 
skills and expertise needed to carry out quality 
evaluations were lacking in and outside 
governments. Private sector consulting firms and 
individuals will be needed to provide practical 
M&E services. Evaluation practice and competencies 
will go a long way towards supporting and sustaining 
the countries’ WoGM&ESs and ultimately in creating 
a culture of results through people’s access to and 
use of information from the evaluations. 
  Reform media news tow ards results -based 
management: Mass media plays a significant and 
central role in nation building and developme nt. In 
their effort to implement  transformational, robust 
and sustainable WoGM&ESs, the governments will 
be required to invest in promoting and s upporting a 
media regime shift.  
  Develop and institutionalise M&E frameworks 
in all political party manifestos and constitutions: 
In Africa , the executive arm of government is led 
by politicians who are sponsored by a political party 
of their choice and  affiliation. These political 
organisations are legally registered entities required 
to operate within the confinements of the laws —
even national constitutions. Thus, a side from listing 
many promises of deliverables to the people, there 
was lack of clarity  on an organised way of 
implementation and measurement of such promises 
if or when they assumed power. Priority 
development areas, impacts, outcomes and outputs 
expected, indicators as well as targets become 
essential elements of success to be clarified in  party 
specific constitutions, manifestos and M&E plans.  
  Introduce and sustain a culture of streamlined 
planning and budgeting for results : While efforts 
are being  made to simplify the planning and 
budgeting processes, especially through Public 
Finance Management (PFM) reforms, more clarity 
was needed on ways to actualise these policy 
provisions. For instance, practical challenges were 
reported in linking, sequencing, arti culating and 
developing national visions, NDPs, MTEFs, annual 
budgets, sector strategic plans, provincial and 
district plans. Studies focused on making the 
linkages between planning and budgeting processes 
would enhance the results-based culture in Africa.  
  Identify the technical and po litical aspects of 
M&E in Africa : The WoGM&ESs will need to be 
strengthened on the supply side and the demand 
side. However, doing so will require in -depth 
understanding of all critical operational and 
technical issues surrounding the system s. Although
<<<PAGE=15>>>
173 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
technical issues may seem obvious to identify, 
political aspects may be complex to identify and 
resolve. As a bearer of good and bad news, M&E 
may not always go well with those tasked to design 
and implement M&E systems. Thus, more research 
studies will be required to understand currently 
unclear perspecti ves of M&E, so that ways are 
found to simplify the articulation  and design of 
M&E arrangements.  
  Develop and implement a robust exchange 
programme with best M&E practising countries 
and organisations : Putting in place a functional 
WoGM&ES is neither a one-off activity nor a short- 
or medium-term undertaking. It must be seen as a 
continuous and long -term endeavour of building, 
reviewing, strengthening and participatory process. 
As individual African countries work to build their  
national systems for M&E, there would be need to 
learn from other countries (within & outside Africa) 
with success stories in implementing WoGM&ESs  
through structured collaborations. 
  Establish financing architecture for the 
WoGM&ESs: One of the outstanding reason given 
for we ak M&E implementation across country 
WoGM&ESs for Africa ’s public sector pertains to 
inadequacies and in many instances lack of finances. 
The current budget support approach seems to fall 
short of the desired investment in creating a thriving 
country system f or M&E. Innovative financing 
options which will help government and its 
stakeholders to practically deal with the current 
financial resource challenge are needed. An in -
depth study may bring out salient alternatives to the 
M&E financing architecture for Africa. Such an 
M&E financial support strategy will for instance 
ascertain where resources to evaluate the NLTV, 
NDPs and strategic programmes and projects will 
be sourced from and give predictable estimates of 
expenditure.  The alternatives will need to be robust 
enough to tackle resource challenges not only  
at national level, but institution -specific level  
as well. This suggestion comes in the light of 
research responses that acknowledged of sustained 
institutional failures to adequately plan for M&E 
activities. 
References 
[1] Naidoo, I. A. (2011). The role of monitoring and evaluation in 
promoting good governance in South Africa : A case study of the 
Department of Social Development: A Thesis submitted to the 
Graduate School of Public & Development Management in 
fulfilment of the requirements for the doctorate degree. University 
of Witwatersrand. 
[2] Pollitt, C. (1998). Managerialism Revisited. In Taking Stock. 
Assessing Public Sector Reforms. Canada (pp. 45 -76). Canadian 
Centre for Management Development. McGill Queen`s University 
Press: Canadian Centre for Management Development. McGill 
Queen`s University Press. 
[3] Prennushi, G., Rubio, G., & Subbarao, K. (2001). Monitoring and 
Evaluation plus Annexes’. In PRSP Sourcebook. Washington, DC: 
World Bank,. 
[4] IEG. (2007). Sourcebook for Evaluating Global and Regional 
Partnership Programs: Indicative Principles and Standards. 
Washington DC, IEG World Bank: Washington DC, IEG World 
Bank. 
[5] Booth, D. (2003). Introduction and overview. Development Policy 
Review, 21(2), 131-159. 
[6] Booth, David, & Lucas , H. (2002). Good Practice in the 
Development of PRSP Indicators and Monitoring Systems. 
Overseas Development Institute, London. 
[7] Edmunds, R., & Marchant, T. (2008). Official Statistics and 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems in Developing Countries: 
Friends or Foes? (October), 1-43. 
[8] World Bank. (1999). Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity 
Development in Africa: A High Level Seminar held in Abidjan, 
Cote d’Ivoire In November, 1998, Precis. A High Level Seminar 
Held in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire In November, 1998. OE D, World 
Bank, Washington, D.C.: OED, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[9] Davies, H., Nutley, S., & Smith, P. (1999). Introducing Evidence-
based Policy and Practice in Public Services. In H. Davies, S. 
Nutley, & P. Smith (Eds.), What Works? Evidence -based Policy 
and Practice in Public Services. Bristol: The Policy Press: Bristol: 
The Policy Press. 
[10] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A., Ng’andu, E., Mizinga, C., & Mwale, 
A. (2018). An Assessment of the Demand -Side of the Monitoring 
and Evaluation System of the Health Sector in  Zambia. World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 4(2), 75-86. 
[11] Mackay, K. (2006b). Institutionalizing of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems to Improve Public Sector Management. IEG 
World Bank, Washington DC. 
[12] GRZ. (2017a). 2016 Annual Progress Report for the Revised Sixth 
National Development Plan 2013-2016: People Centred Economic 
Growth and Development. Ministry of Fiinance and National 
Planning, Lusaka, Zambia. 
[13] Kaufmann, J., Sanginés, M., & Moreno, M. (2015). Building 
effective governments: Achievements and challenges of public 
management results in Latin America and the Caribbean. IADB, 
Washington DC: IADB, Washington DC. 
[14] Hardlife, Z., & Zhou, G. (2013). Utilisation of monitoring and 
evaluation systems by development agencies: The case of the 
UNDP in Zimbabwe. American International Journal of 
Contemporary Research, 3(3), 70-83. 
[15] GRZ. (2014b). Revised Sixth National Development Plan 2013 -
2016: People Centred Economic Growth and Development - 
Volume I. Ministry of Fiinance and National Planning, Lu saka, 
Zambia. 
[16] Mackay, Keith. (2007). How to Build M&E Systems to Support 
Better Government. In The International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development / The World Bank.  
[17] Republic of South Africa. (2007). Policy Framework for the 
Government-Wide Monitorin g and Evaluation System. The 
Presidency, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[18] Kanyamuna, V. (2019). Analysis of Zambia’s Whole -of-
Government Monitoring and Evaluation System in the context of 
National Development Plans. Doctorate Thesis. University of 
South Africa. 
[19] Bamberger, M. (2010). Institutionalising Impact Evaluation. A key 
element in strengthening country -led monitoring and evaluation 
systems. In M. Segone (Ed.), From Policies to Results: 
Developing capacities for country monitoring and evaluation 
systems. Geneva: UNICEF. 
[20] Mosse, D., & Lewis, E. D. (2005). The aid effect. Giving and 
governing in international development. London: Pluto Press: 
London: Pluto Press. 
[21] Chabane, C. (2013). The Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Public Service, Republic of South Africa - The Presidency 
Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. Pretoria, 
South Africa. 
[22] Weiss, C. H. (2000). Theory- based evaluation: Theories of change 
for poverty reduction programs. In O. Feinstein & R. Picciotto 
(Eds.), Evaluation and Poverty Reduction (pp. 103- 111). 
Washington, DC: World Bank.: Washington, DC: World Bank. 
[23] Wong, C. (2012). Toward Building Performance - Oriented 
Management in China: The critical role of Monitoring and 
Evaluation and the Long road Ahead (No. 27). The World Bank, 
Washington D.C. 
[24] Hauge, A. O., & Mackay, K. (2004). Sharing best practices and 
lessons learned: Monitoring and Evaluation for Results -  Lessons 
from Uganda.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 174 
[25] Segone, M. (Ed.). (2009). Country -led Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems: Better evidence, better po licies, better development 
results. UNICEF, Geneva.: UNICEF, Geneva. 
[26] OECD/DAC. (2011b). Conclusions : Where next in monitoring 
and evaluation ? Paris. 
[27] Fay Twersky. F, & Lindblom, K. (2012). Evaluation Principles 
and Practices: An Internal Working Paper. (December), 30.  
[28] Farell, K. M., Kratzmann, S., McWilliam, N., Robinson, S. S., 
Ticknor, J., & White, K. (2002). Evaluation Made Very easy 
Accessible, and Logical. Atlantic Centre of Excellence for 
Women’s Health. 
[29] Kahan, B., & Goodstadt, M. (2005). The Intera ctive Domain 
Model of Best Practices in Health Promotion: Developing and 
Implementing a Best Practices Approach to Health Promotion. 
Health Promotion Practice, 2(1), 43-67. 
[30] Republic of South Africa. (2008). Basic Concepts in Monitoring 
and Evaluation. Publ ic Service Commission, Pretoria, South 
Africa. 
[31] Görgens, M., & Kusek, J. (2009). Making Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems Work: A Capacity Development Toolkit. 
Washington DC, IBRD World Bank: Washington DC, IBRD 
World Bank. 
[32] Hlatshwayo, N. . ., & Govender, K . K. (2015). Monitoring and 
Evaluation in the Public Sector : A Case Study of the Department 
of Rural Development and Land Reform in South Africa. Asian 
Journal of Economics and Empirical Research, 2(2), 91-99. 
[33] Chambers, R. (1994). Paradigm Shifts and the Practice of 
Participatory Research and Development.  
[34] Estrella, M., & Gaventa, J. (1997). Who Counts Reality? 
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation: A Literature Review. In 
International Workshop on Participatory Monitoring and 
Evaluation (Vol. 53).  
[35] Lopez-Acevedo, G., Krause, P., & Mackay, K. (Eds.). (2012). 
Building Better Policies.  
[36] Mackay, K. (2006a). Evaluation Capacity Development: 
Institutionalization of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems to 
Improve Public Sector Management. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[37] Schultz, P. R. (2009). Monitoring and Evaluation Manual: 
Handbook on Monitoring and Evaluation of development projects. 
Danida, Denmark: Danida, Denmark. 
[38] Castro, M. F. (2009). Insider Insights: Building a Results -Based 
Management and Evaluation Sys tem in Colombia. ECD Working 
Paper 18, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[39] Mackay, K. (2011). The Australian Government’s Performance 
Framework. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[40] World Bank. (2003c). Participation in Monitoring and evaluation 
of PRSPs. A docum ent review of trends and approaches emerging 
from 21 full PRSPs. Washington, D.C., The World Bank, Social 
Development Department, The participation and civic engagement 
group. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[41] Booth, David. (2005). Missing links in the polit ics of development: 
Learning from the PRSP experiment.  
[42] Smith, P. C., Nutley, S. M., Davies, H. T. O., Nutley, S. M., & 
Smith, P. C. (2009). What works?: evidence -based policy and 
practice in public services. In What works?: evidence-based policy 
and practice in public services.  
[43] DBSA. (2000). Selected Proceedings from a Seminar  
and workshop organised by the Development Bank of Southern 
Africa, the African Development Bank and the World Bank  
on Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity Development in Africa. 
Johannesburg, South Africa.: The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[44] OECD/DAC. (2002). Glossary of Key Terms in Evaluation and 
Results Based Management. In Evaluation and Aid Effectiveness.  
[45] OECD/DAC. (1991). OECD/DAC Principles for the Evaluation of 
Development Assistance. Paris, OECD Publications. 
[46] Mackay, K. (2008). Helping countries build government 
monitoring and evaluation system. World Bank contribution to 
evidence-based policy making. In M. Segone (Ed.), Bridging the 
GapBridging the Gap. Switzerland: UNICEF: Switzerland: 
UNICEF. 
[47] Valadez, J., & Bamberger. M. (1994). Organizational and 
Management Issues in Programme Evaluation. In J. Valadez & M. 
Bamberger (Eds.), Monitoring and Evaluating Social Programmes 
in Developing Countries: A Handbook for Policymakers, 
Managers and Researchers (pp. 403 -441). The World Bank, 
Washington D.C.: The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[48] World Bank. (2007b). Results -Based National Development 
Strategies Assessment and Challenges Ahead. The World Bank, 
Washington D.C. 
[49] Clements, P., Chianca,  T., & Sasaki, R. (2008). Reducing world 
poverty by improving evaluation of development aid. American 
Journal of Evaluation, 29(2), 195-214.  
[50] OECD/DAC. (2005). AID EFFECTIVENESS 2005 -10 : 
PROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTING THE PARIS 
DECLARATION. Paris. 
[51] OECD/DAC. (2008). 2006 Survey on Monitoring The Paris 
Declaration: Country Chapters - Zambia. Paris. 
[52] Talbot, C. (2010). Performance in Government: The evolving 
system of Performance and Evaluation Measurement, Monitoring 
and Management in the United Kingdom. World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[53] Kanyamuna, V. (2013). Sector Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems in the context of Poverty Reduction Strategies: A 
comparative case study of Zambia’s Health and Agriculture 
sectors. Masters Dissertation. University of Antwerp, Belgium. 
[54] Hwang, H. (2014). Building Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity 
in young systems: The experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam and 
Yemen. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[55] Lucas, H., Evans, D., Pasteur, K., & Lloyd, R. (2004). Research 
on the current state of Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
Monitoring systems. IDS Discussion Paper 382, London. 
[56] Mackay, K. (1999). Evaluation Capacity Development: A 
Diagnostic Gu ide and Action Framework. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[57] Brushett, S. (1998). Evaluation Capacity Development in 
Zimbabwe : Issues and Opportunities. OED, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[58] Burdescu, R., Villar, A. del, Mackay, K., Rojas, F., & Saavedra, J. 
(2005). Institutionalizing Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: 
Five experiences from Latin America. Prem Notes, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
[59] Mubita, A., Mulonda, M., Libati, M., Mwale, N. & Kanyamuna 
(2017) Urban Informality and Small Scale Enterprise (SME) 
Development in Zambia: An Exploration of Theory and Practice, 
Journal of Behavioural Economics, Finance, Entrepreneurship, 
Accounting and Transport 5(1):19-29. 
[60] Goldman, I., Engela, R., Akhalwaya, I., Gasa, N., Leon, B., 
Mohammed, H., & Phillips, S. (2012). Establishing a National 
M&E System in South Africa, Prem Notes No. 21. World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[61] GRZ. (2017b). Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP 2017 -
2021), Accelerating Development Efforts towards Vision 2030 
without Leaving Anyone Behind (Vol. 1).  
[62] Mulonda, M., Kanyamuna, V., & Kanenga, H. (2018). State- Civil 
Society Relationship in Zambia. International Journal of  
Humanities, Art and Social Studies (IJHAS), 3(4), 17-26. 
[63] De Renzo, P. (2006). Aid, Budgets and Accountability: A Survey 
Article. Development Policy Review, 627-645. 
[64] World Bank. (2003d). “Toward Country -led Development:  
A Multi- Partner Evaluation of the C omprehensive Development 
Framework”, Synthesis Report. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[65] Morra Imas, L. G., & Rist, R. C. (2009). The Road to Results: 
Designing and Conducting Effective Development Evaluations. 
Washington, D.C., World Bank: Washington, D.C., World Bank. 
[66] Bedi, T., Coudouel, A., Cox, M., Goldstein, M., & Thornton, N. 
(2006). Beyond the numbers : Understanding the institutions for 
monitoring poverty reduction strategies.  
[67] Mehrotra, S. (2013). The Government Monitoring and Evaluation 
System in India: A Work in Progress.  
[68] Glady Lopez Acevedo, Katia Rivera, Lycia Rivera, L. L. & H. H. 
(2010). Challenges in Monitoring and Evaluation: An Opportunity 
To Institutionalize M&E Systems. Fifth Conference of the Latin 
America and the Caribbean Monitoring and Evaluation ( M & E) 
Network, 204. 
[69] World Bank. (2004). Evaluation Capacity Development - 
Monitoring and Evaluation: Some Tools, Methods and 
Approaches. OED, World Bank, Washington D.C.: OED, World 
Bank, Washington D.C.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
175 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
[70] Mackay, Keith. (2006). Institutionalization of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems to Improve Public Sector Management. In 
ECD Working Paper Series. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[71] Mackay, Keith. (2010). Conceptual Framework for Monitoring 
and Evaluation. The Nuts & Bolts of M&E Systems - The World 
Bank, 1, 8. 
[72] Kusek, J. Z., & Rist, R. C. (2004). Ten Steps to a Results -Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems. A Handbook for 
Development Practitioners. Washington D.C., World Bank: 
Washington D.C., World Bank. 
[73] World Bank. (2012b). Improving the Quality of Public  
Expenditure through the use of Performance Information in 
Mexico. IEG, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[74] Mackay, K. (Ed.). (1998). Public Sector Performance - The 
Critical Role of Evaluation: Selected Proceedings from a World 
Bank Seminar. The World Bank, Wash ington D.C.: The World 
Bank, Washington D.C. 
[75] Segone, M. (Ed.). (2008). Bridging the gap: The role of 
Monitoring and Evaluation in evidence -based policy -making. 
UNICEF, Geneva.: UNICEF, Geneva. 
[76] World Bank. (2000). Monitoring and Evaluation Capacities in 
Ghana: A diagnosis and proposed action plan. The World Bank, 
Washington D.C. 
[77] Naidoo, I. (2010). Monitoring and Evaluation in South Africa. 
Many purposes, multiple systems. In M. Sergone (Ed.), From 
Policies to Results: Developing capacities for country monito ring 
and evaluation systems (pp. 303- 320). New York: UNICEF: New 
York: UNICEF. 
[78] Fereday, J., & Muir -Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating Rigor 
Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid Approach of Inductive and 
Deductive Coding and Theme Development. International Jo urnal 
of Qualitative Methods, 5(1), 1-11.  
[79] Holvoet, N., & Rombouts, H. (2008). The challenge of monitoring 
and evaluation under the new aid modalities: Experiences from 
Rwanda. Journal of Modern African Studies, 46(4), 577-602.  
[80] Baum, W. C., & Tolbert, S. M. (1985). Investing in Development: 
Lessons of World Bank Experience. Washington D. C.: World 
Bank. 
[81] OECD, & World Bank. (n.d.). Source Book: Emerging good 
practice in Managing for Development Results -  A unique 
opportunity to experience MfDRs in action (3 rd ed.). OECD and 
World Bank. 
[82] Bemelemans-Videc, Marie- Louise, Rist, R. C., & Vedung, E. 
(Eds.). (2007). Carrots, Sticks and Sermons: Policy Instruments 
and their Evaluation. United States of America: Transaction 
Publishers. 
[83] Mayne, J., & Zapico -Goni, E. (20 07). Monitoring Performance in 
the Public Sector: Future Directions from International Experience. 
USA: Transaction Publishers: USA: Transaction Publishers. 
[84] Patton, M. Q. (2003). Inquiry into Appreciative Evaluation. New 
Directions for Evaluation, 100, 85-98. 
[85] Carlsson, C., & Engel, P. (2002). Enhancing learning through 
evaluation: approaches, dilemmas and some possible ways 
forward. Background paper presented at the 2002 EES Conference. 
Seville, October 10-12, 2002. ECDPM. 
[86] Carrier, M., Bonnet -laverge, E., &  Dixon, C. (2017). Project 
planning, monitoring and evaluation : Improving the quality, 
learning and accountability of Handicap International’s 
interventions. (January). 
[87] INTRAC. (2011). Monitoring and Evaluation: New Developments 
and Challenges, Internatio nal Conference - 14-16 June 2011, 
Soesterberg, The Netherlands. Isham, Jonathan, Narayan, Deepa 
and Pritchett, Lant (1995) ‘Does Participation Improve 
Performance? Establishing Causalit. The World Bank Economic 
Review, 9(2), 175-200. 
[88] Tania, A., & Ronette, E. (2010). Implementing a government wide 
monitoring and evalution system in south africa. 
[89] Scriven, M. (2007). Key Evaluation Checklist. Evaluation 
Checklists Project. University of Michigan. 
[90] World Bank. (2012a). Designing a Results Framework for 
achieving Results: A How-To-Guide. IEG, Washington, DC.: IEG, 
Washington, DC. 
[91] UNDP. (2002). Handbook on Monitoring and Evaluating for 
Results. UNDP Evaluation Office, New York.: UNDP Evaluation 
Office, New York. 
[92] Kanyamuna, V., Munalula, M., & Mulele, C. S. (2019). 
Monitoring and Evaluation Legislation in Zambia - Gap Analysis. 
International Journal of Humanities, Art and Social Studies 
(IJHAS), 4(1), 15-25. 
[93] Liverani, A., & Lundgren, H. E. (2007). Evaluation Systems in 
Development Aid Agencies: An Analysis of DAC Pee r Reviews 
1996-2004. Evaluation, 13(2), 241-256. 
[94] AfCoP-MfDR. (2014). African Community of Practice on 
Managing for Development Results (AfCoP- MfDR): Putting 
results first in Zambia - Changing the lives of People -  managing 
for development results country assessment. 
[95] Development Bank of Southern Africa. (2000). Selected 
Proceedings from a Seminar and workshop organised by the 
Development Bank of Southern Africa, the African Development 
Bank and the World Bank on Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity 
Development in Africa. Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity in 
Africa, (September), 25 -29. Johannesburg, South Africa: African 
Development Bank and the World Bank. 
[96] GRZ. (2014a). National Planning and Budgeting Policy: 
Responsive, transparent, accountable and results -oriented 
Development Planning and Budgeting processes. Ministry of 
Finance and National Planning, Lusaka, Zambia. 
[97] Mackay, K., & Gariba, S. (2000). The role of Civil Society in 
assessing Public Sector Perform ance in Ghana: Proceedings of a 
workshop, ECD. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.: The World 
Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[98] OECD/DAC. (2007). Aid Effectiveness -  2006 Survey on 
Monitoring the Paris Declaration: Overview of the Results 
(Zambia Country Chapter). Paris, OECD Publications. 
[99] OECD/DAC. (2011a). Aid Effectiveness 2005 -10: Progress in 
implementing the Paris Declaration. Paris, OECD Publications. 
[100] Pitchett, L., Samji, S., & Hammer, J. (2012). It’s All About M&E: 
Using Structured Experiential Learning (‘e’) to C rawl the Design 
Space. United Nations University. 
[101] Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). 
Experimental and Quasi- experimental Designs for Generalized 
Causal Inference. Boston, MA and New York: Houghton Mifflin.: 
Boston, MA and New York: Houghton Mifflin. 
[102] Stame, N. (2004). Theory -Based Evaluation and Types of 
Complexity. Evaluation, 10(1), 58-76.  
[103] World Bank. (2003a). A User’s Guide to Poverty and Social 
Impact Analysis, Poverty Reduction Group. World Bank, 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[104] World Bank. (2003b). A user’s guide to poverty and social impact 
analysis: The World Bank, Poverty Reduction Group (PRMPR) 
and Social Development Department (SDV). The World Bank, 
Washington D.C.: The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[105] World Bank. (2007a). “Results -Based National Development 
Strategies: Assessment and Challenges Ahead”, Review Paper. 
The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[106] World Bank. (2011). Writing Terms of Reference for an 
Evaluation: A How- to-Guide. IEG, World Bank, Washington, 
D.C.: IEG, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[107] Zaltsman, A. (2006). Evaluation Capacity Development: 
Experience with Institutionalizing Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems in Five Latin American Countries -  Argentina, Chile, 
Colombia, Costa Rica and Uruguay. Washington, D.C. 
 
 
© The Author(s) 2019. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons  
Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
 
 
View publication stats