<<<PAGE=1>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2018, Vol. 4, No. 2, 75-86 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/wjssh/4/2/2 
©Science and Education Publishing 
DOI:10.12691/wjssh-4-2-2 
An Assessment of the Demand-Side of the Monitoring 
and Evaluation System of the Health Sector in Zambia 
Kanyamuna Vincent1,*, Mubita Aurick2, Ng’andu Emily2, Mizinga Chinyama3, Mwale Ackson2 
1Department of Monitoring and Evaluation, Ministry of National Development Planning, Lusaka, Zambia 
2Department of Social Work and Sociology, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
3Department of Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Concern International, Lusaka, Zambia 
*Corresponding author: vkanyamuna@unza.zm 
Abstract  This paper assesses the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) arrangements of the health sector in Zambia. 
This topic has been pursued with an understanding that sector M&E is an important aspect  in the overall national 
poverty reduction agenda. The specific focus of this paper is on the demand-side of the health sector M&E system. 
The paper looked at the M&E arrangement in the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the quality of i nformation being 
generated. For the analytical framework, the paper used the diagnostic checklist elaborated by Bedi et al., in their 
2006 publication which identifies four basic elements crucial to consider when assessing t he demand-side of an 
M&E system. These include: (i) analysis and evaluation; (ii) outputs and dissemination; (iii) integration wit h the 
budget process and parliament; and (iv) non-state actors as demand-side stakeholders. Fundamental issues brought 
out are that the M&E function in the health sector in Zambia has some central recognition, but  it is not fully 
developed. It also reveals that the organisational framework to undertake M&E in the sector was in place but equally 
not yet fully operationalized. Equally, M&E champions exist but not adequate to make an impactful case for M&E. 
Possible opportunities for a stronger M&E system in the health sector identified are that: Government through the 
MOH was committed to ensuring that the sector enhances its M&E through various fronts such as donor community 
involvement through Sector Wide Approaches (SWAps) and the strengthened implementa tion of the Paris 
Declaration (PD) principles of alignment and harmonization on aid effectiveness; the link be tween the National 
Health Strategic Plan (NHSP) and the budget process through the Mid Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) 
mechanism; the presence of the National Decentralization Policy which could be use d to strengthen the M&E 
capacities in the sector especially the lower structures which are currently underdeveloped; the fact that the MOH 
strategic plan is developed and implemented within the framework of the National Deve lopment Plan 
(NDP)(currently the 7NDP 2017-2021) and coupling this with the use of the MTEF, the arrangements could be used 
to lobby for resources to strengthen the sector M&E function. The paper also indicates that  there is need to create 
practical incentives for using information generated by the sector M&E system a nd this could be done in various 
ways. For instance, linking the use of M&E information to appropriate moments can be effective when well planned 
and executed. Recommendations for the MOH M&E improvement include; (1) the need to conduct a t horough 
sector M&E diagnosis; (2) to create a forum for inter -line ministry and stakeholder M&E to share experiences for 
learning purposes; (3) to build the M&E capacity of lower and decentralized sector struc tures; (4) to enhance the 
incentive structure for generating and using M&E information within and outside the MOH; and (5) to engage both 
MNDP and MOF to provide M&E backstopping. 
Keywords: monitoring, evaluation, M&E system, health sector, demand-side, Zambia 
Cite This Article:  Kanyamuna Vincent , Mubita Aurick , Ng’andu Emily, Mizinga Chinyama , and Mwale 
Ackson, “An Assessment of the Demand -Side of the Monitoring and Evaluation System of the Health Se ctor in 
Zambia.” World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, vol. 4, no. 2 (2018): 75-86. doi: 10.12691/wjssh-4-2-2. 
1. Introduction 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) has been considered 
by many development proponents as a fundamental 
component in public resource management and is 
acclaimed for fulfilling accountability, feedback a nd 
learning needs of organisations and governments  
[1,2]. 
Following the controversial outcomes of the Structural 
Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) of the 1980’s and early 
1990’s, other mechanisms and strategies of development 
have been elaborated and mostly spearheaded and 
supported by the donor community. These mechan isms 
put the developing countries in charge of articulating their 
development agendas through their own prioritized 
development plans. These strategies are mostly held in 
what are called the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers 
(PRSPs) or National Development  Plans (NDPs). Zambia 
was among the first countries to develop and adopt the 
PRSP policy approach and her first PRSP in 2002 was 
implemented alongside other reforms and reached the
<<<PAGE=2>>>
76 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative 
completion point in 2004  
[3]. The World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) guided the country 
during the PRSP and HIPC processes. 
Linked to the PRSP framework, sectoral plans have  
since been developed in order to involve line ministries 
and ot her major development stakeholders in elaborating 
the national poverty reduction agenda. Through this public 
policy reform process in Zambia, subsequent strategic 
plans for the health sector have been elaborated. Planned 
as a direct input into the NDPs, the Ministry of Health 
(MOH) developed and is now implementing the third 
National Health Strategic Plan (NHSP) covering the 
period 2017 to 2021. The previous strategy was 
implemented between 2011 and 2015 
[4]. The first NHSP 
was for the period 2006 to 2010 [5]. All of these strategic 
plans have been developed to follow the implementation 
period ranges of their successive NDPs (FNDP, SNDP  & 
7NDP).  
Like in the NDP, the NHSP has a n M&E section that 
derives its principles from a Result s Based Management  
approach, whose focus is on a management strategy that is 
aimed at performance as well as achievement of outputs, 
outcomes and impacts 
[6]. The M&E section of the NHSP 
describes in detail how all the MOH programmes and 
activities were going to be implemented, monitored  
and evaluated throughout the life of the sector strategy.  
In addition, the section elaborates on which specific 
stakeholders were responsible for what roles and generally 
how the operational coordination was arranged. In other 
words, the M&E system is functionally expected to hold 
and disseminate all the relevant data and information with  
regards to the MOH programmes and activities. 
Thus, in an  attempt to bring into context the M&E 
function within the MOH, the paper provides an overview 
of the current M&E arrangements in the sector. Ultimately, 
the paper will argue that when the strengths and weaknesses 
of what stimulates the demand -side are ide ntified and 
improved, there could be an upswing in the demand for a 
better developed sector M&E system. This, in return , 
becomes a useful motivation for the supply -side to devise 
ways of satisfying the demand-side of the M&E system. 
1.1. Framework of Analysis 
Before building or strengthening an M&E system , 
either at national or sector level, it is important to consider 
as a first step to undertake a thorough diagnosis of the 
prevailing status in order to map out the strong and weak 
aspects from both the sup ply and demand sides of an 
M&E system. In the literature, different diagnostic 
instruments have been proposed and elaborated by some 
interested development oriented stakeholders. A number 
of M&E proponents have articulated elements that were 
necessary to c onsider when dealing with M&E systems . 
However, it is crucial to note that there is no sin gle agreed 
upon diagnostic checklist in the literature as being the best 
of all for use when assessing the quality of M&E systems.  
Nonetheless, the available lists are playing a significan t 
guiding role to understanding and appreciating some  
key components within M&E mechanisms. Suffice to 
mention, most of these assessment instruments have been 
elaborated to particularly diagnose national level M&E 
systems. Nevertheless, the checklists could still be employed 
and adapted when assessing sector level M&E systems 
and normally, the sector M&E systems cover a narrow 
scope as compared to country level M&E systems 
[7].  
Among the profound diagnost ic tools in the M&E 
literature include the evaluation capacity building 
diagnostic guide and action framework 
[8], the readiness 
assessment [9], the diagnostic instrument articulated in the 
Bedi et al. [10], the checklist used by Booth and Lucas [11] 
in their diagnosis of PRSPs and recently the Holvoet and 
Renard 
[12] M&E checklist used in their diagnosis of 
PRSPs of 11 Sub -Saharan African countries. Of all these 
elaborations, only checklist that attempts to articulate  
separately the supply side and the demand side M&E 
issues is that of Bedi et al 
[10]. They tried to specify the 
elements that were critical to consider when looking  
at either the demand side or the supply side of an M&E 
system. The other tools are broadly elaborated and discuss 
both sides simultaneously. For that reason, this pa per  
uses and adapts the Bedi et al checklist to assess the 
demand-side of the M&E system of the health sector in 
Zambia. 
The components of the checklist include the following: 
(i) evidence of analysis and evaluation, (ii) disseminat ion 
of information, (ii i) integration with budget process and 
parliament, and (iv) participation of non -state actors as 
demand side actors.  
1.2. Research Objectives 
Four objectives guided the study namely: (i) to contextualize 
the health sector M&E arrangements in Zambia; (ii) to 
conduct a diagnosis of the demand -side of the M&E 
system of the health sector; (iii) to discuss possible 
opportunities for a stronger M&E system for the health 
sector, and (iv) to recommend actions for improvement. 
1.3. Research Methodology 
This paper employed a desk -based-research study and 
relied mainly on the review of various documents 
including key Government of Zambia reports (published 
and unpublished) and other policy related literature. The 
MOH strategic documents and reports were of significance 
in this study as well as some scholarly journals, articles  
and research papers relevant to the topic were consulted. 
1.4. Limitation of the Study  
One notable limitation to this research paper had to do 
with the inadequacies of disaggregated literature o n the 
supply and demand-side of the M&E systems. Most of the 
literature available did not state categorically the issues to 
look for on the demand side. In fact, more attention in the 
reviewed literature focused on organisational issues of 
M&E systems, and less on systemic aspects. Nevertheless, 
the use of different government documents as well as other 
policy related sources assisted in reducing this problem. 
1.5. Organization of the Paper 
The structure of this paper takes the following order: 
part two pre sents a brief literature focusing on the
<<<PAGE=3>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 77 
definition of key concepts. Part three contextualizes the 
M&E arrangements of the health sector in Zambia while 
part four presents the diagnosis of the demand side of the 
health sector M&E system. Part five looks at  some 
opportunities that are available to improve the M&E 
system for the health sector and finally part six gives the 
concluding remarks and recommendations. 
2. Literature 
2.1. Definition of key Concepts 
2.1.1. Monitoring 
This is a process that is ongoing through which 
stakeholders obtain feedback on a regular basis regarding 
the progress that is being made towards meeting their 
objectives and goals. It broadly involves tracking 
strategies as well as actions that are taken by partners and 
non-partners. This also includes figuring out new 
strategies and actions that have to be taken in order to 
guarantee progress to the most significant results 
[13]. 
Thus, monitoring is a systematic collection as well as 
analysis of data for purposes of tracking progress of 
project or programme implementation against set 
objectives 
[14]. 
2.1.2. Evaluation  
This is an “objective assessment of an ongoing or 
recently completed project, programme or policy, its 
design, implementation and results” [14]. The aim of an 
evaluation is therefore to determine the relevance as well 
as the fulfillment of goals, the effectiveness and efficiency 
of development, the impacts and sustainability 
[15]. 
2.1.3. Monitoring versus Evaluation 
Though different, monitoring and evaluation  are 
complementary in their functioning. “Evaluation is a 
complement to monitoring in that when a monitoring 
system send s signals that the efforts are going off track 
[…], then good evaluative information can help clarify the 
realities and trends noted with the monitoring system” 
[9]. 
2.1.4. Monitoring and Evaluation System (s)  
M&E systems refer to “series of policies, practices and 
processes that enable the systematic and effective 
collection, analysis and use of monitoring and evaluation 
information” 
[16,17]. Additionally, an M&E system 
broadly includes “the trackin g of overall progress in 
poverty reduction, monitoring and evaluating the 
implementation of NDP policies and programmes, and the 
monitoring of budgets and expenditures. The system 
therefore focuses on the entire results chain  (i.e. inputs, 
activities, outputs, outcomes & impacts)  that links the 
various elements and a broad range of actors” 
[10,18]. 
2.1.5. Demand and Supply Sides of M&E  
For any M&E system to be able to provide the  
needed information, it is important to have bot h a strong 
supply-side and demand-side. The supply-side of an M&E 
system generally refers to the range of systemic and 
institutional aspects such as data collection, sequencin g, 
leadership, coordination, regulation and oversight. As for 
the demand -side, it  is concerned with the use of M&E 
information by different actors that include governmental 
agencies, parliaments, NGOs, CSOs, research institutions,  
universities, the donor community and the general 
population. How these entities were involved to stimulat e 
demand for information could be very useful in 
strengthening the demand-side of an M&E system 
[10].  
3. Contextualizing M&E Arrangements 
for the Health Sector in Zambia  
In Zambia, M&E has been identified as a critical 
requirement towards the achievement of sustained 
economic growth and development. For this reason, M&E 
has been emphasised and elaborated in all national 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs), now called 
National Development Plans (NDPs). Similarly, Zambia’s  
Vision 2030 of becoming a prosperous middle income 
country also demands for evidence -based development 
[19]. As Bedi et al [10] argue, “one of the key components 
of a successful poverty reduction s trategy (PRS) is a 
system for monitoring and implementation of the strategy 
and for tracking progress in poverty reduction”. Putting it 
in another way, PRSPs brought actors together in a 
participatory manner to agree upon a common poverty 
reduction agenda and that this was the main theme which 
M&E systems for PRSPs should be designed to do 
[11]. 
Thus, M&E systems need to provide relevant information 
to the places where it will have developmental effects. 
Since the implementation of her first PRSP in 2002, the 
Zambian government has implemented several reforms to 
improve the performance of the public service, particularly 
the Public Financial Management (PFM) reforms. 
Consequently, the pursuit for better M&E has intensified 
over the years, for example, among many others; Zambia 
is a signatory to the 2005 Paris Declaration (PD), the 2008 
Accra Agenda for Action (AAA) and is implementing the 
recently launched Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
Hence, to be  in position of understanding the 
implementation and resulting effects of the development 
interventions by government and other stakeholders in 
Zambia, it is crucial to study and assess the M&E 
arrangements. More particularly, the M&E systems and 
arrangements for line ministries are the ones supposed to 
have detailed information about the poverty reduction 
efforts in the country. Sectors have comprehensive work 
plans with mandates to implement the poverty reduction 
programmes as described in the NDPs, thus,  appreciating 
sector M&E systems offer an opportunity to follow 
government-wide performance.  
At national level, the Ministry of National Development 
Planning (MNDP) working in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) is responsible for the overall  
coordination of the M&E function in Zambia. There is a 
separate Division for Development Coordination and 
Monitoring and Evaluation within MNDP to carry out this 
national M&E oversight role. The Department of 
Monitoring and Evaluation under this Division is 
particularly mandated to coordinate and oversee the 
evolution of M&E for the entire Zambian public sector 
[20]. Key functions of the department include sector
<<<PAGE=4>>>
78 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
monitoring and developing stronger links between 
ministries, prov inces and districts, including focusing on 
their capacities to monitor the implementation of their 
programmes and activities. The department also works 
with line ministries to develop M&E systems as well as 
Management Information Systems (MIS). The departm ent 
conducts regular reporting on performance of the NDP, in 
consultation with those responsible for monitoring and 
implementation at the sector level. The production of the 
Annual Progress Report (APR) on the NDP and the 
Performance Assessment Framework (PAF) which is used 
as part of the dialogue process around Poverty Reduction 
Budget Support (PRBS) is equally the role of the M&E 
Department. The department also engages district and 
provincial levels more in the process of monitoring and 
creating necessary  linkages with other stakeholders on 
such issues as capacity 
building in areas of data collection, 
analysis, storage, usage and reporting. 
Below is an institutional framework for coordinating, 
implementing, monitoring and evaluating of Zambia’s 
Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP 2017-2021). 
The institutions and structures in 
Figure 1 make up the 
Zambian M&E arrangement linking all NDP functional 
areas from national to community level. The linkages as 
depicted show how information is envisaged to flow 
between the institutional structures.  
The MOH has a National Health Strategic Plan (NHSP) 
with an M&E section that articulates how the plan is being 
implemented, monitored and will be evaluated. Thus, the 
health sector M&E system plays a significant contributing 
role in the Zambian poverty reduction agenda. Therefore, 
to appreciate the operational nature of the health sector 
M&E system, it is important to consider looking at the 
MOH organisational structure. The presence of the M&E 
function at nearly all levels of the sector is significant t o 
appreciate and this will help in the analysis of the 
strengths and challenges faced when implementing M&E 
functions in the sector. 
Accordingly, the organizational and management 
structure of the  MOH is a complex one with structures 
across the country ranging from the national level - all the 
way through to the provinces, districts up to sub-district or 
community levels 
[4]. What follows is the current 
institutional arr angement for the health sector and brief 
functions of each are given with a view to highlight some 
M&E responsibilities at every level. 
 
Figure 1. Institutional Arrangements for the Coordination & Implementation of Plans in Zambia (Source: Ministry of National Development Planning, 2017 
(7NDP), Zambia)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 79 
3.1. Current Institutional Arrangements for 
the Health Sector 
3.1.1. MOH Head Office and Cluster Advisory Group 
(CAG) 
At the centre, the MOH Head Office is responsible for 
the successful implementation of the plan (NHSP) through 
the formulation and implementation of successive MTEFs, 
annual action plans and budgets. It is also responsible for 
policy leadership, management decision-making, standards 
setting and enforcement, and the overall coordination and 
implementation of the NHSP. The CAG is the high level 
consultative and advisory forum for the sector, which 
brings together MOH and all its partners, including relevant 
government ministries and departments, private sector, 
civil society and CPs, to provide advice to MOH on 
different aspects of health. As part of its mandate, the CAG is 
responsible for overall steering of the implementation of  
the plan and monitoring and e valuation of performance. 
The CAG meets quarterly to review progress, recommend 
solutions to identified bottlenecks and build consensus on 
the overall strategic direction of the NHSP.  
3.1.2. Provincial Health Offices (PHOs): 
PHOs serve as intermediaries f or implementation, 
coordination and supporting of the plan (NHSP) within 
their respective provinces. They represent the ministry’s 
functional link to the lower level structures, districts,  
training institutions and the civil society.  
3.1.3. District Health Offices (DHOs) and Hospitals 
District health and hospital management structures are 
responsible for implementing the NHSP at district and 
health facility levels. Harmonization of the district a nd 
hospital plans to match the aspirations in the NHSP is 
crucial for successful implementation. DHOs act as links 
to lower level structures. 
3.1.4. Health Service Delivery Facilities 
Health posts, health centres and hospitals at community 
level are responsible for the implementation of the NHSP. 
3.1.5. Health Training Institutions (HTIs) 
These institutions are responsible for the production of 
appropriately qualified health workers, for implementation 
of the NHSP. 
3.2. Key Sector Partners 
The following are the key partners for the MOH:  
3.2.1. Government Line Ministries and Departments 
Several other government ministries and departments 
impact differently on the performance of the health sector, 
with some actively participating in health service delivery. 
Strong inter -sector coordination mechanisms have been 
promoted though currently reported as weak.  
3.2.2. The Faith-Based Health Sector/CHAZ 
The Churches Health Association of Zambia (CHAZ) 
group is the largest partner to the government in the health 
sector and is currently the second largest provider of 
health services to the general public, after MOH. CHAZ 
plays an important role in the implementation of the 
NHSP through their network of health facilities, which 
include hospitals, health centres and health posts, located  
throughout the country. 
3.2.3. Private Sector 
In Zambia, the private health sector is not fully 
developed but is growing. Deliberate efforts are being 
made to promote private sector participation, including 
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), collaboration in research 
and development, and stren gthening of coordination, 
harmonization and cross-sector referrals 
[20].  
3.2.4. Civil Society 
The civil society, both local and international plays an 
important role in the implementation of the NHSP. Some 
CSOs are involved in  the health promotion, provision of 
health services, training and capacity building, while 
others are involved in advocacy for health. MOH works 
towards promoting stronger coordination and participation 
of the civil society in the health sector, through the Sector-
wide Approach (SWAp) mechanism.  
3.2.5. The Communities 
The government works towards strengthening health 
promotion among the communities and strengthening 
community involvement and participation in the planning, 
management, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation 
of health services, to achieve higher impact. Communities 
are considered key partners in the success of the NHSP.  
3.2.6. Cooperating Partners (CPs) 
The CPs play an important role in the implementation 
of the NHSP through provisio n of financial and technical 
support to the sector and specific programmes. The 
Government works towards strengthening partnerships 
with the CPs, and harmonization of their support efforts, 
for high impact in people’s lives and wellbeing.  
3.2.7. Central Statistical Office 
It collaborates with the MOH especially through the 
provision of survey data gathered during the Zambia 
Demographic and Health Surveys (ZDHS), national 
censuses and other household surveys. 
4. Diagnosis of the Demand-side of the 
Health Sector M&E Arrangements in 
Zambia 
A thorough diagnosis of the demand -side of an M&E 
system is a necessary exercise when trying to understand 
how the utilization of information will potentially bene fit 
the users. Reference 
[9] points out that, “using M&E 
findings to improve performance is the main purpose of 
building a results-based M&E system and that information 
has to get to the appropriate users in a timely fashion so 
that the performance feedback can be used to better 
manage organizations and governments”. But to organize
<<<PAGE=6>>>
80 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
M&E information to serve this purpose is not an easy task  
[21]. For that reason, the major challenge in M&E is to 
gather, store and use information that serves different levels 
[13]. However, despite this challenge, M&E information 
which is acceptable is required in order to enhance 
knowledge that promotes learning. More importantly, 
M&E information must be disseminated and made 
available to potentia l users in order to become applied 
knowledge. 
When M&E systems are developed, and products 
thereof begin to be distributed, the expectations are that 
the concerned stakeholders would utilize the information 
to improve policymaking and better inform managem ent 
decisions at various levels 
[7]. The demand -side of M&E 
systems is significant because this is the part that 
consumes the final products distributed after being 
produced by others (or themselves) from the supply -side. 
To build and sustain a credible demand -side of an M&E 
system would therefore be a fundamental effort towards 
incentivising stakeholders to demand and use M&E 
information. Hence, as a caution, it must be understood 
that the demand -side of an M&E system has a way of 
impacting on the supply -side of the same system 
[10]. 
When there is low demand and utilisation of information 
by key stakeholders, then the M&E function is considered 
as a mere bureaucratic burden and compliance with the 
system procedures deteriorates.  
In what follows, the paper undertakes an assessment of 
the health sector M&E system for Zambia and as already 
stated, the focus is on the system’s demand -side.  
This diagnostic exercise uses the checklist elaborated by 
Bedi et . al 
[10] which identifies four critical elements  
to consider when undertaking an assessment of the 
demand-side of an M&E system. The checklist, as 
indicated earlier, comprises the following: (i) analysis and 
evaluation; (ii) outputs and dissemination; (iii) integr ation 
with the budget process and parliament; and (iv) non -state 
actors as demand -side stakeholders. These elements are 
used as the analytical framework to bring out issues on the 
demand-side of the health sector M&E system. Using 
these dimensions of assessment and analysis, the paper 
strives to show the strengths and weaknesses of the health 
sector M&E system in Zambia.  
4.1. Analysis and Evaluation 
One of the most important aspects to consider when 
building or streng thening the demand side of an M&E 
system is by ensuring that the practice of analysis and 
evaluation needs is embedded and well institutionalised 
within the organisational system. In this way, analysis or 
evaluation can be beneficial and used for the formu lation 
and justification of policies. Further, it can also buil d 
legitimacy and electoral support through evidence of its  
achievements 
[10]. Thus, when assessing the health sector 
M&E system, it is crucial to see how the issue of analysis 
is being elaborated within the MOH and how seriously it 
is being undertaken and incorporated. 
For the health sector in Zambia, there are challenges 
regarding the analysis of M&E results and evaluation 
findings. Although the sector’s main product is the Annual 
Progress Report (APR), it is filled with inadequacies  
in analytical content. The APRs were compiled and 
submitted largely as per donor and central ministries 
(MNDP & MOF) requirements and less for internal use 
[22]. Since the APR was perceived to be satisfying an 
external function, there was thus reduced or no incentive 
at all to invest more in analysis. The sector APRs were 
submitted to MNDP where the country APR is compiled, 
but the challenge was that even at national level, no 
adequate formal arrangement existed to assess the 
analytical quality of the sector reports 
[23]. In such 
instances, it meant that the national APRs equally were a 
perpetuation of gaps in analytical depth. Con sequently, 
these omissions negatively affected the demand and utility 
of these reports. 
The major problem was the lack of recognition and 
acknowledgement that the absence of the analysis function 
was something that required addressing. In the NHSPs, 
there was silence with regards to the need of M&E data 
and information analysis. If it existed, then it was taken 
for granted that the Department of Planning at MOH was 
the one to undertake the role of analysis. However, the 
analysis could be best implemented wh en a separate and 
independent entity is created. Such a body could be 
mandated to lead the analysis function on behalf of the 
sector and situated near the powers that be. The smaller 
such analysis units remained, the more effective they 
could be 
[10].  
However, it was mentioned in the NHSPs that the 
Cluster Advisory Group (CAG) [formerly known as 
Sector Advisory Group (SAG)] for health plays the overall 
function of steering and advising on the operationalisation 
of the M& E role. To some extent therefore, the CAG is 
tasked to conduct M&E analytical exercises. Indeed, the 
creation of a CAG to which health belongs was a positive 
arrangement but what was not clarified in the MOH 
documents is the nature of its (CAG) advice and how the 
incorporation of its recommendations were done to inform 
not only stakeholders, but the main M&E func tion in the 
sector as well. 
Further, the MOH conducted Joint Annual Reviews 
(JARs), a forum that brings together different stakeholders 
(NGOs, CSOs, other private organisations, etc) concerned 
with health matters to discuss how health programmes were 
being implemented in the sector. Strengths and challenges  
of the sector were reviewed with recommendations for 
improvement made and these were meant to inform relevant 
stakeholders to incorporate them for better performance 
[4]. Again, there was a limitation in appreciating the 
outcomes of these reviews because their products were not 
made public and the APRs too did not give d etails of the 
issues that come out, let alone the analytical quality 
aspects. It is also not clarified how the expertise of othe r 
stakeholders were being incorporated in supplementing 
the MOH M&E capacities. 
4.2. Outputs and Dissemination 
A sector M&E system that functions well is expected to 
produce outputs of good quality with information that is  
credible and useful to the users especially the intended 
stakeholders. Such an M&E system would normally 
produce products of high analytical content and compiled  
into outputs and distributed to actors inside and outside 
government 
[10]. At the same time, a functional M&E
<<<PAGE=7>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 81 
system will devise a range of outputs appropriate for 
different audiences and purposes, plus a dissemination 
strategy that provides those outputs across government 
and to the public at appropriate moments in the policy 
cycle. But even more important is how swift the M&E 
information is disseminated since overtime, the  value of 
information decreases quickly, so important findings have 
to be communicated as quickly as possible 
[24].  
As indicated earlier, there are many stakeholders within 
and outside the MOH who were not only concerned with 
the implementation of sector programmes, but also in 
using the information for their operations. This means 
M&E information has to be framed in many but 
stakeholder specific formats and needs so that demand and 
usability were simplified and spurred. The M&E system 
for MOH faced challenges on this aspect. The only 
notable public document produced and available to 
stakeholders was the APR chapter, and as indicated earlier 
it lacked in many ways. Here, the main challenges were at 
two levels; the first being the incompleteness of the APR 
itself and second, the wea k dissemination strategy of the 
document (even at national level). Prennushi et al. 
[25] 
state that, “M&E needed to be closely linked to decision 
making processes at all levels and provide feedback to 
project managers, policyma kers, and civil society on, 
among other things, the performance of existing policies 
and programmes.” Thus, a crucial element of the M&E 
system is the existence of a “ feedback process or loop” , 
which is a mechanism by which M&E results were 
disseminated an d used to decide on future courses of 
action. Simplified products such as reports, press releases, 
policy briefs, workshops and seminars, newsletters and the 
Web could be used to disseminate results among the 
general public and other organisations 
[25]. 
Further, APRs lack in addressing the specific information 
needs of other stakeholders such as the community and 
other lower structures. In addition, it was also not clear  if 
the timing of the APR production was linked to any 
appropriate moment in the planning cycle such as the 
budget process, or even the parliamentary debates. Such 
links were weak and not clearly mentioned. Thus,  
silence on linking the APR to appropriate moments  
or even mere acknowledgement of this necessity 
undermined the potential to instigate incentives for M&E 
information demand. Such gaps impacted negatively on 
the demand -side of the system because MOH will 
continue to provide less analytical APRs and other reports 
which actors will not use or demand. 
Another important factor on the demand -side involves 
the budget of the M&E function in the sector. Finances are 
required to produce, package and to disseminate M&E 
products that are appropriately stakeholder -oriented and 
relevant. In MOH, funding to the M&E sect ion was 
always in deficit and in fact, there was competition wit h 
other activities within the Department of Planning and 
M&E. With the current funding arrangements for M&E 
activities, very little could be achieved and coupled wit h 
high understaffing levels, staff attrition due to low salaries 
and the generally poor infrastructural capacity in the 
health sector, a lot may need to be done if the M&E 
function was to work towards sustainable levels.  
Although the sector APRs primarily go to MNDP and 
there was m ention of the MNDP being responsible to 
provide backstopping services to the health sector M&E, 
no practical support so far had been acknowledged. Only 
short and seldom seminars lasting for a day or less and 
involving all line ministries and other stakehol ders were 
mentioned as having taken place. These seminars were 
around APR preparations 
[26,27]. This was not adequate 
to resolve the many and specific demand -side problems 
the health sector M&E system was experiencing. Thus, if  
the analysis and evaluation of products from the health 
sector M&E system were to be of high analytical quality, 
the specific sector budget to the M&E function needed to 
be sufficient and the deliberate involvement of MNDP and 
MOF would too be of assistan ce. For now, the loose 
alliance and involvement of the M&E Department at 
MNDP and MOF was not making any notable desired 
positive impact. 
At decentralized levels such as the district and community, 
it was common to find data that was not analysed and 
packaged into usable reports and formats. Information of 
this kind could not be used to make decisions at these 
levels nor could they use such information for lobbying 
development. To that extent, sector M&E information 
only benefited the SAG/CAG, the JARs and APRs whose 
feedback was subsequently shared with the MOF and CPs. 
Reference 
[28] in the same line, observes that, “in practice, 
more attention is usually paid to upward accountability 
towards the central M&E system and donors a s compared 
to downward accountability towards citizens”. Having a 
sound upward accountability is good news for Zambia, but 
there is more need to ensure that there was demand for 
M&E results at lower levels within the sector as well so 
that the incentive to  even improve on the information 
quality was enhanced. The absence of public forums to 
share information limited or hindered citizens’ involvement 
not only in the implementation of sector plans, but also in 
M&E activities. The raw data at community level was thus, 
rendered to be of no use at all 
4.3. Integration with Budget Process and 
parliament 
4.3.1. Link M&E System with Budget Process  
Bedi et al. 
[10,29,30,31] assert that, “creating a link 
between PRS monitoring and the budget process is a 
critical objective for a PRS M&E system. The need to 
access public resources creates powerful incentives across 
all public agencies and provides the most promising hook 
for c reating demand for effective M&E”. The linkage 
between the sector M&E system and the budget process is 
acknowledged as an important element in the Zambian 
case as well. The health sector operates within the PFM 
framework as outlined in the NDPs. The Mid Te rm 
Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs) 1  for the sector were 
prepared for the period of three years (rolling plan) with 
annual reviews 
[32]. It was mentioned in the NHSPs that 
MTEFs were an important tool towards linking the sector 
plans and the available resources and that this created the 
1  MTEFs are three -year rolling plans based on the N ational Health 
Strategic Plan priorities and strategies, and are considered as important 
tools for linking the sector planning (i.e. NHSP) and the budgeting 
process on a yearly basis.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
82 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
basis for M&E function to be able to track the utilization 
of public finances.  
With the MTEFs linked to sector M&E, it was thus 
expected that high quality analyses would be reflected in 
the reports, especially APRs which would later be used to 
inform policy and decision making. In the case of the 
health sector, it was not clear how the preparation of the 
MTEFs were influencing the use of the M&E information. 
Other than being a requirement for upwar d accountability 
(mainly to MNDP and donors), there was no notable  
or recorded evidence that the link between the MTEF 
preparation and the M&E system had resulted in 
advantages in improving information quality in the sector. 
Equally, there was no mention a s to whether MTEFs were 
being developed using information from the sector M&E 
system. This gap has a negative effect on the demand -side 
of the sector M&E system because the MOH was still not 
challenged and obliged to produce quality M&E reports 
(i.e. no incentive to trigger or spur support to develop both 
the supply & demand sides of the health sector). 
Further, if the MTEF preparation and the disbursement 
of funds to the health sector was closely tied to the qualit y 
of M&E information submitted alongside the budget 
requests, the motivation to have in place a credible  
M&E information system would be high. As Kusek  
and Rist 
[9] affirm that, “with respect to helping formulate 
and justify budget requests, performance information can 
inform decisions that can lead to budgetary increases —or 
reductions. Projects, programmes, and policies may be 
enhanced or expanded based on performance feedback, 
likewise, they may be cut or eliminated altogether”.  
Thus, what seemed to be clear is that  the incentive 
structure in the MOH was lacking or is poorly 
implemented. In fact, there was no mention of any  
other form of incentive aimed at hooking the users or the 
MOH itself towards strengthening the demand -side of the 
M&E system. 
4.3.2. Link M&E System with Parliament  
The involvement of parliament in M&E has the 
potential to bring legitimacy, country ownership, and the 
voice of constituencies into the process. Among others, 
some key roles parliament plays include the legislative, 
oversight, represen tative and that of reviewing and 
authorising budgets 
[10,33]. Therefore, having in place 
functional linkages between the sector M&E system and 
parliament could lead to a positive demand and utilisatio n 
of system information in critical decisions that impact on 
poverty reduction planning, expenditures and management. 
It is not clearly elaborated how parliament was linked 
with the M&E function in the Zambian health sector. 
Further, parliament was not a member of the health 
SAG/CAG, a platform for various stakeholders with 
health related mandates meeting to share progress in the 
sector. This meant that the Zambian parliament only relied 
on reports (APRs, JARs, etc) produced by the MOH and 
no deliberate institutional coordination arr angements 
existed. Since parliament has a health working committee, 
it was not clear as well what role the committee played in 
the sector M&E, but most likely this was limited to 
receiving reports on selected indicators without providin g 
any feedback for holistic improvement of the sector M&E 
system. 
The problem was further compounded by the non -
acknowledgement of the importance of the parliament in 
the sector M&E and the silence could also mean that no 
institutional arrangements of information flow existe d 
between the two. To that extent, issues of capacity lack in 
M&E skills at both health sector and parliamentary  
levels could be hampering the creation of linkages 
between these different, yet complementary entities.  That 
is why Bedi et. al 
[10] argues that, “without a developed 
committee system, analytical capacity, or sufficient 
institutional resources, it is difficult for parliaments  to 
engage effectively with the executive on policy issues. 
Parliamentary capacity was also limited because of a lack 
of understanding of M&E systems and the opportunities 
these systems presented for parliamentary engagement”.  
Despite these shortcomings for the health sector in Zambia, 
it would have been interesting to know and appreciate 
how the parliament was involved especially in stimulating 
the demand for M&E information and how it was applied 
in improving parliamentary business. 
4.4. Non-State Actors as Demand-Side 
Stakeholders 
The information produced from M& E systems is 
primarily meant to be used by various stakeholders, 
among them governmental and nongovernmental agencies. 
Other users include the private sector and the donor 
community. Therefore, care need to be taken to ensure 
that the information quality is high and wins confidence of 
these stakeholders. Precisely, the actors play a significant 
role in demanding for M&E information. Reference 
[12] 
emphasize that, a sector M&E system should be able to 
indicate explicitly how parliaments, civil society, and 
development partners use and support the strengthening of 
M&E systems. So, a strong information demand at all 
levels is generally the main precondition for the 
development of a sector M&E system. Sustainable 
capacity is usually built up if the MOH and other 
stakeholders are truly committed to measuring the 
outcomes and impact of public action and to using this 
information to achieve better results. Thus, the 
participatory processes followed in designing poverty 
reduction strategi es can be critical in creating a strong 
demand for monitoring and evaluation 
[25]. 
As for CSOs, some of them involved in health service 
provision were also members of both the SAG/CAG and 
they took part in JARs as well. This is  a positive 
development for the sector, however, it was again not 
clear what specific M&E roles these actors provided 
through their membership and participation. The 
procedures of civil society participation were not well  
elaborated and no institutional ar rangements existed. 
Although CSOs were members of other development 
coordinating committees at national (NDCC), provincial 
(PDCC), and district (DDCC) 2 , their particular role in 
strengthening the M&E function was not articulated in the  
sector strategy. Suc h omissions therefore, may have 
2  NDCC (National Development Coordinating Committee), PDCC 
(Provincial Development Coordinating Commi ttee) & DDCC (District 
Development Coordinating Committee). These were advisory and 
decision-making structures.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 83 
adverse effects on the demand -side of the sector M&E 
system.  
Furthermore, there was also perceived tension between 
government (MOH) and NGOs to which, Bedi et al [10] 
state that, NGOs do not alw ays wish to play an 
institutionalised role in poverty monitoring for fear tha t 
they will be co -opted and become controlled by 
government. A related problem concerns representation 
and legitimacy. Whenever CSOs are invited to participate  
in public agencies and processes, government raises 
questions as to how representatives of CSOs are selected 
and whose interests they represented. All these issues 
compounded the potential development and strengthening 
of the health sector M&E system. 
In addition, the only m ention for CPs’ link with sector 
M&E was their membership and participation in the 
SAG/CAG and JARs. Thus, to the extent that one of the 
primary roles of the CAG was to provide overall M&E 
backstopping to the health sector, the development 
partners could b e said to have some level of institutional 
arrangement in place. In stressing the need for clear 
definition of partners’ M&E role, Valadez and Bamberger 
[24] argue that M&E systems should consider 
standardizing information need s of donors with those of 
governments to have uniform M&E procedures. Thus, 
since the health sector was implementing the PD 
principles of alignment and harmonization, there may be 
some agreement among partners on their role in M&E. 
Some donors were in fact  mentioned as being supporting 
capacity-building efforts in M&E, but all this happened in 
a less elaborated way as to how exactly this was being 
done. 
Further, the NHSPs also acknowledged the role of the 
Central Statistical Office (CSO) in the M&E function  of 
the sector. Mainly, the link was with regard to the two 
evaluations (mid-term and end of strategy) planned during 
the lifespan of every sector plan, particularly towards the 
undertaking of the Zambia Demographic and Health 
Survey (ZDHS) and other house hold surveys. While this 
was a positive arrangement, there was no elaboration on 
how the statistics office helped to strengthen the sector 
M&E system.  
Notwithstanding their usefulness and relevance, there 
was no mention in the health sector plans how priv ate 
research institutions and universities in Zambia were 
interacting to strengthen the demand -side of the M&E 
system. Surprisingly, the role of the Office of the Audit or 
General (OAG) was also neither elaborated nor 
acknowledged in the NHSPs, let alone un der the M&E 
section. Nevertheless, the OAG was responsible for 
conducting various financial related audits for all 
government entities and its reports were sent straight to 
parliament. At that stage, the parliament was able to see 
what transpired in terms of the financial expenditures of 
the health sector. But this linkage was not so helpful to the 
sector M&E system because it was limited to financial 
checks and not necessarily to the functionality of the 
sector M&E system. Because of the nature (skewedness to 
finances) of audit exercises and reports, neither the OAG 
nor parliament was able to appreciate and influence 
massive shifts in the functioning of M&E in the sector.  
Despite their commitment to the PD’s alignment and 
harmonization principles, it was n ot clear what specific 
role the CPs played in strengthening the sector M&E 
system. Instead, much was mentioned about the CP’s 
financial input in other sector programmes such as 
HIV/AIDS, breast cancer, malaria and so on 
[4]. Sin ce 
they possess different comparative advantages, there were 
expectations that these stakeholders would consider 
offering M&E support to the health sector, but this was 
not acknowledged in the MOH reports either. However, 
donors could contribute to the creation of demand for 
improved M&E activities through the requirements of 
their assistance. For instance, the World Bank and IMF’s 
conditionality of APRs (in the context of PRSPs) to be 
presented as requirement for accessing multilateral aid 
could work as an  incentive for the M&E demand -side as 
well 
[34]. But while such donor requirements did create 
demand for M&E, sustainable capacity would be built 
only when there was strong in -country and in -sector 
demand 
[25]. 
5. Opportunities to improve the  
Demand-Side of the Health Sector 
M&E System 
Results of an M&E system may either be positive or 
negative and this will always call for transparency and 
commitment in the manner information is disseminated to 
the beneficiaries 
[9]. Less credible information creates 
room for stakeholders to speculate and assume results but 
when the system is transparent and credible, regardless of 
the quality of information in the reports, stakeholders a re 
bound to abide by the information provided.  
Following what has been discussed so far in this paper, 
a supposition can be drawn to the effect that strengthenin g 
the demand -side of the health sector M&E system in 
Zambia is dependent on many factors. Among the key is 
the role of stakeholders in demanding to use the M&E 
information for various decisions at different levels. 
Although there were many flaws in the current M&E 
system for the health sector, a number of advantages and 
opportunities still existed for improvement. The bottom 
line was for the health sector to continue striving towards 
building a system that will gradually inspire all 
stakeholders to use the results for decisions and policy 
improvements. Therefore, there was need to ensure that 
enough motivation and demand for improved M&E 
information was increased and this may only be achieved 
if the environment was created to allow stakeholders to 
participate in the MOH programmes. This will call for 
concerted initiatives on the part of government an d on the 
part of stakeholders themselves. As seen already, the 
critical setbacks for the sector M&E were around the lack 
of an independent and sufficient budget, inadequate and 
uncoordinated analytical capacity, the limitations in 
information dissemination , and generally the poor 
incentives for stakeholders to take up active M&E roles  
[35]. 
For many years now, the Zambian Government through 
the MOH has been implementing various reforms aimed  
at improving the performance of the sector. Some 
programmes such as the SWAp and basket funds have 
been used in the ministry for over a decade now. However,
<<<PAGE=10>>>
84 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
their full benefits have not come to fruition yet. Below, the 
paper presents some existing programm es and practices 
from within and outside the MOH that may be used to 
enhance the demand-side of the sector M&E system. 
5.1. Link to National Development Plan and 
MTEF 
The health sector M&E system does not exist in a 
vacuum. Instead, it is part of the wider  national 
development strategic framework 
[36]. The NHSPs are 
linked and developed within the framework of the NDPs. 
The NDP chapter on health represents a summary of the 
health sector strategy and thus, the NHSP is an expanded  
version of the NDP chapter. In the 7NDP, health 
programmes are articulated under the pillar on Human 
Development. Thus, upward integration and demand for 
sector M&E information is established but the only task 
was to ensure that the M&E linkages and coord ination 
were strengthened especially those between and among 
MNDP, MOH and MOF. This meant that the MNDP, 
parliament, CAG and the CPs being part of the demand -
side will be motivated to ask for improved M&E results 
from MOH. The APR preparation and sharing could thus 
be used to stimulate integration for stakeholders to use as 
well as for subsequent strengthening of the sector M&E 
function. Improved analysis of the APR during its 
preparation stage by all actors could go a long way in 
creating information credibility, thereby attracting wi de 
usage of the report.  
For the M&E demand -side, MTEFs represent a test for 
the credibility of sector M&E and the MOH generally by 
developing these frameworks on evidence as reflected in 
the NHSPs. If the health sector MTEFs are developed 
following what has been generally agreed upon in the 
NDPs/NHSPs, stakeholders will be keen to trust and use 
the M&E information from the sector, knowing very well 
that interventions were based on mutually agreed upon 
strategies and indicators . Thus, MTEFs can be used to 
stimulate demand not only upward but downward as well 
[37]. Therefore, a complete vertical and horizontal 
integration could be the basis for a sustained M&E 
demand-side where stakeholders will ask a nd use the 
information to improve the management of public 
resources at various levels. 
5.2. Presence of the National Decentralisation 
Policy in Zambia 
As indicated by Prennushi et al 
[25], when a country is 
undergoing the process of decentralisation of administrative 
functions and service provision, the most urgent measure 
would be building M&E capacity at all levels of 
implementation and management. Sub -national levels 
such as provinces, district administrations and the 
communities would need M&E capacities to enable them 
assess the effectiveness of the strategy pursued at their 
levels. 
Another opportunity for the MOH M&E is the availability 
of the institutional arrangements made possible through 
the national decentralisation policy. In 2002, the Zambian 
Government first launched the National Decentralisatio n 
Policy in 2002 and revised in 2013, which aims at 
empowering the citizenry with an opportunity to exercise 
control over their affairs and foster development. The 
National Decentralisation Policy spells out various 
measures aimed at, among other things, devolving 
specified functions and authority with matching resources 
to local authorities at district level 
[38]. Under this 
environment, the rol e of the centre (MOH HQ) would be 
to provide policy, strategic guidelines, overall coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation while implementation and 
supervision of the programmes to be done through local 
authorities at provincial and district levels. 
Although the decentralization policy was not fully 
operationalised, the health sector M&E could already use  
it as a policy framework to create linkages (vertical and 
horizontal) so that a network of information flow on 
health issues in the country is well documented and shared. 
In practice, the MOH is the most decentralised sector 
alongside the education sector. This presents a good 
chance for building strong demand for M&E information 
in the sector. However, this would only work well after 
the decentralisation policy was fully or widely 
implemented especially the budget aspect which was 
currently still centralised to a larger extent.  
5.3. Link to the Sector Wide Approach and 
Paris Declaration (PD) 
Through the SWAp mechanism and the PD on aid 
effectiveness, the e nvironment and motivation to build a 
stronger M&E system seems to be available for the health 
sector in Zambia. Although some donors still had 
problems to completely align and harmonise their systems 
with country systems, the overall environment was 
positive to some extent 
[39]. The Paris Declaration of 
2005 and the 2008 Accra Agenda for Action (AAA) spells 
out the new aid modalities whose demands for donors and 
aid recipient poor countries were anchored on the five 
principles of ownership, harmonization, alignment, 
managing for results and mutual accountability 
[40,41]. 
These principles guide the desired reforms which both 
donors and recipients needed to adopt, adapt and commit 
themselves to so that there is effectiveness in the overall 
aid dispensation. Being a big beneficiary of donor 
assistance, the MOH may too view these changing aid 
modalities as windows of opportunity to im prove the 
sector’s M&E system. 
The call for the alignment and harmonizati on of donor 
and recipient country systems would increase the demand 
for high quality M&E information. The constant demand 
for highly analytical M&E reports may subsequently lead 
to a shift within the sector M&E system to improve the 
credibility of M&E final products. 
6. Conclusion 
The demand -side of any M&E system is very crucial 
towards the implementation of a successful and 
sustainable system. However, the demand -side is not easy 
to stimulate because it usually involves many actors from 
both within and outside of any given organisational 
framework. For example, in the case of the health sector in 
Zambia, key stakeholders such as parliament, CSOs,
<<<PAGE=11>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 85 
NGOs, research institutions the citizens and development 
partners are found outside of the entity that coordina tes 
M&E. In such instances, it is necessary to put in place 
deliberate initiatives to inspire and motivate these 
stakeholders to demand for M&E information. Without 
certainty in the utilisation of the M&E information, the 
whole point of having such systems  is purely not 
necessary 
[42,43,44].  
This paper aimed at assessing the Zambian health sector 
M&E arrangements and discuss to what extent the system 
was developed especially with regard to the demand -side 
of the M&E system. The  sector M&E has been 
contextualized within the national development framework 
of the Zambian NDP. An assessment of the current 
strengths and weaknesses of the sector M&E system has 
been done using the checklist developed and elaborated by 
Bedi et. al. 
[10]. The key elements of assessment included 
the evidence of analysis, outputs and dissemination, 
integration, and the role of non -state actors in stimulating 
the demand-side of the sector M&E system. The diagnosis 
showed that the Zambian health sector M&E arrangement 
has a mixed implementation with a combination of 
successes and failures. Despite this blend, it is crucial to 
note that the sector has sufficient policy and institutio nal 
framework provisions for M&E. What was require d is to 
make full use of the environment especially the issues 
around the strengthening of the M&E analytical capacity 
and introducing strong incentives for the use of improved 
M&E information. The budget constraints for M&E have 
also been seen as an overa rching challenge which needed 
urgent attention.  
Finally, the health sector M&E still has great opportunities 
for improvement. The paper has shown that there is substantial 
policy support from the government and indeed the donors. 
Current global development desires are that governments 
of poor countries will develop and implement results -
oriented frameworks so that the fight against mass poverty 
for their affected populations is made more feasible and 
based on evidence. The National Decentralization Policy 
and other reforms present a window of hope for the 
enhancement of the sector M&E system.  
7. Recommendations 
1.  Conduct a thorough sector M&E diagnosis:  This 
has not been done before but when undertaken, it 
will clarify specific points of strengths and 
weaknesses and this will be a good benchmark to 
guide all efforts to have a better health sector M&E 
system. In the absence of this assessment, it is 
impossible to know the u nderlying factors for 
success and failure 
[9].  
2.  Create forum for inter -line ministry M&E 
experience sharing:  Since government is a broad 
entity with all line ministries expected to implement 
the NDP, it will be good for the health sector M&E 
section to consider sharing experiences with other 
sectors from different ministries. This will greatly 
act as a source of knowledge and to help improve 
M&E practices and capacities 
[45]. Other 
stakeholders may be included [46,47].  
3.  Invest in M&E capacity -building at lower 
structures: This paper has noted that the 
inadequate engagement of the lower structures such 
as those at district and community levels had led to 
poor quality, use and demand for M&E information. 
However, since the key information for the M&E 
system is generated at these levels, the health sector 
should consider creating a sustainable arrangement 
to bridge this gap. This can prove cheaper for the 
long term horizon 
[48].  
4.  Enhance the incentive structure for the M&E 
function: Innovative incentives need to be 
introduced to encourage use of performance 
information. This means that success need to be 
acknowledged and rewarded, problem s need to be 
addressed, messengers must not be punished, 
organizational learning is valued, and budget 
savings are shared 
[36,49,50]. This may also mean 
identifying appropriate moments to anchor these 
incentives.  
5.  Engage MN DP and MOF to provide M&E 
backstopping: The Department of M&E at MNDP 
has a mandate to help build and strengthen 
capacities of line ministries in M&E skills and 
procedures. This is not happening currently 
although it is acknowledged as crucial. This effort  
will assist to revolve current inadequacies of M&E 
issues on the demand -side. MOF need to equally 
provide deliberate resource s towards financing 
sector M&E. 
References 
[1] Castro, M.F. (2009) . “Evaluation Capacity Development: Insider 
Insights: Building a Results -Based Management and Evaluation 
System in Colombia”, ECD Working Paper 18, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[2] Görgens, M. and Kusek, J. (2009) . Making Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems Work:  A Capacity Development Toolkit, 
Washington DC, IBRD World Bank. 
[3] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2002). “Zambia 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2002 -2004”, Ministry of 
Finance and National Planning, Lusaka. 
[4] Republic of Zambia . (2010). “Sixth National Development Plan 
(2011-2015): Sustained Economic Growth and Poverty 
Reduction”, Ministry of Finance and National Planning, Lusaka. 
[5] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2006). “Fifth 
National Development Plan 2006 -2010: Broad based wealth a nd 
job creation through citizenry participation and technological 
advancement”, Ministry of Finance and National Planning, Lusaka.  
[6] Mackay K. (2006) . Institutionalization of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems to Improve Public Sector Management. ECD 
Working Paper Series No. 15 
[7] Kanyamuna, V. 2013. Sector Monitoring and Evaluation systems 
in the context of poverty reduction strategies: A comparative case 
study of Zambia’s health and agriculture sectors. MSc – 
Dissertation, University of Antwerp. 
[8] Mackay K. (1999). A Diagnostic Guide and Action Framework. 
Evaluation Capacity Building —ECD Working Series No. 6. 
Washington DC: World Bank. 
[9] Kusek, J.Z. and Rist, R.C. (2004) . Ten Steps to a Results -Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems. A Handbook for 
Development Practitioners, Washington D.C., The World Bank.  
[10] Bedi, T., Coudouel, A., Cox, M., Goldstein, M. and Thornton, N. 
(2006). Beyond the Numbers. Understanding the Institutions for 
Monitoring Poverty Reduction Strategies, Washington, D.C., The 
World Bank.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
86 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
[11] Booth, D. and Lucas, H. (2002) . “Good Practice in the 
Development of PRSP Indicators and Monitoring Systems”, ODI 
Working Paper 172, London, Overseas Development Institute.  
[12] Holvoet, N. and Renard, R. (2007) . Monitoring and Evaluation 
Reform under Changing Aid  Modalities: Seeking the Middle 
Ground in Aid-Dependent Low-Income Countries, UN University, 
Research Paper No. 2007/52.  
[13] UNDP. (2002). Handbook on Monitoring and Evaluating for 
Results, UNDP Evaluation Office, New York.  
[14] IFC/GTZ/DFID. (2008). The Monitoring and Evaluation 
Handbook IF C | G T Z | D F ID 
[15] OECD/DAC. (1991). OECD/DAC Principles for the Evaluation of 
Development Assistance, Paris, OECD/DAC. 
[16] Simister, N. (2009) . Developing M&E Systems for Complex 
Organizations: A Methodology, Monitoring and Evalu ation (M&E) 
Paper 3, INTRAC (www.intrac,org).  
[17] UNDP. (2002). Handbook on Monitoring and Evaluating for 
Results, UNDP Evaluation Office, New York.  
[18] Republic of South Africa, 2008. Basic Concepts in Monitoring and 
Evaluation, Public Service Commission, Pretoria, South Africa.  
[19] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2006). “Vision 
2030: A Prosperous Middle -Income Nation by 2030”, Cabinet 
Office, Lusaka.  
[20] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2017). “Seventh 
National Development Plan 2017 -2021: Accelerating 
Development Efforts towards Vision 2030 without Leaving 
Anyone Behind – Volume I”, Ministry of National Development 
Planning, Lusaka. 
[21] World Bank . (2003). Participation in Monitoring and evaluation  
of PRSPs. A document review of trends and approaches emerging 
from 21 full PRSPs . Washington, D.C., The World Bank, Social 
Development Department, The participation and civic engagement 
group. 
[22] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2006). “2006 
Annual Fifth National Development Plan Progress Report: Broad 
based wealth and job creation through citizenry participation and 
technological advancement”, Ministry of Finance and National 
Planning, Lusaka.  
[23] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2011). “Annual 
Progress Report: Analytical Report for selected sectors”, Ministry 
of Finance, Lusaka.  
[24] Valadez, J. and Bamberger, M. (1994) . “Organizational and 
Management Issues in Programme Evaluation”, in: Valadez J. and 
Bamberger M. (eds.) Monitoring and Eval uating Social 
Programmes in Developing Countries: a Handbook for 
Policymakers, Managers and Researchers, Washington D.C., The 
World Bank, 402-442. 
[25] Prennushi, G., G. Rubio and K. Subbarao (2001) . “Monitoring and 
Evaluation”, World Bank PRSP Sourcebook (Draft for Comments, 
Apr 2001) (www.worldbank.org/poverty). 
[26] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) (2009). “Mid-Term 
Review of the Fifth National Development Plan 2006 -2010: Broad 
based wealth and job creation through citizenry participation and 
technological advancement”, Ministry of Finance and National 
Planning, Lusaka. 
[27] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2016). “2015 
Annual Progress Report for the Revised Sixth National 
Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred Economic Growth 
and Development”,  Ministry of National Development Planning, 
Lusaka. 
[28] Holvoet, N., Gildemyn, M. and Inberg, L. (2012) . “Taking Stock 
of Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements in the Context of 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers: Evidence from 20 Aid -
Dependent Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa”, Development Policy 
Review, 30 (6): 749-772.  
[29] African Community of Practice on Managing for Development 
Results (AfCoP -MfDR) (AfCoP -MfDR). (2014). Putting results 
first in Zambia: Changing the lives of People - managing for 
development results country assessment 
[30] Booth, D. (2005). ‘Missing Links in the Politics of Development: 
Learning from the PRSP Experiment’. ODI Working Paper No. 
256. London: Overseas Development Institute. 
[31] World Bank. (2005). Enabling capacity to achieve results —2005 
Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) progress report. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, Operations Policy and Country 
Services. 
[32] Republic of Zambia . (2006). “National Health Strategic Plan 
(2011-2015): Towards attainment of health related Millennium 
Development Goals and Other National Health Priorities in a clean, 
caring and Competent environment”, Ministry of Health, Lusaka. 
[33] Estrella, S. and Gaventa, J. 2014. Who Counts Reality? 
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation: A literature Review, IDS 
Working Paper 70. 
[34] Hardlife, Z., and Zhou, G. 2013. Utilisation of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems by Development Agencies: The Case of 
UNDP in Zimbabwe, American International Journal of 
Contemporary Research, 3(3) 70-83. 
[35] De Renzio, P., D. Booth, A. Rogerson, and Z. C urran. (2005). 
‘Incentives for Harmonization and Alignment in Aid Agencies. 
ODI Working Paper No. 248. London: Overseas Development 
Institute. 
[36] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ), 2014. National 
Planning and Budgeting Policy: Responsive, transparent , 
accountable and results -oriented Development Planning and 
Budgeting processes, Ministry of Finance, Lusaka. 
[37] Engela, R. and Ajam, T. 2010 . Implementing a Government-Wide 
Monitoring and Evaluation System in South Africa, ECD Working 
Paper series No. 21, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[38] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2002). “The 
National Decentralization Policy: Towards Empowering the 
People”, Government Policy, Cabinet Office, Lusaka.  
[39] Chigunta, F. and Matshalaga, N. (2010) . “Evaluation of the 
Implementation of the Paris Declaration in Zambia”, Final Report, 
Lusaka.  
[40] 3rd Hi gh Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness . (2008). Accra 
Agenda for Action. Accra: 3rd High Level Forum on Aid 
Effectiveness. 
[41] OECD. (2005). “Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness”, Paris, 
OECD Publications.  
[42] Mackay, K. (2007). How to Build M&E Systems to Suppor t Better 
Government, Washington D.C., The World Bank. 
[43] Cousins, Bradley and Leithwood, Kenneth . (1986). ‘Current 
Empirical Research on Evaluation Utilization’, Review of 
Educational Research 56 (3): 331-64. 
[44] Republic of South Africa, 2007. Policy Framework for the 
Government-Wide Monitoring and Evaluation System, The 
Presidency, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[45] Ajam, T. and Engela, R. (2010) . Implementing a Government -
Wide Monitoring and Evaluation System in South Africa, ECD 
Working Paper No. 15, World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[46] Hauge, O. and Mackay, K. 2004. Sharing best practices and 
lessons learned: Monitoring and Evaluation for Results – Lessons 
from Uganda, Capacity Enhancement Briefs, OED, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[47] Hlatshwayo, A.Z. and Govender, K.K. 2015. Monit oring and 
Evaluation in the Public Sector: A Case Study of the Department 
of Rural Development and Land Reform in South Africa, Asian 
Journal of Economics and Empirical Research, 2(2) 91-99.  
[48] Burdescu, R., del Villar, A. Mackay, K., Rojas, F. and Saavedra, J. 
2005. Institutionalising M&E systems in Latin America and 
Caribbean countries Prem Notes, World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[49] Holvoet, N. and Inberg, L. (2012) . Sector Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems in the context of Changing Aid Modalities: 
The case of Uganda’s Health Sector, IOB, Antwerp.  
[50] Chabane, C. 2013. The Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Public Service, Republic of South Africa – The Presidency 
Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation.  
[51] Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) . (2014). “Report of 
the Final Evaluation of the Fifth National Development Plan 2006-
2010”, Ministry of Finance and National Planning, Lusaka. 
[52] Republic of Zambia . (2017). ‘To improve the health status of 
people in Zambia in order to contribute to increased  productivity 
and socio-economic development’, Ministry of Health, Lusaka.