<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339847707
Role of Actors Outside Government in Strengthening the Country Monitoring
and Evaluation System in Zambia
Article  in   Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences · March 2020
DOI: 10.12691/wjssh-6-1-4
CITATIONS
10
READS
1,564
4 authors:
Kanyamuna Vincent
University of Zambia
31 PUBLICATIONS   284 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Million Phiri
University of Zambia
49 PUBLICATIONS   240 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Haggai Kanenga
The Open University
5 PUBLICATIONS   74 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Munalula Mulonda
University of Zambia
9 PUBLICATIONS   148 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Million Phiri on 11 March 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2020, Vol. 6, No. 1, 22-29 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/wjssh/6/1/4 
Published by Science and Education Publishing 
DOI:10.12691/wjssh-6-1-4 
 
Role of Actors Outside Government in Strengthening the 
Country Monitoring and Evaluation System in Zambia 
Vincent Kanyamuna1,*, Million Phiri2, Haggai Kanenga3, Munalula Mulonda4 
1Department of Development Studies, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
2Department of Population Studies, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
3School of Economics and Management, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 
4Department of Development Studies, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
*Corresponding author: vkanyamuna@unza.zm 
Received January 03, 2020; Revised February 12, 2020; Accepted March 03, 2020 
Abstract  Actors outside of government have a crucial role to play in building, str engthening and sustaining a 
country’s system for monitoring and evaluation. Specifically, the role of parliament, civil society and donors can 
improve, in innovative ways, the operations of government monitoring and evaluation systems. For Zambia, these 
actors are key in the development process of the country and their role in making the public sector monitoring and 
evaluation system better becomes significant. This research study investigated the participation of parliament, civil 
society organisations and donors in strengthening Zambia’s whole-of-government monitoring and evaluation system. 
It was found that although their role was recognised, it was rather weak and fragmented. There was generally lack of 
formalised arrangements pertaining to how these actors needed to engage government in strengthening the function 
of monitoring and evaluation across the public sector. While donors provided some notable financial and technical 
support, parliament and civil s ociety had weaker evidence. Nonetheless , donor support was not flexible but 
fundamentally restricted to areas of their (donor) interest as opposed to national monitoring and evaluation priorities. 
In the midst of these positive and negative aspects regarding the role of non-state actors, the study has brought out 
salient insights which if addressed may help improve Zambia’s whole -of-government monitoring and evaluation 
system. The research has established that going forward, the Government of Zambia will need to engage parliament, 
civil society and donors meaningfully if these actors were to help accelerate the development and strengthening of 
the country’s system for monitoring and evaluation. Similarly, the non state actors are also challenged to design and 
implement their monitoring and evaluation activities alongside government priorities and plans. 
Keywords: actors outside government, parliament, monitoring, evaluation, civil society, donors, culture of results, 
evidence-based, whole-of-government M & E system, results 
Cite This Article:  Vincent Kanyamuna, Million Phiri, Haggai Kanenga , and Munalula Mulonda, “Role of 
Actors Outside Government in Strengthening the Country Monitoring and Evaluation System in Zambia.” World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, vol. 6, no. 1 (2020): 22-29. doi: 10.12691/wjssh-6-1-4. 
1. Introduction 
The Zambian public sector whole -of-government 
monitoring and evaluation system (WoGM&ES) is in its 
embryonic stage  [1]. As a consequence, many of its 
components are yet to develop to the satisfaction of 
stakeholders. In that regard, the WoGM&ES for Zambia is 
currently unable to satisfy various information needs for 
different players in the country’s development process. 
However, the country remains challenged in finding 
sustainable ways of developing and sustaining functional 
arrangements for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The 
government still lacks in many ways to make the  
public system for M&E robust enough to supply and 
trigger demand for M&E information across state  
and non -state actors. Despite these challenges, the 
Government of Zambia has for a long ti me now thrived to 
put in place some semblance of a WoGM&ES to promote 
the practice of monitoring and evaluation across the  
public sector and to inspire stakeholders outside of 
government. 
Given the above, three (3) actors outside of government 
make a significant contribution towards a better WoGM & 
ES for Zambia’s public sector.  These include parliament, 
civil society organisations (CSOs), and donors -which now 
prefer to be called cooperating or development partners. 
The role each one of these actors play in ensuring that a 
country system for M&E is robust and responds to the 
information needs of stakeholders becomes crucial 
[2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11]. Indeed, support from these players 
come in many forms. Since a typical WoGM&ES is 
comprised of two sides, that is, th e supply side and the 
demand side, the actors outside of government would 
support such a system on either side. Other stakeholders 
for instance, may even help to strengthen both the supply 
and demand sides of a given WoGM&ES [12,13,14].
<<<PAGE=3>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 23 
 
Therefore, a country that initially undertakes a (rigorous) 
diagnosis to ascertain the contribution of the actors outside 
of government to build and strengthen its WoGM&ES 
stands a better chance to succeed. The issue is that non-state 
actors participate in a number of development processes in 
the country and that their roles could be useful in 
strengthening governance structures especially those to do 
with accountability and transparency. In M&E, the focus 
is on initiating and implementing development interventions 
that w ere informed by evidence. Thus, any stakeholder 
that contributes to strengthening systems of good governance 
and promotes the use of evidence in policy and decision 
making becomes an ally of sustainable development and 
poverty alleviation. 
This study aime d to address the question of the role 
actors outside of government played in strengthening 
Zambia’s public sector WoGM&ES. For the Zambian 
government and its partners, the findings of the research 
study are necessary as the country positions itself to  
build and implement a robust WoGM&ES which  
will provide the desired information for all forms of 
development to all stakeholders. In that regard, parliament, 
civil society and donors have been investigated on how 
they impacted the strengthening of Zambia’s WoGM&ES. 
The findings and analysis provide some insights useful for 
policy to those who have the responsibility of building  
a stronger and sustainable M&E culture for Zambia. 
Equally, the study provokes aspects of further research to 
understand other dynamics  of improving the WoGM&ES 
for Zambia. 
2. Methodological Approach 
This research study focused on finding out the role of 
non-state actors in building and strengthening Zambia’s 
whole-of-government M&E system. The study sought to 
collect and analyse existing information on the function 
played by parliament, civil society and donors in building 
the country’s M&E system for the public sector.  A 
qualitative approach was adopted to guide the research. 
The approach was more investigatory and descriptive. Fo r 
that reason, a number of data sources were consulted 
during data collection, collation, analysis and reporting. 
Thus, to undertake the study, data were collected from the 
reviews of secondary data sources as well as  primary data 
sources. In that regard, document reviews and one -on-one 
interviews with  relevant key informants in institutions 
(state and non-state) were conducted. 
The five-point LEADS system of scoring was used as a 
quantitative way of making the results analysis and discussion 
clearer. Th e LEADS scoring system has five -point 
categories: L (Little action: 1), E  (Elements exist: 2), A  
(Action taken: 3), D (largely Developed: 4), and S  
(Sustainable: 5). Alongside the LEADS scoring system 
was the d iagnostic checklist  which were used together . 
The diagnostic checklist comprises of questions which 
were used for  data collection. Semi-structured interviews 
through self -administered (survey) questionnaires, focus 
group discussions ( FGDs) and key informants  were the 
data collection instruments employed in the study. Equally, 
rigorous document review was also used. 
2.1. Analytical Framework 
Table 1  and Table 2  below represent  the analytical 
frameworks used for this research, i.e. the diagnostic 
checklist and the LEADS scoring system, respectively. 
Table 1. Diagnostic checklist 
Component Question 
Parliament 
Is the role of Parliament properly recognised, and is 
there alignment with Parliamentary control and 
oversight procedures? 
Civil Society 
Is the role of civil society recognised? Are there clear 
procedures for the participation of civil society? Is the 
participation institutionally arranged or rather ad-
hoc? 
Donors Is the role of donors recognised? Are there clear 
procedures for participation of donors? 
Table 2. LEADS Scoring system 
L Little action Score of 1 
E Elements exist Score of 2 
A Action taken Score of 3 
D largely Developed Score of 4 
S Sustainable Score of 5 
 
The research information was collected using the 
diagnostic checklist while the scoring was done using the 
LEADS system. For each score under the LEADS system, 
analysis was done in line with the corresponding questions 
for each non-state actor. 
3. Presentation of Findings 
The study sought to assess the status of participation by 
actors outside of government in helping t o strengthen 
Zambia’s public sector whole-of-government M&E system 
(WoGM & ES). In doing so, three (3) actors have been 
identified and used to undertake the investigation, these 
include; parliament, civil society and donors. Table 3  
below shows a summary o f results as scored using the 
LEADS scoring system. 
Table 3. Summary presentation of diagnostic results 
COMPONENT TOPIC SCORES 
PARTICIPATION OF ACTORS OUTSIDE 
GOVERNMENT 2.0 
 
Parliament 2- Elements exist 
Civil Society 2- Elements exist 
Donors 2- Elements exist 
Source: Diagnostic study score results compiled by author (2019) 
 
From Table 3, it is shown that a ll three actors, namely 
parliament, civil society and donors, were each scored  a  
2-point scoring (with overall  average score of 2 p oints). 
This signifies that only elements of M&E existed in these 
development actors and ultimately could mean that their 
participation and contribution to matters related to the 
WoGM&ES were weaker. 
While we may not fully appreciate lots of detail 
regarding the specific issues of strength and weakness 
about each actor’s contribution to the improvement of 
Zambia’s WoGM&ES, it would be useful to analyse
<<<PAGE=4>>>
24 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
 
intra-component dynamics. The next section provides that 
analysis. 
4. Discussion and Analysis 
To app reciate the details of the findings, a fuller 
discussion and analysis of the results follows. The 
diagnostic checklist considers three key actors outside 
government, namely parliament, civil society and 
development partners and donors. Thus, f or consistenc y 
and in conformity with the study design, the three   
actors (parliament, civil society & donors)  are used as   
sub-headings. 
4.1. Parliament 
The study sought to analyse  the role played by 
parliament through checking whether there was  alignment 
with parliamentary control and oversight procedures in the 
context of the functionality of Zambia’s WoGM&ES . In 
addition, the assessment checked whether parliament 
participated in joint sector reviews  (JSRs) and other 
working groups. 
Overall, the parliament component was given a score of 
2.0, denoting that elements exist. The role of parliament 
was acknowledged in the WoGM&ES as providing 
legislation and oversight functions. However, there was  
no alignment with parliamentary control and oversight 
procedures. Further, parliament did not participate in  
JSRs or working groups. As an arm of government tasked 
with overseeing the legislation system and approval of 
government estimates of revenues and expenditures  
(i.e. national budgets), parliament could play a significant 
role in the successful implementation and strengthening of 
the WoGM&ES for Zambia [15,16,1,17,18]. However, the 
annual progress reports ( APRs) and other M&E -related 
documents did not mention the role played by parliament 
in strengthening M&E functions in the public sector. It 
was not clear how parliamentary control and oversight 
procedures were being undertake n in the context of 
national M&E [19,20,21,22,23,24,25]. Further, aside from 
the mentioning how parliament is  envisaged to participate 
in sector working groups ( i.e. cluster advisory groups)  
in the current processes, there was presently  no  
clear evidence of its M&E strengthening role. Although 
parliament performed its traditional role of oversight 
through debates on the floor of the house, visits to  
selected project and pro gramme sites, and meetings  
of parliamentary committees, it was acknowledged  
that there was room to engage parliament in a more 
innovative and meaningful way. These efforts remained 
uncoordinated and fragmented in terms of their linkages 
and contributions t o the functionality and operational 
arrangements of the WoGM&ES [25,26] . In addition, it 
was acknowledged that parliament was involved in the 
discussions about national development plans ( NDPs), 
although with weak evidence on how it was engaged. In 
that regard, parliament was reported to be participating to 
a lesser extent in the development planning process 
through the participation of parliamentary offices at ward 
and district levels during the NDP consultative process es. 
Further, parliament was acknowled ged as being critical to 
providing oversight during the implementation of  
NDPs, especially through annual budgetary hearings and 
approvals. 
It was established that the WoGM&ES did not embrace 
or have a strategy in place for dissemination of M&E 
outputs on poverty to parliament. Instead, there was only a 
general dissemination of poverty data to all na tional 
stakeholders through reports from the Zambia Statistics 
Agency (ZSA -formerly called the Central Statistical 
Office/CSO), APRs and related reports. Prese ntations and 
reports to parliament were not structured and were 
normally voluminous without user-friendly summaries for 
easier reference by par liamentarians. However, only ZSA  
was mentioned as practising the dissemination of 
statistical data to parliament.  Therefore, the WoGM&ES 
was weak in that regard because parliament plays an 
oversight role in the governance system of the country. 
Thus, for parliament not to have access to reports and 
information on how NDP implementation was being 
undertaken, and more so the development results being 
pursued and achieved, much was left to be desired on the 
transparency, accountability and good governance tenets 
of the nation. It was revealed that this scenario contributed 
to weaker parliamentary debates in the house on types of 
legislation needed for growth and development and 
debates on financial resource allocations during budget 
appropriation hearings. A stronger WoGM&ES would  
be structured in such a way that parliament and its 
committees would play a dual role of supplying M&E data 
and information and demanding M&E outputs to enhance 
its participation in the development process of the country. 
The WoGM&ES recognised parliament as one of  
the potentially major M&E information users. However, 
the issues of appropriatenes s, timing, timeliness and  
form of M&E outputs to meet the needs of parliament 
were reported as being fragmented  and in many cases 
missing. Although general reports were acknowledged  
to be disseminated to parliament, there was a need for 
innovative data pre sentation and visualisation, rather than 
the current bulky reports (APRs, institutional reports, etc). 
Further, M&E data and information would be more useful 
to parliament if it was produced at constituency and  
ward level. But at the moment, it is produced  only at 
provincial and national level in most cases. In addition, 
the WoGM&ES needed a well -defined framework for 
engaging parliament. It was suggested by respondents that 
there should be a way to link what happens in p arliament, 
and also in all constitue ncies in the country. When  
such information was harmonised and synchronised 
within a functional WoGM&ES, parliament would operate 
effectively with improved evidence -based policy and 
decision-making processes. Parliament needed  to demand 
for proper accounta bility and transparency from the 
executive branch of government based on evidence and 
real-time information supplied by a stronger WoGM&ES. 
With regard to the use of information from the 
WoGM&ES by parliament and its committees, it was 
reported that no cle ar evidence was available to prove  
the practice. No such demonstrations of the utilisation  
of information by parliament existed. The debates  
by parliamentarians were guided mainly by popular  
media subjects and some reports given by the executive. 
However, with regard to the data from the statistical office
<<<PAGE=5>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 25 
 
(ZSA), parliament was said to have been using it to inform 
policy and some types of projects being implemented in 
the country. In the absence of a functional WoGM&ES, 
parliamentarians were reported to be using any source of 
information such as the media and other unsubstantiated 
sources. This created information decay with credibility, 
reliability and relevance issues. To that extent, creating a 
stronger WoGM&ES, coupled with a robust national 
statistical system (NSS), woul d be the sure approach for 
Zambia [27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34]. 
Further, parliament was reported as not communicating 
its needs formally or informally through legislation that 
required particular information. No such formal or even 
informal requests were in place. Instead, it was reported 
that some requests from parliament to the executive  
were available, which sought explanations and certain 
statistics on selected issues. In such cases, the executive 
would respond by providing responses as requested by 
parliament. It was acknowledged that parliament had the 
capacity to use M&E information effectively. However, 
before being used by parliamentarians, such information 
had to be appropriately packaged, presented, simplified 
and consistent. 
4.2. Civil Society 
The research study also investigated whether the role of 
civil society was recognised in M&E activities of  
the WoGM&ES. The focus here was on the clarity  
of procedures for the participation of civil society and 
whether their participation was arranged inst itutionally  
or was merely ad hoc. Further, whether civil society 
participated in JSRs and other working groups was  
another crucial aspect of assessed by this study. 
On the sub -dimension pertaining to civil society, a 
score of 2.0 was given, denoting that M&E elements 
existed. The role of civil society in the WoGM&ES was 
recognised. Procedures were in place for the participation 
of civil society, although these were not comprehensively 
clear. Through some institutional arrangements, civil society 
institutions were reported to be participating in M&E 
activities such as JSRs and in technical working groups 
(TWGs) of various cluster advisory groups ( CAGs) as 
implemented i n the Seventh National Development Plan 
(7NDP) [14,25,35]. 
The Fifth National Development Plan ( FNDP), Sixth 
National Development Plan (SNDP) and the Revised Sixth 
National Development Plan (R-SNDP) all documented the 
existence of CAGs (initially called Sector Advisory 
Groups/SAGs). These institutional structures were created 
to support the implementation of government development 
plans and strategies through the participation of state and 
non-state actors [25,36,37,38] . Thus, civil society 
organisations (CSOs) have institutionally been incorporated 
in the CAGs as a platform for their participat ion in the 
development processes of Zambia. Although this existed, 
clear CAG membership issues regarding CSOs remained 
vague, hence rendering the institutional arrangements ad 
hoc. Nonetheless, the documents did not state the 
categorical procedures for the participation of civil society. 
The issues that CSOs were expected to table at meetings 
of CAGs were not stipulated, for instance. Such grey areas 
could affect participation and overall quality of engagement 
at meetings. 
Overall, the participation status of CSOs in the  
current implementation of government plans and strategies 
remained unclear and fragmented. This was reported to be 
true of other levels, namely national, line ministry, 
provincial and district. Document review revealed that a 
limited number of CSOs were taking part consistently. No 
structured reports for CAGs were found to give details of 
issues discussed in meetings. In addition, no incentives 
were reported to be in place to motivate civil society 
participation in the WoGM&ES. Some individua l CSOs 
were engaged in selected forums regarding monitoring 
NDP programmes. Civil Society for Poverty Reduction 
(CSPR) for instance had been consistent in attending  
NDP stakeholder meetings. However, the voice of CSPR 
alone was not enough to demand account ability and good 
governance practices by government. Consequently, the 
weakness of CSOs in the country was reported to have led 
to a poorly performing WoGM&ES. Moreover, there  
was a suspicion among respondents that when CSOs or 
individual CSOs operated too close to government, their 
objectivity in holding government accountable weakened, 
since they turned into allies of government. This was a 
dilemma because CSOs are believed to be well placed to 
make government account for public goods and services, 
while these CSOs may be compromised by government. 
It was established that civil society was not represented 
appropriately in the coordination and liaison mechanisms 
of the WoGM&ES. Findings revealed that there were  
no civil society players in the whole of gover nment 
implementation framework. While some CSOs were 
usually consulted on their input in the planning and 
preparation processes of NDPs, there were gaps in their 
engagement in the definition and implementation of M&E 
functions during the NDP implementation. In addition, no 
CSOs were consulted adequately about the roles they were 
expected to play in the WoGM&ES. There was no 
framework to coordinate civil society systematically in the 
country. As a result, it was not clear in the findings 
whether civil societ y had capacity to participate in the 
enhancement of the WoGM&ES. It was also found that 
there were no or fragmented participatory mechanisms  
in place to obtain information from civil society in the 
formulation of NDPs based on the needs of the citizens. 
Consultations were held with various stakeholders, 
including civil society, through meetings, symptoms and 
workshops. These forums were undertaken at national, 
line ministry, provincial and district level across the 
country during the preparation process of the 7NDP, for 
instance. However, there were no information mechanisms 
in place to learn which programmes of the NDP had 
received comments from civil society before, during and 
after implementation. Only comments on the holistic 
objectives of the plan were received. 
It was reported that the NDPs were made available to 
the public through the Ministry of National Development 
Planning ( MNDP) website and that some hard copies  
were disseminated across the country to all Ministries, 
Provinces and other Spending Agencies (MPSAs). Weak 
evidence was found that civil society exerted pressure on 
government for information about its performance in
<<<PAGE=6>>>
26 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
 
reducing poverty. Currently, there was limited demand for 
M&E data from non- state actors because their own M&E 
was not results oriented or evidence based. Civil society in 
Zambia was reported to be fragmented, especially when it 
came to participation in the WoGM&ES. At best, they 
were working as individual organisations and lacked 
collective bargaining in demanding results from the 
government and other development agencies. Even among 
themselves, CSOs failed to uphold high standards and 
practice for M&E at all levels. 
In addition, the WoGM&ES lacked a strategy  
for disseminating M&E outputs to the public and  
CSOs in particular. APRs were sporadically  disseminated 
to civil society. A fragmented arrangement was reported 
to be in place whereby dissemination of M&E products 
was done through the national development coordinating 
committee (NDCC), provincial development coordinating 
committees (PDCCs), district development coordinating 
committees (DDCCs) and cluster advisory groups  
(CAGs). There were plans to strengthen the knowledge 
and management function to include dynamic sharing of 
information across a broader spectrum of stakeholders and 
development players. Civil society was acknowledged as 
having participated in the preparation of line ministry 
strategic plans at those levels only to some limited  
extent. Not all strategic plans were subjected to wider 
consultations outside the sectors. 
The wide publication of M&E information in the media 
was not practised in the WoGM&ES. Overall, media data 
in Zambia (especially among government institutions) was 
apparently not focused on development performance 
reporting. As a consequence, this  led to challenges in 
information sharing across the WoGM&ES. However, 
only minimal M&E information on a few interventions 
was reported in the media (many times, restricted to 
infrastructure related development). This also happened 
when there were interests and motivation to pursue on the 
media side. In M&E, all information is expected to be 
published so that stakeholders may use it to discuss ways 
of improving development interventions. The lack of 
media involvement in the M&E architecture of the 
WoGM&ES f or Zambia did not resonate well with  
the broader agenda of good governance and popular 
participation in national development. Furthermore, it  
was established that civil society in Zambia did not 
communicate its data needs to the WoGM&ES. There was 
no forma l mechanism in place for M&E information 
sharing from CSOs to the WoGM&ES. 
4.3. Donors 
As for donors and development partners, the aspects 
assessed under the parliament and civil society were  
equally applicable. The component concerning donors was 
given a score of 2.0, entailing that M&E elements existed. 
Development partners (DPs) and donors are key players in 
the evolution of M&E  in countries [14,39] . Questions in 
the diagnostic checklist included: Is the role of donors 
recognised? Are there clear procedures for the participation 
of donors? Do donors participate in joint sector reviews 
and/ or other working groups? [40,41,42] . As with civil 
society, the role of donors in the WoGM&ES was 
recognised. To some extent, there were clear procedures 
for their participation. Donors were reported to participate 
in JSRs and technical working groups (TWGs) to a 
considerable level. In addition, the reviews of NDPs and 
APRs showed that although the role of donors was 
recognised and their participation institutionalised  in the 
context of CAGs and other bilateral and multilateral 
arrangements, their role in supporting the sustainability of 
M&E functions was weak and fragmented. Nonetheless, 
there was considerable acknowledgement of donor support 
to the strengthening of th e WoGM&ES through financial 
and technical assistance. However, this support was 
mainly conditional and inflexible, leading to  ownership 
and sustainability challenges [24,25,26,43]. But although 
this was acknowledged, there was lack of a structural 
arrangement with regard to the role of DPs. The review 
showed some evidence of donors participating in JSRs 
and meetings of CAGs. Surprisingly though, separate 
M&E systems that were implemented by DPs and donors 
(that is, to serve their own interests) were referred  to. This 
was regarded as undermining the ownership, strengthening 
and sustainability the of country’s WoGM&ES. 
Nevertheless, DPs were acknowledged as playing an 
important liaison role in the coordination framework of 
WoGM&ES. They were reported as provid ing incentives 
in the form of financial and technical assistance and 
encouraging government agencies (e.g. MPSAs)  to use 
information from the WoGM&ES [1,5,10,26]. But despite 
their positive role, DPs were reported as not using the 
WoGM&ES themselves. Thi s was partly because the 
WoGM&ES was in its infancy phase and had not 
meaningfully incorporated DPs in the system. These 
fragmentations and inconsistencies are weaknesses in the 
system. This was also reported as a reason for DPs not 
fully embracing the government system for M&E. No 
strong evidence was found in which DPs consistently used 
information from the WoGM&ES. It was reported that 
some DPs were not helping to strengthen the WoGM  & 
ES, but crowded out or weakened national accountability 
mechanisms through their partial participation and insistence 
on maintaining their own separate accountability mechanisms 
or M&E arrangements. 
The coordination of the demand for M&E data and 
information from DPs was reported to be weak. It was 
reported that financing from DPs towards M&E related 
activities was restricted to selected line ministries. Therefore, 
given the fragmented manner in which the M&E activities 
of DPs were coordinated, many aspects remained 
undeveloped. In terms of the influence from DPs on the 
functioning of the WoGM&ES, DPs still needed to help 
by providing (flexible or unconditional) financial support 
for rolling out the WoGM&ES. It was also established 
that the divergent M&E requirements of DPs contributed 
to a sense of territoriality among governm ent agencies, 
thereby discouraging smooth coordination of M&E 
activities in the WoGM&ES. There were cases such as the 
health sector in which each development partner wanted to 
develop its own database to provide information on 
indicators of their subject. When the types of M&E and 
reporting requirements for DPs were assessed, it was 
gathered that DPs needed government statistics and 
performance data for indicators for their own planning and 
resource allocation. Usually DPs demanded outcome and 
impact-level information, which the WoGM&ES was
<<<PAGE=7>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 27 
 
unable to generate systematically since national surveys 
were undertaken irregularly. Consequently, DPs used this 
gap to justify the maintenance of their parallel M&E 
systems for the projects they supported. 
For that reason, government was currently encouraging 
DPs to use national M&E arrangements and frameworks 
as a way of harmonising and strengthening the WoGM  
& ES. Again, this practice by DPs could undermine  
the building and sustaining of the WoGM&ES for  
the country. Ins tead of working to build and strengthen 
internal systems for M&E, DPs ultimately weakened  
the line ministry arrangements for M&E and the  
WoGM & ES. With regard to whether DPs used the 
WoGM&ES for their own monitoring and reporting  
needs, it was reported tha t this was not really the  
case. 
In terms of other mechanisms used by the DPs, it was 
reported that they engaged in dialogue meetings, which 
were held periodically, through quarterly and annual 
reviews (for example JARs in health and education 
sectors). Thu s DPs were reported to be influencing the 
operations of the WoGM&ES to some extent. For instance, 
sectors were allegedly influenced at times to focus on 
collecting data that were specific to the needs of DPs. As a 
result, data needed for the WoGM&ES to meet the needs 
of a wider audience was not collected. As to whether the 
demand for M&E information by DPs influenced the 
WoGM&ES in producing data and information, it was 
established that DPs usually financed the production of 
statistics and other information  types vital to their own 
planning, implementation and reporting requirements.  
It was also reported that DPs did not coordinate their 
M&E requirements among themselves. There were many 
parallel demands for statistics, data, information and 
reports from various DPs. 
5. Conclusion 
This research study was about determining the role non-
state actors played in strengthening the WoGM&ES for 
Zambia’s public sector. The focus was on investigating 
the involvement of parliament, civil society and donors in 
improving the functionality of Zambia’s WoGM&ES. 
Indeed, M&E has become the buzz phrase in the good 
governance agenda, the world over. Through functional 
M&E, development stakeholders hold a common view 
that pursuing goals and desired results become feasible. It 
is for that reason that governments, individual organisations 
and single interventions (projects & programmes) adopt 
M&E as a core function as they deliver goods and services 
to communities. 
The participation of actors outside government was 
found to be w eak and fragmented in both particular  
and general terms. While there were notable positive 
engagements from donors, parliament and civil society,  
a lot more remained to be done towards ensuring  
that the WoGM&ES for Zambia was favourable. For 
certain, these  actors were recognised as being critical 
stakeholders in improving both the supply side and 
demand side of the WoGM&ES fo r the public sector  
[44,45,46,47,48,49,50]. 
Recommendations 
Role of Parliament 
There is need to e nhance the oversight r ole of 
parliament at all levels of government business.  The study 
findings have shown that only weak and fragmented 
linkages existed be tween parliament and other levels of 
development structure across government . This is despite 
the National Assembly having a  constitutional mandate to 
represent the citizens in issues of development and human 
rights. Parliament makes laws and approves government 
spending. These roles and responsibilities give parliament 
a unique development mandate. For that reason, parliament’s 
role in M&E across the WoGM&ES becomes significant . 
Efforts through innovations and initiatives will need to be 
promoted so that functional linkages between parliament 
and all other levels of development are strengthened. Thus, 
there is need to have M&E products in the form of reports 
and interactive programmes to give parliament an opportunity 
to appreciate development changes across the WoGM&ES 
regularly. Parliament will also be required to restr ucture 
itself to respond to this emerging  challenge function. 
Essentially, this may compel redefining the roles and 
responsibilities of the parliamentary committees and 
creating new initiatives to support the M&E function 
within the National Assembly. 
Civil society 
To make civil society organisations (CSOs) key in 
strengthening M&E systems, there is need to e nsure 
collaboration and coordination mechanisms are functional  
between themselves and government.  CSOs are an 
important partner in the development process of Zambia. 
The work of CSOs has become more widespread as more 
organisations have come on board in recent years  
[1,17,18]. Among others, CSOs are involved directly in 
implementing development interventions in such sectors 
as education, agriculture, health, child protection, water 
and sanitation, and community resilience through supporting 
entrepreneurship among citizens. Other CSOs  lobby 
government and the donor community to act in needy 
communities so that people have access to decent lives. To 
that extent, it will be important that deliberate initiatives 
should be identified and implemented to strengthen the 
linkages between government and CSOs. In particular, 
M&E collaboration and coordination efforts betw een 
government and CSOs  will need to be strengthened. This 
may be achieved through undertaking a thorough needs  
assessment to identify practical coordination and collaboration 
points. CSOs will need reliable M&E information in their 
advocacy work and in implementing development 
interventions. Such collaboration will best be done at all 
levels of government business . Joint M&E plans and 
actions will be desired to support a functional WoGM&ES. 
A review and strengthening of the advisory bodies, at 
national, provincial, district and sub -district levels will be 
a good starting point. 
Donors 
To strengthen the role of  donors in supporting the 
WoGM&ES, there is need to develop a joint national 
M&E work plan . Such an M&E work plan would be a  
detailed framework that is fully elaborate and costed. As 
the study findings have shown, donors are involved in
<<<PAGE=8>>>
28 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
 
supporting the deve lopment of the WoGM&ES through 
provision of financial resources and technical services. 
However, owing to the lack of a common M&E action 
plan, which shows the areas of prioritised collaboration, 
the work of donors has not yielded much of the desired 
results. Financing and technically supporting a common 
plan for M&E will entail strengthening the WoGM&ES. 
Further, there is need to a void implementing parallel 
donor M&E systems: It was found in this study that 
donors were in the habit of maintaining their  own parallel 
M&E arrangements. This practice was reported as 
weakening the WoGM&ES, whereby, instead of collectively 
supporting the national system for M&E, donors spent 
money on creating information communications technology 
(ICT)-based systems that cate red only for their work 
related information needs. In the enhanced WoGM&ES, 
donors would be expected to work with government 
through a unified national M&E work plan -and ultimately 
in supporting the WoGM&ES. 
References 
[1] Wong, C. (2012). Toward Building Performance - Oriented 
Management in China: The critical role of Monitoring and 
Evaluation and the Long road Ahead (No. 27). The World Bank, 
Washington D.C. 
[2] Kanyamuna, V. (2019). Analysis of Zambia’s Whole- of-
Government Monitoring and Evaluation System in the context of 
National Development Plans. Doctorate Thesis. University of 
South Africa. 
[3] Booth, David, & Lucas, H. (2002). Good Practice in the 
Development of PRSP Indicators and Monitorin g Systems. 
Overseas Development Institute, London.  
[4] Chabane, C. (2013). The Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Public Service, Republic of South Africa -  The Presidency 
Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. Pretoria, 
South Africa. 
[5] Zaltsman, A. (2006). Evaluation Capacity Development: 
Experience with Institutionalizing Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems in Five Latin American Countries -  Argentina, Chile, 
Colombia, Costa Rica and Uruguay. Washington, D.C. 
[6] Hardlife, Z., & Zhou, G. (2013). Utilisation of monitoring and 
evaluation systems by development agencies: The case of  
the UNDP in Zimbabwe. American International Journal of 
Contemporary Research, 3(3), 70-83. 
[7] Hauge, A. O., & Mackay, K. (2004). Sharing best practices and 
lessons learned: Monitoring and Evaluation for Results -  Lessons 
from Uganda.  
[8] Hwang, H. (2014). Building Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity 
in young systems: The experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam and 
Yemen. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[9] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A., Ng’andu, E., Mizinga, C., & Mwale, 
A. (2018). An Assessment of the Demand -Side of the Monitoring 
and Evaluation System of the Health Sector in Zambia. World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 4(2), 75-86. 
[10] Mackay, K. (2006b). I nstitutionalizing of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems to Improve Public Sector Management. IEG 
World Bank, Washington DC. 
[11] Kanyamuna, V., Munalula, M., & Mulele, C. S. (2019). 
Monitoring and Evaluation Legislation in Zambia - Gap Analysis. 
International Journal of Humanities, Art and Social Studies 
(IJHAS), 4(1), 15-25. 
[12] Burdescu, R., Villar, A. del, Mackay, K., Rojas, F., & Saavedra, J. 
(2005). Institutionalizing Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: 
Five experiences from Latin America. Prem Notes, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[13] Castro, M. F. (2009). Insider Insights: Building a Results -Based 
Management and Evaluation System in Colombia. ECD Working 
Paper 18, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[14] Kusek, J. Z., & Rist, R. C. (2004). Ten Steps to  a Results-Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems. A Handbook for Development 
Practitioners. Washington D.C., World Bank: Washington D.C., 
World Bank. 
[15] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2016. 2015 
Annual Progress Report for the Revised Six th National 
Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred Economic Growth 
and Development. Lusaka: Ministry of National Development 
Planning. 
[16] GRZ. (2017b). Seventh National Development Plan (7NDP  
2017-2021), Accelerating Development Efforts towards Vision 
2030 without Leaving Anyone Behind (Vol. 1). 
[17] World Bank. (2003). “Toward Country -led Development: A 
Multi-Partner Evaluation of the Comprehensive Development 
Framework”, Synthesis Report. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[18] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A. & Kotze, D.A. (2020), Is the policy 
environment for Zambia supportive of thriving whole -of-
government monitoring and evaluation system? Advances in 
Social Sciences Research Journal, 7(1) 542-554. 
[19] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2009. Mid-Term 
Review of the Fifth National Development Plan 2006 -2010: Broad 
based wealth and job creation through citizenry participation and 
technological advancement. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and 
National Planning. 
[20] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Plan ning. 2010. Sixth 
National Development Plan 2011 -2015: Sustained Economic 
Growth and Poverty Reduction. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and 
National Planning. 
[21] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2012. 2011 
Annual Progress Report for the Sixth National Development Plan 
2011-2015: Sustainable Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction. 
Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[22] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2013. 2012 
Annual Progress Report for the Sixth National Development Plan 
2011-2015: Sustainable Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction. 
Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[23] GRZ. (2014). Revised Sixth National Development Plan  
2013-2016: People Centred Economic Growth and Development - 
Volume I. Ministry of Fiinance and National Planning, Lusaka, 
Zambia. 
[24] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2016. 2015 
Annual Progress Report for the Revised Sixth National 
Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred Economic Growth 
and Development. Lusaka: Ministry of National Development 
Planning. 
[25] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2017b. Seventh 
National Development Plan (7NDP 2017 -2021), Accelerating 
Development Efforts towards Vision 2030 without Leaving 
Anyone Behind (Vol. 1). Lusaka: Ministry of National Development 
Planning. 
[26] Kanyamuna, V. (2013). Sector Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems in the context of Poverty Reduction Strategies: A 
comparative case study of Zambia’s Health and Agriculture 
sectors. Masters Dissertation. University of Antwerp, Belgium. 
[27] Holvoet, N. & Renard, R. 2005. Putting the New Aid Paradigm to 
Work, Challenges for Monitoring and Evaluation, Discussion 
Paper No. 2. Institute of Development Policy and Management, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp.  
[28] Mackay, K., & Gariba, S. (2000). The role of Civil Society in 
assessing Public Sector Performance in Ghana: Proceedings of a 
workshop, ECD. The World Bank, Washi ngton, D.C.: The World 
Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[29] Mackay, Keith. (2006). Institutionalization of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems to Improve Public Sector Management. In 
ECD Working Paper Series. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[30] Mehrotra, S. (2013). The Government Monitoring and Evaluation 
System in India: A Work in Progress.  
[31] Morra Imas, L. G., & Rist, R. C. (2009). The Road to Results: 
Designing and Conducting Effective Development Evaluations. 
Washington, D.C., World Bank: Washington, D. C., World  
Bank. 
[32] Mubita, A., Mulonda, M., Libati, M., Mwale, N. & Kanyamuna 
(2017) Urban Informality and Small Scale Enterprise (SME) 
Development in Zambia: An Exploration of Theory and Practice, 
Journal of Behavioural Economics, Finance, Entrepreneurship, 
Accounting and Transport 5(1): 19-29. 
[33] Naidoo, I. (2010). Monitoring and Evaluation in South Africa. 
Many purposes, multiple systems. In M. Sergone (Ed.), From 
Policies to Results: Developing capacities for country monitoring
<<<PAGE=9>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 29 
 
and evaluation systems (pp . 303-320). New York: UNICEF: New 
York: UNICEF. 
[34] Kanyamuna, V., & Phiri, M. (2019) Who said Monitoring and 
Evaluation is not rooted in firm theoretical foundations? A review 
of relevant literature. International Journal of Humanities, Art and 
Social Studies, 1(4): 1-22.  
[35] Booth, David. (2005). Missing links in the politics of development: 
Learning from the PRSP experiment.  
[36] Bamberger, M. (2010). Institutionalising Impact Evaluation. A key 
element in strengthening country -led monitoring and evaluation 
systems. In M. Segone (Ed.), From Policies to Results: 
Developing capacities for country monitoring and evaluation 
systems. Geneva: UNICEF. 
[37] Bedi, T., Coudouel, A., Cox, M., Goldstein, M., & Thornton, N. 
(2006). Beyond the numbers : Understanding the institutions for 
monitoring poverty reduction strategies.  
[38] Tania, A., & Ronette, E. (2010). Implementing a government wide 
monitoring and evalution system in south africa. 
[39] Segone, M. ( Ed.). (2008). Bridging the gap: The role of 
Monitoring and Evaluation in evidence -based policy -making. 
UNICEF, Geneva.: UNICEF, Geneva. 
[40] Holvoet, N. & Inberg, L. 2011. Sector Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems in the Context of Changing Aid Modalities: Th e Case of 
Niger’s Health Sector, Working Paper 2. Institute of Development 
Policy and Management, University of Antwerp, Antwerp.  
[41] Kanyamuna, V., Kotzé, D. A. & Phiri, M. “Monitoring an  
Evaluation Systems: The Missing Strand in the African 
Transformational Development Agenda.” World Journal of Social 
Sciences and Humanities, 2019. 5(3): 160-175. 
[42] Kanyamuna, V., Kotzé, D. A. & Phiri, M. “Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems: The Missing Strand in the African 
Transformational Development Agenda.” World Journal of Social 
Sciences and Humanities, 2019. 5(3): 160-175. 
[43] World Bank. (2012). Designing a Results Framework for 
achieving Results: A How- To-Guide. IEG, Washington, DC.: IEG,  
Washington, DC. 
[44] Estrella, M., & Gaventa, J. (1997). Who Counts Reality? 
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation: A Literature Review. In 
International Workshop on Participatory Monitoring and 
Evaluation (Vol. 53).  
[45] Mulonda, M., Kanyamuna, V., & Kan enga, H. (2018). State- Civil 
Society Relationship in Zambia. International Journal of 
Humanities, Art and Social Studies (IJHAS), 3(4), 17-26. 
[46] Glady Lopez Acevedo, Katia Rivera, Lycia Rivera, L. L. & H. H. 
(2010). Challenges in Monitoring and Evaluation: An Opportunity 
To Institutionalize M&E Systems. Fifth Conference of the Latin 
America and the Caribbean Monitoring and Evaluation (M & E) 
Network, 204. 
[47] World Bank. (2012b). Improving the Quality of Public 
Expenditure through the use of Performance Inf ormation in 
Mexico. IEG, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[48] Görgens, M., & Kusek, J. (2009). Making Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems Work: A Capacity Development Toolkit. 
Washington DC, IBRD World Bank: Washington DC, IBRD 
World Bank. 
[49] Brushett, S. (1998). Evaluation Capacity Development in 
Zimbabwe : Issues and Opportunities. OED, World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[50] Republic of South Africa. (2007). Policy Framework for the 
Government-Wide Monitoring and Evaluation System. The 
Presidency, Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
 
© The Author(s) 2020. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
 
View publication stats