<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353992365
Towards Building a Functional Whole-of-Government Monitoring and
Evaluation System for Zambia: The Demand Side
Article  in   World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities · August 2021
DOI: 10.12691/wjssh-7-3-2
CITATIONS
4
READS
1,032
1 author:
Kanyamuna Vincent
University of Zambia
31 PUBLICATIONS   284 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Kanyamuna Vincent on 23 August 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2021, Vol. 7, No. 3, 83-105 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/wjssh/7/3/2 
Published by Science and Education Publishing 
DOI:10.12691/wjssh-7-3-2 
Towards Building a Functional Whole-of-Government 
Monitoring and Evaluation System for Zambia:  
The Demand Side 
Vincent Kanyamuna* 
School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Department of Development Studies, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia 
*Corresponding author:  
Received July 02, 2021; Revised August 05, 2021; Accepted August 16, 2021 
Abstract  Every monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is comprised of two sides — the supply side and the 
demand side. This study focused on the demand side of Zambia’s whole-of-government M&E system (WoGM&ES). 
It investigated the gaps that characterised the public sector system for M&E and proposed a new model for 
improving the demand side. Primary and secondary sources were used to collect data for the study. Questionnaires 
and interview guides are the instruments employed to collect information. Essentially, Zambia’s WoGM&ES was 
found to be very weak on the demand side. The system lacked a unified arra ngement for demanding and utilising 
M&E information. Government and non-government structures and institutions such as the presidency, parliament, 
line ministries, civil society, the academia and cooperating partners remained fragmented and uncoordinated in the 
manner they demanded for M&E information to feed into their internal development processes. The general public 
too had no clear means of engaging the public sector on development issues that affected them. In many cases, M&E 
reports were not in the reach of the public, making it difficult to engage. More so, political championship at the level 
of the Presidency and Cabinet ministers as well as at several technical levels across the public sector lacked in 
Zambia. To address the gaps, this paper is a p roposed blueprint for consideration by the Government of Zambia.  
The model proposes that Government implements the following to build and sustain the demand side: transform the 
Presidency and top government positions (political and technical) into M&E champions; promote the use of M&E 
information by the Presidency; link M&E to planning, budgeting and policy processes; promote the use of M&E 
information by parliament, civil society, academia, media and donors. Decentralised structures of government as 
well as the general public will also need to be stimulated on the acquisition and use of M&E information. Equally, 
Government would need to incentivise the strategic users of M&E information across the country. Another similar 
study has been conducted on the supply side of Zambia’s WoGM&ES. Evidence on both sides will be useful for 
building and sustaining Zambia’s WoGM&ES going forward! 
Keywords: whole-of-government monitoring and evaluation system , monitoring, evaluation, monitoring and 
evaluation system, LEADS, diagnostic checklist, demand-side, supply-side, good governance, Zambia 
Cite This Article:  Vincent Kanyamuna, “Towards Building a Functional Whole -of-Government Monitoring 
and Evaluation System for Zambia: The Demand Side .” World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, vol. 7, 
no. 3 (2021): 83-105. doi: 10.12691/wjssh-7-3-2. 
1. Introduction 
In Zambia, poverty has continued to undermine the 
lives of the majority citizens, both those in the rural and in 
urban areas. Statistics show that over sixty percent (60%) 
of Zambians live in abject poverty and of those, the 
majority dwell in rural as well as peri -urban areas.  
Others too dwell in urban slums. For that reason,  
good governance is desired in order to improve the  
socio-economic situation that was currently precarious. 
Most of the development indicators —social, political  
and economic were sh owing negative results. Monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) has increasingly become the 
cornerstone upon which good governance could be 
attained by governments and other development agencies. 
It is for that reason local and international development 
organisations including governments the world over were 
building, strengthening and sustaining their M&E systems. 
An M&E system denotes an institutional or organisational 
set-up comprising management plans, processes, strategies, 
information systems, indicators, rep orting lines, standards 
and accountability relationships, which allow development 
structures at national and provincial or regional levels 
such as departments, municipalities and other institutions 
to effectively perform their M&E functions [1,80,101]. 
Specifically, the Zambian Government, just like what 
was transpiring in other countries has in place a whole -of-
government monitoring and evaluation system 
(WoGM&ES). The system was set up to enhance public 
sector monitoring and evaluation activities, thereby
<<<PAGE=3>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 84 
contributing to the national poverty reduction agenda. [6] 
defines a WoGM&ES as a robust system that not only 
provides an integrated and all-encompassing framework of 
M&E practices, principles and st andards to be used 
throughout government institutional structures, but also 
functions as an apex- level system for information and 
draws from the component systems in a framework meant 
to deliver essential M&E products tailored to satis fy 
information needs of users. 
Further, several experts and practitioners in the field of 
M&E have articulated a number of key requirements for a 
successful WoGM&ES. These fundamentals have a 
holistic effect on functional country level M&E systems. 
Any national system for M&E that seeks to function to the 
satisfaction of its stakeholders requires two asp ects to be 
fully functional [2,18,55,64,80,86]. The two aspects are;  
a) the capacity to supply M&E  information, and b) the 
capacity to demand and use M&E information. The 
contention is that once these two aspects were fully 
developed, they would help to generate country -specific 
information and assist in identifying roles and 
responsibilities of stakeh olders in pursuit of building and 
sustaining a stronger WoGM&ES. When these two sides 
of an M&E system are strengthened, opportunities, 
limitations, and options for building and strengthening a 
realistic system for M&E are identifiable and remedial 
actions are determined. For Zambia, all these aspects were 
found by this research study to be weak in various degrees. 
Although some aspects were reported to be working fairly 
well, compared with others, the holistic status of the 
WoGM&ES still required fixing an d ownership by 
government institutions and citizens.  
This paper focuses on the demand -side of Zambia’s 
WoGM&ES. A separate study was done for the  
supply-side and the two research papers are recommended 
to be read together for a complete understanding of what 
the Zambian Government should consider in building and 
strengthening the public sector system for M&E. Thus, 
this research paper is a blueprint proposed model to 
enhance the WoGM&ES for Zambia. In addition, the 
insights herein can also be of use for o ther governments 
and other development agencies. Additionally, the model 
and study recommendations, when adopted and fully 
implemented will re -engineer the Zambian Government 
spirit of evidence-based poverty reduction agenda delivered 
using principles of sustainable development and inclusiveness. 
2. Study Background 
According to [10,14,29,46,55] , a country monitoring 
and evaluation system should deliver timely and reliable 
data and analysis to feed into the policy process. At th e 
same time, such a system must be able to create necessary 
demand for the M&E information which come in various 
products and forms. To accomplish this, it must include a 
range of functions that are specifically institutional in 
nature, including coordinat ion among data producers to 
establish a common set of indicators and eliminate gaps 
and redundancies; the development of common standards, 
procedures, and platforms; a strengthening of monitoring 
capacity across the government administration; the 
organisation of information flows among stakeholders 
inside and outside government; the compilation and 
analysis of data from various sources; data analysis and 
program/intervention evaluation; the generation of annual 
progress reports and other outputs; the provis ion of advice 
and support to policy makers; the dissemination of outputs 
across government and to the public; and the organization 
of the participation of civil society and parliament. 
Conceptually, these elements all form part of the national 
M&E system. However, it is important to recall that, at the 
outset, most of the actors involved will not recognise their 
activities as part of a national system. Whether they will 
participate vigorously in making the country M&E system 
operational depends largely on t heir interests and 
incentives. The rules, both formal and informal, that 
govern these incentives are therefore a key dimension of 
the country-level M&E system. 
Building and sustaining the demand side of a country’s 
WoGM&ES is not an easy undertaking. It re quires a great 
deal of capacity and determination from those who pursue 
the task [47,55,70,85,104] . The complexity of developing 
and strengthening the demand side comes in view of 
having in place many stakeholders who are expected to 
invest resources in building M&E systems to serve 
nationwide information needs. In the process, several 
systems may be created that work in parallel and at times 
in conflict, leading to problems of duplication and 
redundancies in data collection, gaps or imbalances in 
M&E, lack of data compatibility,  and poor information 
flows [31,32,33,52,55,66,67,80]. 
It is for the reasons above that aside from putting in 
place an effective institutional supply side, it is critical to 
build a robust demand side for an M&E system to operate 
successfully and  comprehensively. In fact, [59,83,105]  
warns, “effective demand is crucial and depends on many 
factors outside the scope of the WoGM&ES and cannot 
easily be institutionalised”. Certain fundamental elements 
constitute the demand side of an M&E system and are 
summarised below.  
a) Analysis and evaluation 
For an M&E  system to have a robust and well -
developed demand side, it is necessary to invest in the 
capacities to undertake quality analysis and evaluation of 
policies and programmes. If these practices are still in 
their infancy, an M&E system may introduce them in  
phases, for instance starting with the collection of quality 
data, followed by capacity building for analysis of data, 
and finally, the institutionalisation of the practice of 
utilising the data to evaluate policies and programmes 
[59,70,76,92,102]. 
b) Outputs and dissemination 
There should be commitment to the compilation and 
analysis of appropriate outputs of M&E information in 
readiness for their dissemination and distribution to a 
wider audience within and outside government. The 
ultimate usefulness of any M&E system is really the 
ability for its information to be utilised by stakeholders 
[5,89,90,91]. According to [59]  and [67], a good 
WoGM&ES will generate a range of outputs to meet the 
information needs of various audiences and will include a 
dissemination strategy that reaches all its intended users. 
For example, all development issues of relevance to local 
communities will be appropriately reported within suitable 
M&E outputs designed for the general public.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
85 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
c) Linking WoG -M&E system to planning and 
budgeting processes  
Creating a link between the WoGM&ES and the 
planning and budgeting processes is a powerful way o f 
generating demand fo r M&E [8,82,96,99,112] . For this 
reason, [3,4,98,113] assert that when agencies bid for 
public resources, this is an opportunity to ask them to 
justify their policies and plans, based on evidence 
provided by M&E data. For instance, in linking the 
WoGM&ES to the budget, care needs to be taken to avoid 
undesired effects. M&E data will not always be 
satisfactory and used to set annual priorities for 
expenditure. Attributing the results to spending could b e 
problematic, especially when multiple interventions could 
have influenced the results. For instance, if budget 
releases were unreliable, it could lead to difficulties in 
holding public sector implementers accountable for their 
performance. Consequently, simply because the 
responsible agency may have performed poorly at M&E, 
sanctions may be difficult to enforce since they might lead 
to cuts in funding for some interventions [6,12-15,58]. 
d) The role of parliament 
Parliaments should be key users of M&E information 
from poverty reduction interventions [18 -22,25,64,68]. 
However, in practical terms, parliaments have not been 
proactively involved in the activities of WoGM&ES 
[23,58,73,87]. Therefore, without a strong committee 
system, supported by experienced research staff, these 
parliaments are generally unable to engage effectively 
with the executive on policy issues [36,40,68,71] . As an 
example, public committee hearings on NDP implementation, 
based on annual progress reports (APRs) and other 
outputs, would help to raise the profile of a WoGM&ES. 
This process would be enhanced if the role of parliamentary 
committees was institutiona lised in the WoGM&ES or if 
technical and financial support was provided to parliament. 
To assist in interpreting data, parliamentarians may draw 
on expertise in civil society and academia, thus helping to 
forge useful alliances and broaden the inpu ts into the 
policy process [24,26,57-62,65]. 
 
e) Organising civil society participation 
CSOs can play various roles in a WoGM&ES as 
producers and users of M&E information. A WoGM&ES  
may therefore provide an opportunity to sustain 
participation of these actors over a longer period.  The 
extent and nature of civil society participation in a 
WoGM&ES varies considerably. For instance, where civil 
society is already highly mobilised around  development 
issues, popular participation in development policy tends 
to be well institutionalised and sometimes supported by 
legal mandates. On the other hand, where there is little 
tradition of civil society involvement in the policy process, 
building u p interest and capacity in such involvement 
must be a longer-term goal [10,58,66,75,78,103]. 
3. Methodological Approach 
In this research study, the main objective was to assess 
the functionality of Zambia’s WoGM&ES by tracking 
what works, what does not, and why in respect of  
the supply side and demand side. This was done to 
produce feasible suggestions for policy and legislative 
improvement and for further learning. Data were collected 
from reviews of secondary as well as primary data sources. 
Ultimately, the study was aimed at proposing a model for 
Zambia to build and sustain a stronger WoGM&ES which 
was going to inspire a generational transformation of  
good governance practices through evidence -based 
development. Particularly , the proposed model has 
attempted to give salient suggestions on how to  
re-structure and strengthen the demand -side fundamentals 
for Zambia’s WoGM&ES. 
The presentation of study findings follows the six 
components of the adopted diagnostic checklist as 
articulated by [36] . The six criteria or components of the 
country level M&E checklist include the following:  
i) policy, ii) methodology, iii) organisation, iv) capacity,  
v) participation of actors outside government, and vi) use 
of information from M&E (see Table 1).  
Table 1. Diagnostic Checklist for M&E at National Level  
No. Topic  Question  
 I. Policy 
1 The evaluation plan Is there a comprehensive evaluation plan, indicating what to evaluate, why, how, for whom? 
2 M versus E Is difference and relationship between M and E clearly spelled out? 
3 Autonomy and impartiality 
(accountability) 
Is the need for autonomy and impartiality explicitly mentioned? Does the M&E plan allow for tough 
issues to be analysed? Is there an independent budget? 
4 Feedback Is there an explicit and consistent approach to reporting, dissemination, integration? 
5 Alignment planning and budgeting Is there integration of M&E results in planning and budgeting? 
   
 II. Methodology   
6  Selection of indicators Is it clear what to monitor and evaluate? Is there a list of indicators? 
7 Selection criteria Are the criteria for the selection of indicators clear? And who selects? 
8 Priority setting Is the need acknowledged to set priorities and limit the number of indicators to be monitored? 
9 Causality chain Are different levels of indicators (input -output-outcome-impact) explicitly linked (programme theory)? 
(vertical logic) 
10 Methodologies used Is it clear how to monitor and evaluate? Are methodologies well identified and mutually integrated? 
11 Data collection Are sources of data collection clearly identified? Are indicators linked to sources of data collection? 
(horizontal logic)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 86 
No. Topic  Question  
 III. Organization 
12 Coordination & oversight Is there an appropriate institutional structure for coordination, support, central oversight, and feedback? 
With different stakeholders? 
13 Statistical Office Are surveys, censuses etc. streamlined into M&E needs? Is the role of the statistical office in M&E clear? 
14 Line Ministries Are there M&E  units in line ministries and semi -governmental institutions (parastatals), and are these 
properly relayed to central unit? 
15 Decentralised levels Are there M&E units at decentralised levels and are these properly relayed to central unit? 
16 Link with projects Is there any effort to relay with/coordinate with donor M&E mechanisms for projects? 
   
 IV. Capacity 
17 Problem acknowledged Are current weaknesses in the system identified? 
18 Capacity building plan Are there plans for remediation? Do these include training, appropriate salaries, etc. 
   
 I. Participation of actors outside government 
19 Parliament Is the role of Parliament properly recognised, and is there alignment with Parliamentary control and 
oversight procedures? 
20 Civil Society Is the role of civil society recognised? Are there clear procedures for the participation of civil society? Is 
the participation institutionally arranged or rather ad-hoc? 
21 Donors Is the role of donors recognised? Are there clear procedures for participation of donors? 
   
 VI. Use of information from M&E 
22 Effective use of M&E in APR Is there a presentation of relevant M&E results? Are results compared to targets? Is there an analysis of 
discrepancies? 
23 Internal usage of APR Is the APR also used for internal purposes? Is it an instrument of national policy -making and/or policy 
influencing and advocacy? 
Holvoet and Renard, 2005. 
 
Each criterion has a set of questions that are necessary 
to understanding the M&E  issues pertaining to it. The 
checklist has been prepared and articulated with a view to 
helping governments and other development stakeholders 
concerned with public sector -related M&E systems to 
examine the areas of weakness and strength and use such 
information to have targeted M&E reform agendas. The 
checklist was appropriate for use in this research study 
because the Zambian Government would benefit from the 
diagnostic results to strengthen the WoGM&ES. 
Further, the five -point LEADS system of scoring wa s 
used together with the checklist as a quantitative way of 
making the results analysis and discussion clearer. The 
LEADS scoring system has five-point categories: L (Little 
action: 1), E ( Elements exist: 2), A ( Action taken: 3), D 
(largely Developed: 4),  and S ( Sustainable: 5). The 
diagnostic checklist and the LEADS scoring system were 
used conjointly. Using the questions from the diagnostic 
checklist, data collection was done using semi -structured 
interviews through self-administered (survey) questionnaires, 
focus group discussions (FGDs) and key informants. 
Rigorous document review was also used (see Table 2). 
Table 2. LEADS scoring method for assessing country level M&E systems 
No. Dimension Question 
Scores 
1 2 3 4 5 
Key area/ Component 6: Use of information from M&E 
1 M&E 
outputs 
Is there a 
presentation 
of relevant 
M&E results? 
Are results 
compared to 
targets? Is 
there an 
analysis of 
discrepancies
? Is the M&E 
output 
differentiated 
to different 
audiences? 
There is no 
presentation 
of relevant 
M&E results. 
Results are 
not compared 
to targets. 
There is no 
analysis of 
discrepancies. 
The M&E 
output is not 
differentiated 
towards 
different 
audiences. 
 
There is a 
presentation 
of relevant 
M&E results. 
Results are 
not compared 
to targets. 
There is no 
analysis of 
discrepancies. 
The M&E 
output is not 
differentiated 
towards 
different 
audiences. 
There is a 
presentation of 
relevant M&E 
results. 
Results are 
compared to targets. 
There is limited 
analysis of 
discrepancies. 
The M&E output is 
not differentiated 
towards different 
audiences. 
There is a presentation of 
relevant M&E results. 
Results are compared to 
targets. 
There is analysis of 
discrepancies, but analysis 
is still weak. 
The M&E output is 
differentiated towards 
different audiences. 
or 
There is a presentation of 
relevant M&E results. 
Results are compared to 
targets. 
There is in-depth analysis 
of discrepancies. 
The M&E output is not 
differentiated towards 
different audiences. 
There is a 
presentation of 
relevant M&E 
results. 
Results are 
compared to targets. 
There is in-depth 
analysis of 
discrepancies. 
The M&E output is 
differentiated 
towards different 
audiences.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
87 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
2 
Effective 
use of 
M&E by 
developme
nt partners 
Are donors 
using the 
outputs of 
sector M&E 
systems for 
their 
information 
needs? Is the 
demand for 
M&E data 
from donors 
coordinated? 
Development 
partners are 
not using the 
outputs of the 
sector M&E 
system for 
their 
information 
needs. 
The demand 
for M&E data 
from 
development 
partners is not 
coordinated. 
Development 
partners are 
using the 
outputs of the 
sector M&E 
system for 
their 
information 
needs, but 
rather in an 
ad hoc way. 
The demand 
for M&E data 
from 
development 
partners is not 
coordinated. 
Development 
partners are 
systematically using 
the outputs of the 
sector M&E system 
for their information 
needs. 
The demand for 
M&E data from 
development 
partners is not 
coordinated. 
Development partners are 
using the outputs of the 
sector M&E system for 
their information needs, 
but rather in an ad hoc 
way. 
The demand for M&E data 
from development partners 
is well coordinated. 
or 
Development partners are 
systematically using the 
outputs of the sector M&E 
system for their 
information needs. 
The demand for M&E data 
from development partners 
is coordinated, but 
coordination could be 
improved. 
Development 
partners are 
systematically using 
the outputs of the 
sector M&E system 
for their 
information needs. 
The demand for 
M&E data from 
development 
partners is well 
coordinated. 
3 
Effective 
use of 
M&E at 
central 
level 
Are results of 
M&E 
activities used 
for internal 
purposes? Is 
it an 
instrument of 
policy-
making 
and/or policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at central 
level? 
Results of 
M&E 
activities are 
not used for 
internal 
purposes. 
It is not an 
instrument of 
policy-
making 
and/or policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at central 
level. 
 
Results of 
M&E 
activities are 
used for 
internal 
purposes, but 
rather in an 
ad hoc way 
It is an 
instrument of 
policy-
making, 
hardly of 
policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at central 
level. 
 
Results of M&E 
activities are 
systematically used 
for internal 
purposes. 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making, 
hardly of policy-
influencing and 
advocacy at central 
level. 
or 
Results of M&E 
activities are used 
for internal 
purposes, but rather 
ad hoc 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making and 
policy-influencing 
and advocacy at 
central level. 
Results of M&E activities 
are systematically used for 
internal purposes, but use 
could be more intense. 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making and/or 
policy-influencing and 
advocacy at central level. 
 
Results of M&E 
activities are 
systematically used 
for internal 
purposes. 
It is an instrument 
of policy-making, 
policy-influencing 
and advocacy at 
central level. 
 
4 
Effective 
use of 
M&E at 
local level 
Are results of 
M&E 
activities used 
for internal 
purposes? Is 
it an 
instrument of 
policy-
making 
and/or policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at local level? 
Results of 
M&E 
activities are 
not used for 
internal 
purposes. 
It is not an 
instrument of 
policy-
making 
and/or policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at local level. 
Results of 
M&E 
activities are 
used for 
internal 
purposes, but 
rather in an 
ad hoc way. 
It is an 
instrument of 
policy-
making, 
hardly of 
policy-
influencing 
and advocacy 
at local level. 
Results of M&E 
activities are 
systematically used 
for internal 
purposes. 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making, 
hardly of policy-
influencing and 
advocacy at local 
level. 
or 
Results of M&E 
activities are used 
for internal 
purposes, but rather 
in an ad hoc way. 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making and 
policy-influencing 
and advocacy at 
local level. 
Results of M&E activities 
are systematically used for 
internal purposes, but use 
could be more intense. 
It is an instrument of 
policy-making and/or 
policy-influencing and 
advocacy at local level. 
 
Results of M&E 
activities are used 
for internal 
purposes. 
It is an instrument 
of policy-making 
and/or policy-
influencing and 
advocacy at local 
level. 
 
5 
Effective 
use of 
M&E by 
outside 
governmen
t actors 
Are results of 
M&E used as 
an instrument 
to hold 
government 
accountable? 
Results of 
M&E are not 
used as an 
instrument to 
hold 
government 
accountable. 
Results of 
M&E are 
used as an 
instrument to 
hold 
government 
accountable, 
but only 
limitedly and 
only by a few 
outside 
government 
actors. 
Results of M&E are 
used as an 
instrument to hold 
government 
accountable, but 
only by a few 
outside government 
actors. 
Results of M&E are used 
as an instrument to hold 
government accountable by 
several outside government 
actors, but use could be 
more intense. 
Results of M&E are 
intensively used as 
an instrument to 
hold government 
accountable by 
several outside 
government actors. 
Source: Adapted from Holvoet, Inberg and Sekirime, 2013.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 88 
4. Summary Presentation of Research 
Findings 
Country level monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
systems have two sides —supply and demand. For a 
system to function properly, both sides mu st be fully 
operational. On one hand, the supply side should be able 
to provide relevant information to meet the needs of 
various stakeholders. Through evidence -based decision 
and policy making processes, the supply side of an M&E 
system becomes essential source of information. On the 
other hand, the demand side is what incentivises the 
supply side by seeking for information required in 
decision and policy making processes. In that regard, both 
sides are supposed to be well developed to enable an 
M&E system to be relevant to the development process of 
an organisation. 
Table 3 presents the results of the assessment of 
Zambia’s WoGM&ES to illustrate the status of the public 
sector M&E system. It gives a summary of the Zambian 
public se ctor M&E system as diagnosed in the study. 
Although the study used the qualitative approach, this 
quantitative scoring system was employed to provide 
substance analysis and arrive at areas of improvement for 
the system. 
Table 3. Summary presentation of diagnostic results 
No. COMPONENT TOPIC SCORES 
1 POLICY 2.2 
  
M&E plan 2 
M versus E 2 
Autonomy & impartiality (accountability) 2 
Feedback 3 
Alignment to planning & budgeting 2 
2 METHODOLOGY 2.9 
  
Selection of indicators 2 
Quality of indicators 3 
Disaggregation 3 
Selection criteria 3 
Priority setting 2 
Causality chain 3 
Methodology used 3 
Data collection 4 
3 ORGANISATION 1.9 
 a) Structure  1.6 
  
Coordination & oversight 2 
Joint sector reviews 1 
Sector working groups 2 
Ownership 2 
Incentives 1 
 b) Structure  2.2 
  
Linkage with statistical office 3 
‘Horizontal’ integration 2 
‘Vertical’ upward integration 2 
‘Vertical’ downward integration 1 
Link with projects 3 
4 CAPACITY  2.0 
  
Present capacity 2 
Capacity building plan 2 
Problem acknowledged 2 
5 PARTICIPATION OF ACTORS OUTSIDE GOVERNMENT 2.0 
  
Parliament 2 
Civil Society 2 
Donors 2 
6 USE OF INFORMATION FROM M&E OUTPUTS 1.4 
  
Outputs 2 
Effective use of M&E by donors 1 
Effective use of M&E at central level 2 
Effective use of M&E at local level 1 
Effective use of M&E by actors outside of Government 1 
Source: Diagnostic study score results compiled by author (2021).
<<<PAGE=8>>>
89 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
The level of implementation status for the components 
of Zambia’s WoGM&ES varies across the criteria as 
shown in Table 4 . Although the results in Table 3  above 
show variances across the 34 sub -components/topics, it is 
interesting to observe how the overall picture varies from 
‘little action taken’  to ‘elements exist’ and ultimately to 
‘action taken’. None of the dimensions scored ‘ largely 
developed’ (4) or ‘sustainable’ (5).  
Table 4. Status of Zambia’s Whole-of-Government Monitoring and 
Evaluation System 
Dimension Status of implementation 
on LEADS scoring system 
Policy 2 Elements exist 
Methodology 3 Action taken 
Organisation 2 Elements exist 
Capacity 2 Elements exist 
Participation of actors outside 
government 2 Elements exist 
Use of information from M&E 1 Little action 
Average status of implementation 2 Elements exist 
Source: Scores from study findings compiled by author (2021) 
[NOTE: For ease of scoring and comparability, the scores have been 
rounded up to the nearest whole number. For example, the 2.2 score for 
the policy dimension is 2.0, the methodology dimension becomes 3.0, 
and so on]. 
 
Overall, the diagnostic results indicate th at the 
methodology component of Zambia’s WoGM&ES is 
comparatively more developed with a score of 2.9 
(rounded to 3) out of a possible total of 5, while the least 
developed component is the use of information from 
M&E outputs  at 1.4 (rounded to 1). This dem onstrates a 
weakness on the demand side of Zambia’s WoGM&ES. 
The organisation dimension (structure and linkages 
combined) had a score of 1.9, which was closer to those 
for capacity and participation of actors outside 
government (both have a score of 2) . The policy 
dimension scored 2.2. Although it was compiled 
holistically, the results reveal important dynamics. For the 
methodology component, five sub- topics scored 3 points 
(that is, quality of indicators, disaggregation, selection 
criteria, causality chain and methodologies), signi fying 
that important M&E actions had been taken in this 
dimension across the WoGM&ES. The data collection 
sub-component scored the highest (4 points), meaning it 
was the most developed under the methodology dimension, 
while the selection of indicators and priority setting  
sub-components scored 2 points, meaning that only 
elements of M&E existed for those aspects of the 
methodology dimension.  
The next relatively well developed component was 
policy (with 2.2 score), but a closer look at the intra  
sub-component dynamics gave notable aspects of 
analytical interest. For example, while the topic on 
feedback has a score of 3 points (action taken), the rest of 
the sub -components (M&E plan, M
&E, autonomy and 
impartiality, and alignment with planning and budgeting)  
scored 2 points each. This may mean that although the 
policy component seems to be fairly or well developed at 
a 2.2 -point score, Zambia’s WoGM&ES fared poorly in 
its accountability function. This is also true of the  
sub-dimensions of alignment of M&E wi th planning and 
budgeting processes (a 2-point score).  
All three actors, namely parliament, civil society and 
donors, had a 2- point score each for the component of 
participation of actors outside government (with overall 
score of 2 points). This signifies  that only elements of 
M&E existed in these development actors and ultimately 
could mean that their participation and contribution to 
matters related to the WoGM&ES were weaker. The 
capacity dimension also had an overall 2 -point score (that 
is, only M&E el ements existed). It is worrisome to note 
that all three sub-components under this dimension (that is, 
present capacity, problems acknowledged and capacity 
building plan) possessed only elements of M&E and none 
was largely developed (4) or sustainable (5). The second 
lowest scoring component was the organisation  dimension 
(combining structure and linkages) with an aggregated 
score of 1.9. Organisational linkages scored better, with an 
average 2 -point score, than the organisational structure, 
with an average score of 1.6.  
For the component  of use of information from M&E 
outputs, the diagnostic results show that while M&E 
outputs may be available, their access and utilisation for 
management functions remain challenging across 
government structures and institutions outside government. 
Thus, the effective use of M&E outputs at local or 
decentralised levels scored a dismal 1 point (little M&E 
action was taken). Similarly, the effective use of M&E 
outputs by actors outside government scored 1 point, 
while the use o f M&E at central level had a 2 -point score. 
Again, these low scores suggest that currently the 
WoGM&ES did not inspire the demand for and utilisation 
of M&E information for decision-  and policy -making 
processes by key stakeholders in the country.  
In all, the presentation of these results opened up a 
number of discussion points. The positive aspects and the 
gaps would both stimulate opportunities to identify and 
strengthen aspects of Zambia’s WoGM&ES. Taking time 
to consider these aspects in the assessment would generate 
critical action points such as this proposed model to 
strengthen the demand side. A separate study to build and 
strengthen the M&E supply side of Zambia’s WoGM&ES 
has also been undertaken.   
5. Demand Side Monitoring and 
Evaluation Proposed Model  
For Zambia to build, strengthen and sustain its 
WoGM&ES, deliberate and consistent steps will be 
inevitable. Holistically, the transformational improvements 
and accompanying M&E reforms will be needed at two 
levels of the overall WoGM&ES, namely transforming the 
supply side, and transforming the demand side. Therefore, 
this study recommends a robust transformation of the 
demand side. However, building and sustaining a 
functional system for M&E on the demand side, just like 
on the supply side, has to be gradual and incremental 
because it is a complex task. It demands detailed 
knowledge across sectors, and of interactions among 
planning, budgeting, and implementation functions in the 
public sector. The matter is complicated even further 
whenever the machinery of government is decentralised, 
with powers and functions shared and spread across the 
three spheres of government —executive, legislature and
<<<PAGE=9>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 90 
judiciary. It is precisely this kind of complex 
intergovernmental structure, with diffuse powers and 
functions, which requires strong M&E systems to promote 
coordination and prevent fragmentation as a country 
thrives to achieve good governance and poverty reduction.  
Model synopsis 
The rationale of this proposed model is premised on the 
need to put in place fiv e (5) functionality dimensions 
meant to improve the M&E coordination function: 
a)  Clarity on the common purpose of implementing a 
WoGM&ES  
b)  The Zambian governance structure  
c)  Independent evaluation structure  
d)  Government-wide integrated ICT infra structure and 
arrangements   
e)  Decentralised and integrated national statistical 
system  
a) Clarity on the common purpose of implementing a 
WoGM&ES  
Why is the Zambian government motivated to build, 
strengthen and sustain a functional WoGM&ES? This 
question is important if the country’s system for M&E is 
to be built on solid ground. Responses to the question will 
trigger all sorts of operational questions: What? How? 
When? Who? Zambia is among the poorest countries of 
the world and is plunged in the vicio us cycle of 
deprivation and want. Efforts by government and citizens 
should be towards emancipating the country from this dire 
situation. Poverty levels are currently high and increasing 
at over 60%, as is unemployment, especially among the 
youth and women, and inequalities, yet the country still 
depends on the mono economy of copper.  
In building and strengthening its WoGM&ES, Zambia, 
like any other country, will need to provide a commonly 
shared justification for embarking on such effort.  The 
purpose must be widely appreciated and stakeholder  
buy-in built so that the implementation process is not a 
preserve of one agency, but of the entire government 
machinery. For instance, many factors led the South 
African government to recognise the n eed for a 
government-wide monitoring and evaluation (GWM&E) 
system. Among other reasons, the government of South 
Africa faced an increasing emphasis on service delivery 
and the gathering of non -financial information, in pursuit 
of gr eater value for money s pent [7,9,17,56,72,77,111]. 
This model contends that while the Zambian government 
may be certain about the purpose of implementing  
the WoGM&ES (even in a fragmented manner, as found 
in this study), the current weak position mus t be 
reconsidered. A thorough process of broad- based 
advocacy among key stakeholders on the need to build a 
robust evidence -based WoGM&ES becomes inevitable. 
Doing so will be useful in that investing in such a system 
will not only be expensive in terms of resources, but in 
building consensus among the citizens and institutions that 
are critical to owning and sustaining such a system in the 
long term. This model challenges the status quo of being 
comfortable in implementing the current WoGM&ES in a 
fragmented manner where key government structures such 
as line ministries, provinces and districts could not show 
common understanding of the WoGM&ES. Various and 
varying definitions of the system (WoGM&ES) were 
given with misinterpretation and even misunderstandin gs 
of what it is intended to achieve. For such reasons, when a 
clearly and commonly shared position on the common 
meaning, rationale, objectives and goal of a functional 
WoGM&ES are attained, Zambia will be on a sustainable 
path towards a successful system. 
b) Zambian governance structure 
It is crucial to appreciate the structure of the Zambian 
governance system. The development process is facilitated 
by the governance structure as enshrined in the national 
constitution. Thus, the WoGM&ES is proposed to be 
anchored on the Zambian Constitution, backed by all 
appropriate current laws and those to be enacted in future. 
The system should be well linked to all the three arms of 
government, namely executive, judiciary and legislature, 
as shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. Three branches of the Zambian governance system (Source: Grade 7 Social Studies, Longman Zambia Educational Limited, 2017, p. 21)
<<<PAGE=10>>>
91 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
Figure 1  shows the three branches of government, 
which work in complementarity in service of the Zambian 
population. Their core roles are as follows: The legislature  
makes the laws of the country and controls the executive. 
The executive runs the country according  to its laws, and 
makes decisions for the country. It is also called the 
government. The judiciary makes sure that the laws of the 
country were obeyed through the courts.  
c) Independent evaluation structure  
This model recommends in the strongest possible  way 
the creation of a separate, autonomous, neutral and 
independent institution mandated with the responsibility 
of conducting ‘strategic national evaluations’ in Zambia. 
Currently, the evaluation role is at its weakest or, worse 
still, ‘non-existent’. Yet, the evaluation function is the 
most critical part of any successful WoGM&ES 
[15,27,68,71,82,87,92]. For Zambia, it is not surprising 
that the situation of a weak evaluation culture is like this, 
because the reason for puttin g an M&E system in place 
was driven mostly by the World Bank and IMF during the 
implementation of the PRSP programme between 2000 
and 2004. If the demand had been internally driven and 
owned, probably practices such as embedding a strong 
‘evaluative culture’ within the current weak WoGM&ES 
would be addressed. Although this view seems to be far -
fetched for Zambia, it remains the correct and feasible 
way to proceed —establishing an independent evaluation 
office.  
Countries that are seen to be implementing succ essful 
WoGM&ES with strong ‘evaluation’ cultures embedded 
in them include Colombia, Mexico, Chile, South Africa, 
Indonesia, Canada and Australia [16,17,48,52,81,84,88,94]. 
These countries are reported to have built strong 
evaluative functions as a starting point when creating their 
systems for M&E and have invested time and resources to 
strike a balance between strengthening the supply and 
demand sides of their systems. Similarly, this model 
proposes that since Zambia’s WoGM&ES was still at its 
embryonic stage, it is important that the culture and 
practice of evaluation within the system are embraced. But 
as this effort is being embarked on, serious buy -in from 
the political leadership and the civil service must lead the 
transformational shift. As in these best practice countries, 
setting up a separate structure for undertaking strategic 
national evaluations would be inevitable and an effort in 
the right direction. But the location of this structure must 
be given operational and r esource independence to give it 
‘teeth’ by producing evidence for improvement of service 
delivery in the public sector.  
d) Government-wide integrated information technology 
and communications infrastructure  
To have in place a functional WoGM&ES, this mod el 
proposes restructuring and strengthening the current 
information technology and communications (ICT)  
set up across the public sector. Accordingly, all the four 
operational levels of government will need to host ICT 
portals, which will be data and infor mation gateways  
that feed into the national and provincial databases.  
ICT improvement will serve as a powerful enabler 
towards integrating systems and sub -systems, which will 
ultimately help create a holistic WoGM&ES. However, 
the findings in this study have shown that currently the 
evolution of ICT to support the WoGM&ES is at its 
weakest. Nevertheless, this model contends that if 
progress was to be made, government may have no 
alternative but to invest meaningfully in the ICT sector to 
support a robust M&E function in the country. The Smart 
Zambia Institute (SZI) initiative is a positive starting point. 
However, there is need for the institution to expand to all 
operational areas of government to support and host the 
WoGM&ES ICT component.  
Figure 2 below shows the ICT infrastructural arrangements 
that need to be introduced and strengthened throughout the 
government structures. The proposal is to have two 
functional ICT aspects, a portal for official data entry, and 
a database for  data and information storage. These are 
proposed to be placed at every operational level of the 
WoGM&ES (that is, presidency, national, line ministry, 
provincial and district level). Effectively therefore, these 
ICT infrastructures are proposed to be synchronised with 
the statistical functions at all levels. This entails that for 
all the statistical information collected by CSO across the 
country will need to sit on these ICT platforms or be 
functionally linked. Current statistical arrangements will 
need to be restructured to meet the proposed institutional 
and information system design, particularly in terms of 
ICT and other resource capacities, such as human, 
financial, material and skills. 
 
Figure 2. Government M&E and information communication technology portals
<<<PAGE=11>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 92 
In Figure 2 the linkage relationships that are portrayed 
between levels (shown by arrows) are important. In terms 
of the M&E championship, it is proposed th at more effort 
in inculcating the culture and practice of results evolves 
from the presidency, to national level institutions, to line 
ministries, to provinces, and all the way to district and 
sub-district level. At the same time, ICT -aided M&E and 
statistical portals as well as databases will flow 
downwards from district level, feeding into provincial, 
line ministry, national and finally into the evaluation 
database. In addition, institutions at each level will be 
responsible for maintaining databases and utilising the 
information for their decision- making processes. Through 
this kind of interaction and operation, it is seen as a 
practical approach to building and sustaining a stronger 
supply- and demand- side and ultimately the WoGM&ES 
for the Zambian public sector.  
e) Decentralised and integrated National Statistical 
System  
Promising efforts to re -engineer the operations of the 
Central Statistical Office (CSO) have been reported.  
These efforts are proposed in the draft national strategy 
for the developm ent of statistics (NSDS) 2014 -2018  
and the National Statistical System (NSS). However, it 
was gathered that the current linkages and functional 
relationships between the WoGM&ES and the NSS  
are weak and fragmented. There are apparently no 
deliberate stru ctural arrangements to strengthen the 
desired complementary roles and responsibilities of the 
WoGM&ES and NSS. Yet, a successful WoGM&ES 
needs to be anchored effectively on a stronger NSS. Data 
and information need to flow between these systems  
and used i n informing developmental decisions and 
policy-making processes.  
Thus, this model presupposes that not much progress 
will be made towards building and sustaining a 
WoGM&ES for Zambia’s public sector without having a 
corresponding NSS in place. To that ext ent, just as the 
WoGM&ES is proposed to be strengthened by having 
functional elements in all structures of government at 
national, line ministry, provincial and districts level, so 
should the NSS. More so, focus should be not only on 
putting these M&E and statistical functions in place, but 
on their sustainable collaborations and integration. To 
have a responsive NSS, it should be enhanced in terms of 
possessing critical components such as data suppliers and 
users, other data producers and permanent trainin g 
facilities for continued capacity building. Therefore, the 
model supports the components of the NSS as proposed in 
the NSDS (see Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3. Components of the National Statistical System (Source: Central Statistical Office, National Strategy for the Development of Statistics, 2014, p. 
2. Key: NSO: National Statistics Office; CSO: Central Statistical Office) 
 
The model takes into account the current set up, in which the leadership and coordinating roles of M&E and statistics 
at national level are under the mandate of the MNDP. This arrangement needs to exist for better collaboration and to 
cement both roles (th at is, M&E and statistics). The model also proposes strengthening the legislation at all levels to 
ensure that this relationship and functionalities of the WoGM&ES and the NSS are developed and sustained. This will 
entail having in place a common policy and law that spells out these intentions and functionalities. In the absence of a 
common legislation, efforts need to be made to harmonise existing ones, because it is only when roles and responsibilities 
are clearly understood from a policy level and through legal provisions that the implementation process would be feasible. 
This model considers that M&E and statistical functions need to be seriously defined and harmonised across all structures 
of government as conceptualised in Figure 4.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
93 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
 
Figure 4. Harmonising statistical monitoring and evaluation across government structures
5. Strengthening the Demand Side 
The utilisation of information from M&E is probably 
the most important element that every system for M &E 
should seek to attain and maintain. The demand side of an 
M&E system motivates investments and commitments 
that strengthen the supply side. “The demand side can be 
strengthened by promoting greater awareness of, and 
confidence in, the monitoring informa tion and evaluation 
findings which the system produces―awareness among 
ministers, civil servants, and in civil society. Greater 
utilisation of M&E information will require that key 
ministers and their ministries―especially the presidency 
and all apex institutions play a leading and even forceful 
role in championing the usefulness of the M&E 
information produced by WoGM&ES” [55] . Once  
there is evidence and assurance that information from 
M&E processes will be used, the supply side should  
be incentivised and preoccupied in preparing and 
disseminating this information for the use by needy 
stakeholders. Therefore, similar to the supply side, the 
demand side involves a number of aspects. Below  
are the prescribed solutions for consideration on the 
demand side of Zambia’s WoGM&ES as proposed in this 
model.  
a) Use of monitoring and evaluation  information by the 
presidency 
The continuous request for and use of M&E 
information by the presidency form s the basis for this 
model’s success. As a champion of the results -based 
management (RBM), the presidency would be expected to 
play a significant role in supporting a strengthened M&E 
through consuming information from M&E. If the 
presidency systematically  asks for evidence from the 
implementation of NDPs, a culture of results would 
quickly spread across government and beyond. This 
demand for M&E information from the highest office 
would strengthen the WoGM&ES. Like in Colombia, the 
President uses M&E infor mation to enhance political 
control of the executive arm of government as well as in 
his weekly town hall meetings in different municipalities 
around the cou ntry [29,53,55,95,100,114,115]. For 
Zambia, commitment to using M&E in formation by the 
presidency would necessitate a transformational agenda 
towards good governance resulting from evidence -based, 
transparent and accountable development process. The 
findings of this study have shown that the Presidency did 
not have in place an institutionalised way of demanding 
for high quality performance results from MPSAs. 
b) Linking monitoring and evaluation to planning, 
budgeting and policy processes  
The diagnostic review showed that Zambia’s 
WoGM&ES provides regular information about  inputs, 
activities and outputs. This information was provided by 
institutions at national, line ministry, provincial and 
district level through monthly, quarterly and annual 
reports. However, this research study found weak 
evidence for the full utilisation of M&E information to 
inform planning, budgeting and policy -making processes. 
[33,37,38,39,58,113] made a similar observation when 
they stated that “the challenge lies in generating demand 
for information in a country where information and 
analysis are rarely used in decision making”. The use of 
information to inform policy decisions at various levels of 
government was mixed. While several policies were being 
formulated and others reviewed across government,  
there was little evidence of utilising M&E information. 
The same result was true for the utilisation of M&E 
information in budgeting processes. For instance,  
MOF confirmed that it was difficult to obtain information 
about the ways in which MPSAs utilised fund allocations 
from the previous period. Similarly, although many  
line ministries and other spending agencies made  
their financial reports ava ilable, they were incomplete. 
Surprisingly, no structured sanctions had been implemented 
to take such institutions to task. This was attributed 
mainly to ‘political’ interference from higher offices (that 
is, according to study findings) and the general la ck of 
structured demand for M&E information in government. 
However, for planning processes, the study findings 
showed scanty evidence of the use of M&E information 
and in a fragmented manner. M&E products such as APRs, 
NDP evaluation reports, and other ins titutional reports 
were reported of being used to inform the preparation of 
NDPs.  
This model therefore proposes serious reconsideration 
of the manner in which processes of planning, budgeting 
and policy making were done vis -à-vis the use of M&E 
information. Most importantly, these processes are 
supposed to benefit from the mandatory utilisation of
<<<PAGE=13>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 94 
M&E information. It is therefore submitted that whenever 
these processes are undertaken at any level, M&E 
information should be demanded and used to determine 
progress. This demand for M&E products by leaders and 
users at all levels will continuously pressurise the supply 
side to provide the much needed information for these 
processes. In the end, Zambia’s WoGM&ES will thrive 
and become dependable source of eviden ce for 
development processes within government and outside.   
Among others, to actualise the use of M&E, APRs 
presents an opportunity for MPSAs to undertake annual 
public expenditure reviews. Thus during the APR 
preparation process, budget expenditure data and 
information could be provided by MPSAs and in- depth 
analysis done. By so doing, all successive APRs would 
offer M&E information that was readily available for 
decision and policy makers. Thus, the current situation, as 
found in this study, that M&E in formation from APRs 
was rarely used to inform budgetary and policy making 
would be past experience and point of future learning. 
When those changes occur, MOF will be able to state how 
APR expenditure information was feeding into the 
subsequent budgeting p rocesses. Regardless of whether 
the annual expenditure information was positive  
or negative, it would be justified. Furthermore, the APR  
as an M&E product will then provide expenditure 
information for use by key stakeholders to pressurise 
government to re-engineer the annual budget architecture.  
c) Use of Monitoring and evaluation information by 
parliament 
Parliament plays a significant role in the development 
process of Zambia through its oversight function and 
mandate to make laws that govern the count ry. Parliament 
deliberates and approves the estimates of expenditures 
(that is, national budgets) for government. It is therefore 
prudent to have a sound linkage between parliament and 
the WoGM&ES or better understood, parliament to form 
part of the WoGM&E S. The information generated from 
the national M&E system should feed into the decisions 
and development processes of the National Assembly. In 
the same manner, the works of parliament should be 
reported back into the country system for M&E so that 
evidence-based management is not the preserve only of 
the executive and the judiciary branches of government, 
but of all the three arms, including the legislature. To that 
extent, this model advocates for a practically oriented 
approach to involving parliament in  strengthening 
Zambia’s WoGM&ES. On the demand side, parliament 
will have clearly defined M&E roles and products that are 
useful to its operations and how it will in return give 
feedback to the WoGM&ES.  
Nevertheless, the findings showed that the utilisati on of 
M&E information by parliament was weak, ad hoc and in 
many ways non- existent. The lack of institutionalised 
M&E structures and products in parliament and across the 
WoGM&ES has led to these poor findings. Issues of 
M&E capacity, ranging from systemic, technical skills and 
financial resources, were found to be inhibiting, thus, 
causing low demand for M&E information by parliament. 
Equally, leadership that consistently promotes functional 
M&E at parliament was not in place. Therefore, many 
critical ques tions remain unanswered. For instance,   
in the absence of structured M&E information, what 
evidence guides parliamentary proceedings and the 
business of various parliamentary committees? Budgetary 
considerations form a key role of parliament, but, devoid 
of evidence of high analytical value, how do members of 
parliament and government engage prudently? What 
information is available for every parliamentarian to equip 
him or her with evidence-based debates and representation 
of the masses?  
In resolving these  challenges and in ensuring that 
parliament becomes a practical stakeholder in the 
WoGM&ES, a number of actions have to be embarked on. 
An inclusive M&E culture that supports a ‘results-focused 
development process’ is required to be put in place. 
Undoubtedly, Zambia will need to complete the 
formulation and launch of the National Monitoring and 
Evaluation Policy (NM&EP). This policy must be 
comprehensive in its scope, definition and content so that 
all development stakeholders see themselves as active 
players in its successful implementation. In the same 
manner, an act of parliament is vital for a sustainable 
WoGM&ES for the Zambian public sector. Aside from 
the national level policy environment, parliament will 
need its own policy position for its M&E functions and 
practice. Drawing from the national M&E policy 
provisions and the supportive legislation, parliament will 
be expected to create M&E structures at apex level, and at 
all levels of its operations, including constitutional offices 
across the country.  These decentralised functions will be 
harmonised and linked up with other structures of the 
WoGM&ES at all levels.  
Further, for this to occur, strong leadership that fully 
supports a transformational M&E agenda will be needed 
in parliament to work as a ‘ champion’ to continuously 
demand for a strengthened M&E function with parliament 
and across the country. Additionally, parliament will 
require investment in skills development pertaining to 
M&E. This will mean articulating a thorough capacity -
building plan . This plan would best be a product of a 
diagnostic process, a needs assessment that would 
holistically benefit from what is currently working, not 
working and possibly why. To that extent, such an 
assessment should cover all aspects of a functional M&E 
system, for instance checking for current ICT support, 
skills, availability of budget for M&E, leadership, M&E 
information demand, institutional set up, and linkages 
with other MPSAs.  
d) Use of monitoring and evaluation information by 
civil society  
Civil s ociety is a key stakeholder in the development 
process of Zambia. The interest of civil society 
organisations (CSOs) is to ensure that government  
efforts lead to poverty reduction for the majority poor 
citizens. Essentially, CSOs function as checks and 
balances on the services of government as providers of 
development services to the people. Most of their work is 
advocacy and championing good governance tenets of 
accountability and transparency. CSOs are believed to be 
fair representatives of the people an d their partnerships 
with government are seen as important success factors. 
When CSOs are involved in key processes such as 
planning, budgeting and policy making, this is regarded  
as a desired state of participatory and inclusive 
development.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
95 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
The role of civil society remains significant in the 
development process of Zambia. This was established in 
this study. CSOs were reported to have taken part in 
development processes of Zambia. In a number of 
processes, most prominently their involvement in the 
planning process and in poverty monitoring featured in the 
study findings. Recently, CSOs were part of the major 
stakeholders in the preparation of the 7NDP (2017- 2021). 
In the recent past, they played an important role in the 
constitution-making process for the  country. Their 
continued voice in democratic and electoral issues is 
another aspect in which CSOs have rendered useful input. 
In addition, CSOs were reported to be providing 
constructive input and feedback for the budget process. 
However, notable aspects needed to be improved if CSOs 
were to offer a meaningful contribution to development 
efforts. One such area is strengthening the role of M&E 
across government. CSOs have an operational presence at 
all these (government -wide) levels and their involvement 
in M&E issues would go a long way towards building, 
strengthening and sustaining the WoGM&ES for Zambia. 
For details on the use of M&E information by civil society.  
On the demand side, CSOs are supposed to be key users 
of M&E information. Their feedback should be taken 
seriously in re -shaping M&E functionalities at any level. 
The involvement of CSOs would best start from the 
supply side where they participate in designing all M&E 
parameters such as systems development, indicator 
choices, methodologies, leader ship, planning, funding, 
coordination, reporting and dissemination, and policy 
formulation. Once that has been done, the role of CSOs on 
the demand side would be streamlined and easy to 
implement. Currently, CSOs belong to major advisory 
bodies, which incl ude the NDCC, PDCCs, DDCCs and 
WDCs. They also belong to a number of CAGs according 
to the pillars of the 7NDP. These are key platforms in 
which CSOs could make their M&E contributions. 
Currently, this role was acknowledged as being weak and 
fragmented and  often left to a few civil society member 
organisations. 
To ensure effective use of M&E information by CSOs, 
the WoGM&ES should produce outputs that are tailored 
to their information needs. Thus, CSOs  would be required 
to participate in the articulation of those M&E products 
and dissemination mechanisms. The capacities of CSOs in 
terms of M&E technical skills, financial resources and 
generally the availability of appropriate systemic and 
human resource s would need to be in place. In addition, 
coordination relationships between CSOs and all 
government structures would need to be prioritised. To 
achieve these, CSOs themselves would be expected  
to be proactive through innovating ways of engaging 
government, citizens, parliament, development partners 
and other stakeholders constructively, particularly on 
matters of improved good governance practices. 
e) Use of monitoring and evaluation information by 
donors 
While the role of donors in supporting M&E in Zambia 
was acknowledged and appreciated, the results of this 
study showed that much needs to be improved. Although 
donors provided technical support and funding for 
selected M&E activities, they had contributed to the 
weakened state of Zambia’s WoGM&ES through  
maintaining their own parallel M&E arrangements. This 
scenario was rationalised because the WoGM&ES was 
still in its infancy, and was not able to satisfy all 
stakeholders’ information needs. It was also pointed out 
that donor support was not flexible enough to address 
urgent challenges such as financing M&E human capacity 
building plans for MPSAs. Much of their support went 
towards activities that were less impactful in empowering 
local practitioners. The financing from donors was 
reported to have usually been spent on procuring 
expensive external consultants, whose work had not been 
easy to sustain. The types of technical support that were 
given, such as those involving ICT strengthening, were 
redundant because of incompatibilities with local systems 
and practices.  
Therefore, this model proposes a holistic reconsideration 
of the work of donors in supporting M&E functions in the 
country. After identifying a number of gaps in this 
diagnostic study, it is crucial for the work of donors to  
be tailored to supp ort essential activities. Nevertheless,  
a strategic plan is needed that articulates M&E issues  
for the whole country, so that all donor support will  
draw their action points from this master plan. Since the 
involvement of donors in strengthening M&E is currently 
weak and fragmented across the WoGM&ES, government 
will need to spearhead the undertaking of a comprehensive 
stakeholder M&E work plan, which will act as an  
action sheet for stakeholder participation. In the work  
plan, which will be drawn from the national assessment 
(also stakeholder based and driven), donors will be 
expected to submit their feedback regarding collective 
support for a unified WoGM&ES for the country.  
The gaps that were identified in this research will be 
addressed practically using this structured, collective and 
participatory approach. Therefore, the relationship 
between government and donors will be expected to thrive, 
since the M&E plan will serve the information interests of 
both parties. 
f) Use of monitoring and evaluati on by decentralised 
structures 
On the demand side, the continued quest for and use of 
M&E information by all stakeholders would go a long 
way towards building, strengthening and sustaining the 
WoGM&ES for Zambia. As the research findings showed, 
there were n otable weaknesses in the manner in which 
M&E functions were being implemented as one moved 
from national -level institutions to decentralised ones at 
sector, provincial and district level. While line ministries 
were performing much better comparatively in t erms of 
M&E activities, provinces and districts were the poorest. 
There were many gaps at decentralised level. These 
included lack of institutional structures for M&E, no 
M&E champions, absence of skilled staff in M&E, 
inadequate or in some cases no budget  for M&E  
activities, and a generally weak culture of M&E. Others 
included weak statistical function, lack of systems for 
information management and fragmented coordination 
and collaboration mechanisms.  
For decentralised structures to consistently use 
information from M&E and subsequently help strengthen 
the demand side, their capacities will need to be enhanced. 
The starting point should be to ensure that units or 
sections responsible for M&E are established at all
<<<PAGE=15>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 96 
decentralised levels, and staff skilled in M&E are 
deployed to these structures. Another aspect of similar 
importance will be to articulate M&E plans, M&E work 
plans and M&E guidelines at all levels. All these efforts 
will need to draw from the National M&E Policy and the 
appropriate M&E legisla tion. It is hoped that while these 
efforts are being made, a wide range of M&E champions 
will emerge to strengthen the M&E function across 
government and promote a culture of results. However, 
from the initial stages, a cadre of M&E champions will be 
required who are advocates of RBM and practitioners of 
M&E in their institutions and spheres of influence. Once 
in place, this type of leadership will be crucial in defining 
the medium - and long -term transformational agenda  
for M&E, not only in decentralised s tructures, but across 
the WoGM&ES for Zambia’s public sector. This will 
mean that, instead of the current set -up in which staff 
responsible for the planning function also undertake M&E 
activities, there should be separate and adequately funded 
and staffed structures tasked with the day- to-day M&E 
activities. By so doing, the demand for M&E products and 
their dissemination will characterise the M&E practices in 
all functional structures of government.    
g) Incentivising the use of monitoring and evaluation 
information 
Utilising information from M&E by stakeholders does 
not occur naturally. If it was so, then many countries, 
organisations and development agencies would have 
sustained systems for M&E. While the significance of 
using M&E information is seldom c ontended, practices 
have shown that agencies did not use information from 
M&E for various reasons. For some, M&E information  
is not available owing to lack of systems for M&E,  
while for others, information may be provided, but is not 
trustworthy. Further , some M&E information may have 
come in late for processes such as planning and budgeting. 
The results of this study have shown that the utilisation of 
M&E information was undermined at all levels. Among 
the reasons were the lack of a variety of and stakeh older 
appropriate M&E products, poor or limited dissemination 
strategies, lack of linkages of M&E products with 
strategic policy cycle moments, and lack of incentives to 
promote a culture of results through stakeholders 
demanding and using M&E information.  
Incentives can be key ingredients in the enhancement of 
the demand side of an M&E system [11, 32,34,35,41-44]. 
Thus, in an effort to build and sustain a stronger demand 
side of the WoGM&ES, significant investments of time 
and resources will be needed. A national M&E plan will 
be required that includes list of events or moments that use 
information from M&E. Spearheaded by government and 
supported by all stakeholders, the national M&E plan will 
need a costed work plan and show t he M&E products, 
responsible institutions, the dissemination strategy, users, 
timelines, the events for M&E information, and other 
aspects. The incentive structure will then be developed  
in a participatory manner, and the responsibility of 
enforcement will be given to ‘powerful’ agencies, say, the 
MOF, MNDP or the presidency or a combination of them. 
This model proposes that a strong incentive structure 
should be developed if the WoGM&ES is to make 
progress and contribute towards building and sustaining a 
culture of results. Nevertheless, leadership at national 
level and at other decentralised levels, including buy -in 
from non-state actors, will be a requisite for the success of 
this effort. All MPSAs for instance will be required to 
know that funding will  not be received for the next period 
in the absence of evidence of results from previous 
allocations. In the first instance, many agencies may face 
compliance challenges, but ultimately such a structure or 
arrangement will instil a sense of commitment to the 
provision and demand for quality M&E information. The 
WoGM&ES will make positive strides towards a system 
that is to the satisfaction of stakeholders and promotes 
overall good governance agenda for the country. 
6. Conclusion 
Putting in place a successfu l government -wide M&E 
system requires two critical sides to be fully developed —
the supply side and the demand side. On one hand, the 
supply side is responsible for generating the M&E 
information, in its appropriate quality and quantity as 
demanded by vario us users. On the other hand, the 
demand side of an M&E system is expected to seek for 
M&E information contained in different data and 
information products and utilise them in decision -making 
and policies. This study focused on the demand side  
of Zambia’s WoGM&ES, and particularly articulating  
the type of actions that needed to be considered by 
Government to build, strengthen and sustain a stronger 
system for the public sector. In that regard, the study 
represents a blueprint for the successful building an d 
implementing a functional WoGM&ES that would satisfy 
the information needs of stakeholders. The stakeholders 
that form a critical group to create meaningful demand for 
M&E information has been duly identified— the presidency, 
parliament, civil society, co operating partners/donors, 
ordinary citizens, etc.  
To address the demand side of Zambia’s WoGM&ES, 
the Government and its stakeholders are required to 
consider transforming the entire public sector to become 
results-oriented. Once the culture of results w as inculcated 
in the public sector as well as outside, the demand for 
M&E information would take centre stage and the country 
will be making progress towards implementing its 
development interventions inspired by evidence. To build, 
strengthen and sustain a culture of results in the  
country will not be an easy undertaking. It will require 
commitment from all key stakeholders to transform both 
the supply and demand sides of the WoGM&ES . In that 
regard, Government is expected to implement the 
following to build and sustain the demand side: promote 
the use of M&E information by the presidency; link M&E 
to planning, budgeting and policy processes; promote the 
use of M&E information by parl iament, civil society and 
donors. Decentralised structures of government as well as 
the general public will also need to be stimulated on the 
acquisition and use of M&E information. Equally, 
Government would need to incentivise the strategic users 
of M&E i nformation across the country. Another similar 
study has been conducted on the s upply side of Zambia’s 
WoGM&ES.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
97 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
7. Recommendations 
A number of salient and categorised recommendations 
are made below: 
 
Presidency Level  
1.  Institutionalise M&E championship:  The 
responsibility of growing, nurturing and driving the 
culture of results should be rooted in the presidency. 
Unlike in the current scenario, where the 
appreciation of M&E is ad hoc and fragmented, the 
presidency is expected to vigorously pursue the 
mandate of M&E by leading the nation in creating a 
country that focused on results -based management 
(RBM). This should be pursued under the managing 
for development results (MfDRs) approach. The 
presidency would then be seen as giving the 
‘sermons’ to incentivise the rest of the stakeholders 
in the country in supplying quality M&E information 
and creating demand for its utilisation. Sustained 
over successive political administrations, such 
championship at this level will go a long way 
towards attaining a stron ger and successful 
WoGM&ES. Therefore, the presidency would  
need to be concerned with the functionality of  
M&E arrangements at national, line ministry, 
provincial and district level. Thus, practically, this 
transformation would mean that the president, 
cabinet, Cabinet Office, ministers and all the 
structures operating under the Office of the 
President (OP) would be expected to be proactive 
and aggressive advocates of RBM and M&E. 
2.  Establish an evaluation structure : There is need 
to introduce an evalua tion culture through 
spearheading the conduct of strategic evaluations. 
The OP is expected to take the lead in the 
transformation towards a results -based and focused 
Zambia. At the level of the presidency, an 
evaluation structure has to be established to o versee 
strategic evaluations across government. Despite 
being under the president, the structure would be 
required to operate independent of any interference 
from this office. Instead, it would be expected to 
receive full support in terms of good will and 
resources to function properly. Adequate financial 
resources, skilled staff and appropriate infrastructure 
would be required to make this institution 
functionally relevant in providing the kind of 
information base the country needs. To ensure its 
viability and independence in its operations, its 
leader or management should be appointed by 
parliament or other p rofessional body through a 
democratic process. The presidency should use the 
findings from these evaluations directly in its 
development engagements with all stakeholders. 
The results should also be made public in various 
formats, such as electronic and pr int. However, the 
challenge would be to make this institution political 
proof— meaning that changes in political leadership 
should not make this function vulnerable or 
threatened with abolition. For this reason, the 
legislation, through constitutional provision and the 
institutionalisation of evaluation across government, 
would help sustain this important function. 
3.  Create a feedback mechanism: While a formalised 
and mandated structure to handle strategic  
national evaluations is extremely important, 
creating a mechanism that guarantees action on 
recommendations from these evaluations is of equal 
significance. To that extent, the WoGM&ES, 
particularly the evaluations structure, will be best 
positioned to clarify how all actions from 
evaluation reports will  be finally implemented by 
institutions across government and beyond. The 
motivation of this feedback mechanism will  
be to improve public service provision and  
nation building. For instance, key evaluation 
findings, their remedial recommendations, 
responsible agency and timeliness of executing the 
improvements could be published, say, on 
institutional websites, reports and so on.  
 
National apex institutional level 
4.  Put in place leadership and ownership of M&E 
systems: One of the gaps identified in thi s study 
concerns inadequate or lack of evidence of M&E 
leadership at national level. M&E champions and 
other capacities are required at national level, 
particularly in all apex institutions. Powerful 
ministers and other top leaders in these institutions 
will be expected to offer support towards the M&E 
function. Therefore, top government leadership will 
spur the spread and development of M&E systems 
at decentralised levels. At the same time, this effort 
will lead to the strengthening of the WoGM&ES 
supply a nd demand sides. Practically, this support 
will come through sequential demand and 
utilisation of M&E information by these institutions. 
For instance, particular M&E reports and other 
appropriate products on national budget 
performance and NDP implementati on from all 
MPSAs will be demanded and utilised by apex 
institutions.  
5.  Introduce stronger laws for M&E : The supreme 
law of the land in Zambia is the national 
constitution. In addition, several accompanying 
pieces of legislation are aimed at helping to 
actualise the contents and aspirations articulated in 
the national constitution. The laws of Zambia aim 
to guide and protect citizens and the national 
endowments from undue loss or damages. There is 
need for a clearer ‘stiffened’ law in support of 
M&E and results orientation. Starting with a 
national M&E policy, which was reported to be 
currently in draft form, there is need for a 
constitutionally supportive M&E legislation. This 
law should be able to capacitate and compel all 
public institutions, including  the presidency, 
national apex institutions and decentralised 
government structures, to adhere to RBM through 
the implementation of a stronger WoGM&ES. This 
law should include freedom of information, which 
will allow evidence to be reported on all 
development aspects of public interest. Once such a 
law has been enacted, those whose role is to supply
<<<PAGE=17>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 98 
M&E information and those who use the 
information will be fully protected and work freely 
without fear of being victimised.  
6.  Create synergies between govern ment and 
training institutions: Capacity-building, especially 
specialised skills in M&E was found to be a big 
challenge for Zambia’s WoGM&ES. Professionals 
and practitioners of M&E still face practical 
difficulties with regard to provision of high quality 
analysis and complete M&E products that satisfy 
stakeholder information requirements at all levels. 
It is suggested that government will come up with 
stronger and institutionally sustainable synergies 
and collaborations with local training institutions to 
provide skills in evaluation analysis and process. In 
return, training and research institutions will be 
innovative by developing state-of-the-art programmes 
and courses meant to meet the growing M&E 
industry in the country. In that regard, a policy  
to guide this process may be developed to 
institutionalise M&E at all critical educational 
levels of the country’s educational system. The 
private sector can too be challenged by policy to 
play a significant role of localising and building a 
results-oriented culture in Zambia. 
 
Decentralised levels: line ministries, provinces & 
districts  
7.  Undertake institutional level -specific M&E 
diagnoses: Institutional M&E functions could be 
complex. When they involve stakeholders, these 
functions could be even more diverse and 
complicated. Since line ministries vary in many 
respects, it would be prudent to conduct diagnostic 
exercises for every sector to ascertain the current 
strengths and gaps before embarking on remedial 
actions. This would be the first step in an effort  
to build and sustain functional institution -wide  
M&E arrangements [11, 47,87,93,97]. Some of the 
information regarding what works, what does not 
work, and why for the decentralised government 
structures have been highli ghted in this study. As 
with the diagnosis of the WoGM&ES, line ministry, 
provincial and district -specific M&E assessments 
will need to focus on all the elements that help build 
and strengthen the supply sides and demand sides of 
those systems.  
8.  Create information-sharing fora for inter -
institutional M&E experiences : This study has 
established that only limited M&E products were in 
place across the WoGM&ES. The prominent one is 
the annual progress report (APR), which is a 
compilation of progress reports  from ministries, 
provinces and other spending agencies (MPSAs). 
New innovations are required and these could 
include exchange ministry- to-ministry, province-to-
province and district- to-district programmes, an 
annual national M&E symposium, a web -based 
M&E platform to resolve related questions, etc. The 
Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association 
(ZaMEA) could be used as an M&E information 
platform for practitioners. As a community of 
practice (CoP) for Managing for Development 
Results (MfDRs) in Zambia, Z aMEA presents an 
opportunity to support knowledge sharing and 
learning. Other fora on M&E include the African 
Evaluation Association (AFrEA), which is the 
African Continent Community of Practice (AfCoP) 
on the subject matter of MfDRs and RBM.  
9.  Establish an incentive structure for the 
consumption of M&E information : A lack of 
incentives to stimulate the supply and demand of 
M&E information across the WoGM&ES was 
common. All levels were reported not to have any 
form of incentive in place to promot e the use of 
M&E information. Incentives are significant to a 
successful M&E system, particularly in 
encouraging the strengthening of the supply and 
demand sides. Therefore, it will be useful to 
identify stakeholder-appropriate incentives that will 
spur the use of M&E information by stakeholders at 
all levels across the WoGM&ES. The incentives 
will have to work at all levels. Regardless of 
whether they are carrots, sticks or sermons, they 
will need to be carefully enforced across the 
WoGM&ES in a non -selective and discriminatory 
manner. A range of incentives such as technical, 
political, financial management and skills training 
could be developed. 
10. Guarantee M&E backstopping support at all 
levels: Currently, backstopping services with regard 
to M&E capacities across institutions was lacking. 
Yet, for continuity and institutionalisation of M&E 
across the WoGM&ES, support is required from 
national level institutions down to the decentralised 
structures. In that regard, the capacity of apex 
institutions will need to be enhanced to make them 
practically competent to offer M&E backstopping 
services across the WoGM&ES. Line ministries, 
provinces and districts will be expected to possess 
appropriate capacities to allow for vertical and 
horizontal backstopping sup port. In that regard, 
M&E support could be obtained from a higher -level 
structure or from within the same level or indeed 
from training institutions. 
11. Leadership and ownership for M&E systems at 
all levels: At all decentralised levels, there is a need 
to introduce strong leadership that will promote 
institutional implementation and ownership of the 
M&E function. M&E works well when the top 
leadership of an institution demands and uses M&E 
information to inform its decision-making processes. 
At the same time, buy -in from institutional 
leadership can lead to further support towards 
having M&E resources and efforts to strengthen 
arrangements for M&E. In other words, there is 
need to put in place leaders and managers in all 
government decentralised institutions who are 
going to vigorously champion for the evolution and 
transformation of M&E within their institutions and 
overall across the WoGM&ES.  
 
Statistical regime transformation 
12. Reform and transform the national statistical 
function: The transformation of the WoGM&ES 
will be possible only when an equivalent
<<<PAGE=18>>>
99 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
transformation takes place under the National 
Statistical System (NSS). Although the current CSO 
was supplying official statistics to the country, a 
number of gaps were identified , among them the 
lack of timely data to help the M&E function 
provide meaningful and critically analytical reports 
for decision and policy making. Collaboration 
between the WoGM&ES and the NSS at all levels 
was found to be weak, ad hoc and fragmented. 
Therefore, the government, working in 
collaboration with all its stakeholders, will be 
required to invest in the statistical function and 
ensure the WoGM&ES and NSS complement each 
other. Thus, their operational structures will need to 
work in synch, implying that the sections that 
implement M&E and statistics at all levels will need 
to be harmonised, well linked and coordinated. 
Legislation that links the statistical function and 
that of M&E will too need to enforced. At best, one 
law should be articulated to su pport both M&E and 
statistics. 
 
National-wide indicator system  
13. Create a national and sub- national indicator 
system: There was notable effort to put 
performance indicators in place in the NDPs. The 
immediate past two NDPs and the current 7NDP 
have d emonstrated an improvement in the manner 
in which indicators were identified. However, there 
is no defined indicator system in Zambia. Given the 
complex development work that government has to 
do, such a system would clarify which priority 
measurement indi cators to track at national, line 
ministry, provincial, district and sub -district level. 
At the moment, there are no performance indicators 
at provincial and district level, which makes it 
impossible to measure progress and appreciate 
development impacts. It becomes a matter of 
guesswork as to what informs decision and policy 
making at those levels in the absence of evidence 
from an M&E system or a national statistical 
system.  
 
Community of practice  
14. Re-engineer the Zambia Monitoring and 
Evaluation As sociation: Zambia has in place a 
community of practice (CoP) for M&E in the 
Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association 
(ZaMEA). While it is in its infancy and its 
functionality is fairly good so far, the association 
must be made more robust and inclusive . Although 
it is a platform for practitioners of M&E and those 
interested in the field, it needs to be anchored on 
stronger national level leadership (that is, state and 
non-state). National, line ministry, provincial and 
district level M&E practitioners w ould need to take 
proactive roles and responsibilities in strengthening 
the M&E function in the country. At best, regional 
or provincial chapters could be established so that 
these become operational centres for ZaMEA. 
Innovative incentives could be designed to attract 
the interest of stakeholders. At the same time, 
academia and the media would be expected to 
ensure that the evolution of M&E is spread and 
documented. In addition, ZaMEA needs strong 
links with parliament, civil society, research 
institutions and individual citizens, who could be 
regular users of M&E information. ZaMEA could 
also carry out strategic evaluations of public 
projects and programmes to demonstrate that 
quality information is useful for national 
development. In this case, ZaMEA coul d provide 
government and other stakeholders with expertise in 
conducting analytically strong evaluations. 
 
Role of Parliament  
15. Enhance the oversight role of parliament at all 
levels: The study findings have shown that only 
weak and fragmented linkages existed between 
parliament and other MPSAs in Zambia. 
Nevertheless, the  National Assembly has a 
constitutional mandate to represent the citizens in 
issues of development and human rights. Parliament 
makes laws and approves government spending. 
These roles and responsibilities give parliament a 
unique development mandate. For that reason, its 
M&E role across the WoGM&ES will be crucial. 
Efforts through innovations and initiatives will need 
to be promoted so that functional linkages between 
parliament and all other levels of development are 
strengthened. In that regard, there will be a need to 
have M&E products in the form of reports and 
interactive programmes to give parliament an 
opportunity to appreciate development changes 
across the WoGM&ES regularly. Parliament will 
also be required to restructure itself to respond to 
this challenge function. Practically, this may 
compel redefining the roles and responsibilities of 
the parliamentary comm ittees and creating new 
initiatives to support the M&E function within the 
National Assembly. 
 
Civil society 
16. Ensure collaboration and coordination 
mechanisms are functional : CSOs are an 
important stakeholder partner in the development 
process of Zambi a. The work of CSOs has become 
more widespread as more organisations have come 
on board in recent years ( Mulonda et al., 2018) . 
Among others, CSOs are involved directly in 
implementing development interventions in such 
sectors as education, health, agricul ture, water and 
sanitation, and community resilience through 
supporting entrepreneurship among citizens. Others 
are advocates of development in many areas. They 
lobby government and the donor community to act 
in needy communities so that people have access  to 
decent lives. To that extent, it will be important that 
deliberate initiatives should be identified and 
implemented to strengthen the linkages between 
government and CSOs. In particular, M&E 
collaboration and coordination efforts between 
government and  civil society will need to be 
strengthened. This may be achieved through 
undertaking a thorough needs assessment to identify 
practical coordination points. CSOs will need
<<<PAGE=19>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 100 
reliable M&E information in their advocacy work 
and in implementing development inte rventions. 
Such collaboration will best be done at all levels. 
Joint M&E plans and actions will be desired to 
support a functional WoGM&ES. A review and 
strengthening of the advisory bodies, which include 
the NDCC, PDCCs, DDCCs and WDCs, w ill be a 
good starting point. 
 
Donors 
17. Develop a joint national M&E work plan to 
support the WoGM&ES:  An M&E work plan is a 
detailed framework that is fully costed. As the study 
findings have shown, donors are involved in 
supporting the development of the WoGM&ES 
through provision of financial resources and 
technical services. However, owing to the lack of a 
common plan, which shows the areas of prioritised 
collaboration, the work of donors has not yielded 
the desired results (see Chapter 7). Thus, an 
elaborative joint government and donor M&E plan 
will be needed to work as a guide for current and 
future collaborations as far as M&E enhancement is 
concerned. Again, such efforts will need to be at all 
levels of government. Financing and technically 
supporting a common pla n for M&E will entail 
strengthening the WoGM&ES.   
18. Avoid implementing parallel donor M&E 
systems: It was found in this study that donors were 
in the habit of maintaining their own parallel M&E 
arrangements. This practice was reported as 
weakening the WoGM&ES, whereby, instead of 
collectively supporting the national system for 
M&E, donors spent money on creating ICT -based 
systems that catered only for their work related 
information needs. In the enhanced WoGM&ES, 
donors would be expected to work with government 
through a unified national M&E work plan.   
 
Academia 
19. Transform the education system to being results 
focused: Among the key gaps reported in the 
current WoGM&ES for Zambia are lack of 
analytical skills, inadequate in -depth M&E  skills 
and generally the lack of champions for M&E in 
government. Even among non -state actors, the 
challenges were reportedly similar. There was also 
a lack of results -based media reporting, particularly 
media coverage that highlights government 
achievements against the National Development 
Plans (NDPs) vis -à-vis the attainment of Vision 
2030 objectives. Therefore, academia has an 
opportunity to help resolve the gap by vigorously 
introducing programmes and courses with 
development results -based content. In  that regard, 
the subject matter of monitoring and evaluation will 
require featuring prominently in academic 
programmes of all teaching institutions at all levels. 
Nonetheless, this will mean developing academic 
level-specific and tailored M&E and RBM 
programmes and courses to address the skill gaps in 
the country. To produce these, a thorough needs 
assessment or knowledge-based diagnosis should be 
undertaken so that such curriculum reviews and 
developments may be informed appropriately 
[49,50,106]. 
20. Create strong competencies in undertaking 
development evaluations : The findings of this 
study have shown that the culture and practice of 
evaluation in Zambia remains poor, and in many 
cases non -existent. Not only did government 
undertake a limited number of evaluations, but the 
skills and expertise needed to carry out quality 
evaluations were lacking in and outside government. 
Private sector consulting firms and individuals will 
be needed to provide practical M&E services. 
Evaluation practice and competencies will go a long 
way towards supporting and sustaining the 
country’s WoGM&ES and ultimately in creating a 
culture of results through people’s access to and use 
of information from the evaluations. 
 
Media 
21. Reform media news towards results -based 
management: Mass media plays a significant and 
central role in nation building and development. In 
its effort to implement a transformational, robust 
and sustainable WoGM&ES, the government will 
be required to invest in promoting and supporting a 
media regime shift. Zambia will need media 
platforms and spaces that are innova tive and 
preoccupied with consistently reporting on 
development results based on evidence from a 
reliable and credible WoGM&ES. The media is 
supposed to play its double role of contributing to 
the strengthening of the supply side and the demand 
side of the  WoGM&ES. To that extent, the media 
will be expected to always search for evidence on 
development processes. That is why the freedom of 
information (FOI) legislation would be vital  
for Zambia in transforming and nurturing a  
culture of results. Therefore,  the print, digital and 
electronic media would be expected to offer a  
wide range of evidence and remedial action to 
resolve the issues. Such media will not only help 
build a results-oriented population, but contribute to 
a strengthened Zambian economy thr ough stronger 
democracy, economic development, human rights 
and generally in adhering to good governance tenets.  
22. Develop and institutionalise M&E frameworks 
in all political party manifestos and constitutions: 
In Zambia, the executive arm of governme nt is led 
by politicians who are sponsored by a political party 
of their choice and affiliation. These political 
organisations are legally registered entities required 
to operate within the confinements of the laws of 
Zambia according to the stipulations i n the highest 
law of the land — the Constitution. A review of 
manifestos and constitutions for the major political 
parties in Zambia indicated that none of them had 
any explicit articulation of an M&E arrangement 
(e.g. constitutions & manifestos of the Patriotic 
Front (PF), United Party for National Development 
(UPND) & Movement for Multiparty Democracy 
(MMD)). Aside from listing many promises of 
deliverables to the people, there was lack of clarity
<<<PAGE=20>>>
101 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
on an organised way of implementation and 
measurement of suc h promises if or when they 
assumed power. Priority development areas, 
impacts, outcomes and outputs expected, indicators 
as well as targets become essential elements of 
success to be clarified in party specific constitutions, 
manifestos and M&E plans. M&E methodologies 
also need to be explained for the people to make 
informed choices in an election. The absence of an 
M&E framework then undermines the party 
message and electorates would deem such promises 
as mere political rhetoric, propaganda and sheer 
vote-seeking. Adherence to good governance tenets 
equally gets compromised. 
Therefore, since political parties shall come and  
go in terms of leading the country at a particular time,  
it is strongly contended that, far before a given party 
assumes government powers, its proposed M&E 
framework should be very clear. In Zambia for instance, 
political parties like the PF, MMD, UPND and all other 
parties would have clear and robust party -specific M&E 
frameworks and articulations on how they were going to 
pursue a c ulture of results once elected to power. That 
way, the proposed model in this study —of anchoring the 
country system for M&E on the presidency can be made 
feasible. As they propound their proposed system of 
governance to the general populace and other key 
stakeholders, specific M&E frameworks of individual 
political parties would be articulated in their campaign 
messages. Thus, even when a successful party shall find 
an established WoGM&ES for the public sector in  
place, it will be necessary for such a part y to have  
a clear understanding and appreciation of its own M&E 
vision and set up. Only when such practices and 
institutionalisation of M&E in intra - and inter - party 
politics shall exist in Zambia will the culture of results 
based on evidence become the inspiration of good 
governance and practical poverty reduction. This action 
point will help strengthen both the supply and demand 
side of the country’s WoGM&ES. 
23. Ensure the main party campaign messages 
comprise M&E functionalities: Political elections 
are all about development promises. In the tripartite 
elections, Zambians vote for local government 
representatives, members of parliament and 
presidential candidates and all these offer different 
development messages. I contend here that, drawing 
from their specific party manifestos and particularly 
the M&E frameworks and plans, these candidates 
will need to demonstrate how development results 
will be pursued and attained for the citizens —in a 
measurable and realistic manner. Such quali ty, 
clarity and consistence in the campaign messages of 
a given political party will give an opportunity for 
people to easily identify themselves with which 
organisation best holds a practical strategy to 
deliver the desired development aspirations. 
Specifically, campaign messages should carry such 
important information as development priority areas, 
high level results of focus (that is, impacts and 
outcomes), outputs, indicators, targets and clear 
time frames. To some extent, details of roles and 
responsibilities should also be articulated. The 
research findings revealed that a newly elected 
party in power spends much time trying to organise 
itself to determine which structural arrangement 
would best deliver campaign promises. This  
should be resolved way before assuming state 
power—through detailed M&E frameworks and 
plans. In that regard, offices of the president for 
specific political parties will need to drive this 
M&E agenda as they shall be the ones to foster a 
thriving culture of results once in leade rship.  
For the incumbent party in power, there will be 
need to practically re- organise and shift according 
to the recommendations in the proposed model. 
Therefore, in the long run, the people of Zambia 
will attach importance towards demanding for  
a resul ts-oriented governance system from their 
various leaders and providers of goods and services. 
24. Transform political leaders into M&E 
Champions, focused and committed to a culture 
of results: For M&E to be well institutionalised and 
used as an instrument  of good governance, political 
championship will be a necessary requirement for 
Zambia’s WoGM&ES. While not every politician 
may qualify to be called a champion of M&E, there 
will be need for key political players to be 
transformed into practical results -based leaders  
who shall be at the helm of advancing and growing 
a culture of development results in the public 
service and beyond. Such leaders as presidential 
candidates and senior party officials for every 
political party/organisation will need to play  
the role of M&E champion. That way, Zambians 
will be given an opportunity to get results -based 
party manifestos and messages and engage  
in meaningful debate as to the direction the  
country was taking developmentally. This however, 
will call fo r a pragmat ic intra - and inter - party 
transformation for political players to make 
themselves champions of - results- for- results to 
improve Zambians’ living standards. All these 
efforts will need to be anchored on political party 
constitutions and manifestos inspire d by a 
commitment to a culture of results based on 
knowledge and appropriate skills set. 
 
Future research 
25. Investigate the functional relationships of good 
governance institutions in Zambia : The role of 
M&E is to enhance good governance through the 
promotion of transparency and accountability by 
those tasked with the responsibility of utilising 
public resources. The WoGM&ES is expected to 
cut across all three arms of government (see  
Figure 8 .1). Therefore, more research will be 
needed to understand which institutions in these 
arms of government need to be part of the 
WoGM&ES. For instance, studies will be required 
to determine the roles of various actors in 
strengthening the WoGM&ES. Institut ions such as 
the Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Anti -
Corruption Commission (ACC), judiciary, and 
parliament will form a firm basis for creating and  
sustaining a stronger WoGM&ES.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 102 
26. Introduce and sustain a culture of streamlined 
planning and budget ing for results : While efforts 
have been made to simplify the planning and 
budgeting processes, especially through Public 
Finance Management (PFM) reforms and the 
launch of the 2014 National Planning and 
Budgeting Policy, more clarity is needed on ways to 
actualise these policy provisions. For instance, 
practical challenges were reported in linking, 
sequencing, articulating and developing the NLTV, 
NDPs, MTEFs, annual budgets, sector strategic 
plans, provincial and district plans. Studies focused 
on making the linkages between planning and 
budgeting processes would enhance the results -
based culture in Zambia. To avoid rhetorically 
motivated planning, a transformative culture of 
streamlined planning and budgeting for results 
should be the driving force behind these studies. 
The aim should be to have a lean planning and 
budgeting system with properly linked planning and 
budgeting outputs expected at national, line 
ministry, provincial and district levels. All levels 
will be required to work around implementing a 
unified work plan towards realising a national goal, 
namely NLTV through NDPs.  
27. Identify the technical and political aspects of 
M&E in Zambia : The WoGM&ES will need to be 
strengthened on the supply side and the demand 
side. However, doing so will re quire in -depth 
understanding of all critical operational and 
technical issues surrounding the system. Although 
technical issues may seem obvious to identify, 
political aspects may be complex to identify and 
resolve. As a bearer of good and bad news, M&E 
may not always go well with those tasked to design 
and implement M&E systems. Thus, more research 
studies will be required to understand currently 
unclear perspectives of M&E, so that ways are 
found to simplify the articulation and design of 
M&E arrangements . Issues of weak M&E 
coordination, autonomy and overall poor power 
relations among institutions, especially the M&E 
role of the OAG, parliament, CSO and civil society, 
need to be elaborated [107-110].  
28. Develop and impleme nt a robust exchange 
programme with best M&E practising countries 
and organisations : Putting in place a functional 
WoGM&ES is neither a one-off activity nor a short- 
or medium -term undertaking. It must be seen as a 
continuous and long -term endeavour of bui lding, 
reviewing, strengthening and participatory process. 
As Zambia works to build its national system for 
M&E, there would be need to learn from other 
countries with success stories in implementing 
whole-of-government monitoring and evaluation 
systems th rough structured collaborations. Since 
such countries as South Africa, Uganda, Colombia, 
Chile, and Australia may have similar experiences 
to Zambia, learning from them would work well for 
Zambia.  
29. Re-establish a financing architecture for the 
WoGM&ES: One of the outstanding reason 
given for weak M&E implementation across the 
WoGM&ES for Zambia’s public sector pertains to 
inadequacies and in many instances lack of finances. 
The current budget support approach seems to fall 
short of the desired investment in creating a thriving 
country system for M&E. Innovative financing 
options which will help government and its 
stakeholders to practically deal with the current 
financial resource challenge are needed. An  
in-depth study may bring out salient alternati ves to 
the M&E financing architecture for Zambia. Such 
an M&E financial support strategy will for instance 
ascertain where resources to evaluate the NLTV, 
NDPs and strategic programmes and projects will 
be sourced from and give predictable estimates of 
expenditure.  The alternatives will need to be robust 
enough to tackle resource challenges not only at 
national level, but institution -specific level as well. 
This suggestion comes in the light of research 
responses that acknowledged of sustained 
institutional failures to adequately plan for M&E 
activities.   
30. Re-engineer the public sector planning 
architecture focused on development results:  
M&E function thrives on good and results -oriented 
planning. The findings of this research have 
revealed that plans across government structures 
(that is, at national, line ministry, provincial & 
district) are currently fragmented and in some cases 
missing. There were many line ministries with 
outdated strategic plans while others either were 
implementing draft plans or  had no official plans. 
The situation was worse at provincial and district 
level where barely a few of them had up -to-date 
plans. For the few with such plans, there was a 
notable weak linkage with respective NDPs. It was 
difficult to map out clear linkages between the NDP 
and the other plans at decentralised levels. Even 
worse were the de- linkages that existed between 
implementation mechanisms as well as monitoring 
and evaluation frameworks. Thus, these gaps 
demand that all planning at all levels of 
government— national, line ministry, provincial, 
district and sub -district should be responsive to a 
results-based planning. It means that designing a 
country-level M&E measurement framework for 
NDPs is practically problematic. For instance, the 
lack of specific i ndicators and targets at provincial, 
district and among several line ministries 
exacerbates the challenge for effective and efficient 
M&E in the country. This gap also makes it 
difficult to place and provide data and information 
needs for regional, contine ntal and global 
obligations. To fix this challenge, the planning 
architecture must be shifted to meet these basic 
tenets of results -based management through 
implementation of an effective WoGM&ES. Thus, 
future studies will have to consider appreciating the  
whole range of public policy and guidelines on 
planning, budgeting, implementation, oversight, 
legislation and geo -political aspects of national 
development.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
103 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
References 
[1] Republic of South Africa. 2007. Policy Framework for the 
Government-Wide Monitoring and Evaluation System. The 
Presidency, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[2] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2006. Fifth 
National Development Plan 2006 -2010: Broad based wealth and 
job creation through citizenry participation and technological 
advancement, Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[3] Hardlife, Z. & Zhou, G. 2013. Utilisation of monitoring and 
evaluation systems by development agencies: The case of the 
UNDP in Zimbabwe. American International Journal of 
Contemporary Research, 3(3): 70-83. 
[4] Bamberger, M. 2008. Enhancing the utilisation of evaluations for 
evidence-based policy- making. In M. Segone (Ed.). Bridging the 
Gap. Switzerland: UNICEF. 
[5] Abraham, I.J. & Torres, M.M. 2004. Mainstreaming 
Empowerment in the Bolivia PRSP monitoring and  evaluation at 
the Municipal Level. Special series on social accountability in 
Latin America and the Caribbean. The World Bank, Washington, 
D.C. 
[6] Republic of South Africa. 2008. Basic Concepts in Monitoring and 
Evaluation. Public Service Commission, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[7] Edmunds, R. & Marchant, T. 2008. Official Statistics and 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems in Developing Countries: 
Friends or Foes?, (October): 1-43. 
[8] Adrien, M.H. 2003. Evaluation Capacity Development: Guide to 
Conducting Reviews of Organisations Supplying M&E Training, 
ECD Working Paper Series No. 9, The World Bank, Washington, 
D.C. 
[9] Kanyamuna, V., Phiri, M., Kanenga, H. & Mulonda, M. (2020). 
“Role of Actors Outside Government in Strengthening the 
Country Monitoring and Evaluation S ystem in Zambia.” World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, vol. 6, no. 1: 22-29. 
[10] Ahmad, R. 2008. Governance, Social Accountability and the Civil 
Society. JOAAG, Vol.3. No.1. 
[11] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2014 Annual 
Progress Report for the Revised Sixth National Development Plan 
2013-2016: People Centred Economic Growth and Development. 
Lusaka: Ministry of National Development Planning. 
[12] Ostrom, E., Gibson, C., Shivakumar, S. & Andersson, K. 2002. 
Aid, Incentives, and Sustainability : An Institutional Analysis of 
Development Cooperation, Workshop in Political Theory and 
Policy Analysis, Indiana University, Sida Studies in Evaluation 
02/01. 
[13] Akhtar, T., Ebrahimian, E., Prasad, B., and Tavera, C. (Eds.). 2005. 
Partners for Change. Experi ences from UNDP’s work with civil 
society organizations through the Global Environment Facility. 
[14] Alzate, R. D. E. 2000. Monitoring and evaluating local 
development through community participation: The experience of 
the Association of Indigenous Cabildos of  Northern Cauca, 
Columbia. In M. Estella, J. Blauert, D. Campilian, J. Gaventa, J. 
Gonsalves, I. Guijt, D. Johnson, & R. Riacafort (Eds.), Learning 
from change: Issues and experiences in participatory monitoring 
and evaluation (pp. 95 -108). Ottawa: Interna tional Development 
Research Centre. 
[15] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2016. 2015 
Annual Progress Report for the Revised Sixth National 
Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred Economic Growth 
and Development. Lusaka: Ministry of National De velopment 
Planning. 
[16] Arora, D. 2013. Good Governance: A Study of the Concept in 
Indian Context–Origin of the Concept of Good Governance, Good 
Governance, 37(1): 1-16. 
[17] Booth, D. 2005. Missing links in the politics of development: 
Learning from the PRSP experiment, ODI Working Paper No. 256. 
Overseas Development Institute, London. 
[18] Brousselle, A. & Champagne, F. 2011. Program theory evaluation: 
Logic analysis. Evaluation and Program Planning, 34(1): 69-78. 
[19] Castro, M. F. 2009. Insider Insights: Building a Result s-Based 
Management and Evaluation System in Colombia. ECD Working 
Paper 18, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[20] Castro, M.F., Lopez -Acevado, G.,Busjeet, G.B. & Ardonez, X.F. 
2009. Mexico's M&E System: Scaling up from the sectoral to the 
National Level. Evalu ation Capacity Development. IEG. The 
Word Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[21] Chabane, C. 2013. The Role of Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Public Service, Republic of South Africa—The Presidency 
Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. Pretoria, 
South Africa. 
[22] Chambers, R. 1994. Participatory rural appraisal (PRA): 
Challenges, potentials, and paradigm. World Development, 22(1): 
1437–1454. 
[23] Eberlei, W. & Henn, H. 2003. Parliaments in Sub -Sahara Africa: 
Actors in poverty reduction? Eshborn: Deutsche Geschellsc haft 
fu¨r Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ). 
[24] El Baradei, L. Abdelhamid, D. & Walley, N. 2014. 
Institutionalising and streamlining development monitoring and 
evaluation in post -revolutionary Egypt: A readiness Primer. 
African Evaluation Journal, 2(1): 1-16. 
[25] Engela, R. & Ajam, T. 2010. Evaluation Capacity Development: 
Implementing a Government -Wide Monitoring and Evaluation 
System in South Africa, Working Paper Series No. 21 No. 21. 
OED, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[26] Gomez, R., Olivera, M. & Velasco, M. 2009 . Implementing a 
Subnational Results-oriented Management and Budgeting System: 
Lessons from Medellin, Colombia. Evaluation Capacity 
Development. IEG. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[27] Görgens, M. & Kusek, J. 2009. Making Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems Wo rk: A Capacity Development Toolkit. 
IBRD World Bank, Washington DC. 
[28] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2002. Zambia 
poverty reduction strategy paper (2002 -2004), March 2002. 
Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[29] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2009. Mid-Term 
Review of the Fifth National Development Plan 2006-2010: Broad 
based wealth and job creation through citizenry participation and 
technological advancement. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and 
National Planning. 
[30] Adato, M. 2011. Combining Quantitative and Qualitative methods 
for Program Monitoring and Evaluation: Why are mixed method 
designs best? Prem Notes. Special series on the Nuts and Bolts of 
M&E systems. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[31] GRZ. Ministry of Finance  and National Planning. 2014. National 
Planning and Budgeting Policy: Responsive, transparent, 
accountable and results -oriented Development Planning and 
Budgeting processes. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National 
Planning.  
[32] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. National 
Monitoring and Evaluation Policy (2019 -2023): Results-oriented, 
evidence-based, integrated and well -coordinated Government -
wide Monitoring and Evaluation System for improved 
development results. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance an d National 
Planning, 2019. 
[33] Kusek, J.Z., Rist, R.C. & White, E.M. 2004. How will we know 
Millennium Development Results when we see them? Building a 
Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation System to Give us the 
Answer. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[34] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning (MOF –Zambia). 
2013. Report on the Performance of the Sector Advisory Groups 
(SAGs), Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[35] Ahem, M., Beard, V.A., Gueorguieva, A.I. & Sri Handini, R. 2012. 
Using M&E to support Performance Based Planning and 
Budgeting in Indonesia. Prem Notes, Special series on the Nuts 
and Bolts of M&E systems. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[36] Hickey, S. & Mohan, G. 2008. The Politics of Establishing Pro 
Poor Accountability: What can Pov erty Reduction Strategies 
Achieve? Review of International Political Economy, 15(2):  
234-258. 
[37] Holvoet, N., Gildemyn, M. & Inberg, L. 2012. Taking Stock of 
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements in the Context of 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers: Evidence  from 20 Aid -
Dependent Countries in Sub -Saharan Africa. Development Policy 
Review, 30(6): 749-772. 
[38] Holvoet, N., Inberg, L. & Sekirime, S. 2013. Institutional analysis 
of monitoring and evaluation systems: Comparing M&E systems 
in Uganda's health and educat ion sectors. Working Paprer, 
Institute of Development Policy and Management, University of 
Antwerp. 
[39] Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association. National 
Evaluation Advocacy and Strategy–2018-2021. Lusaka, 2018. 
[40] Holvoet, N. & Renard, R. 2005. Putting the New Aid Paradigm to 
Work, Challenges for Monitoring and Evaluation, Discussion
<<<PAGE=23>>>
World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities 104 
Paper No. 2. Institute of Development Policy and Management, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp.  
[41] Holvoet, N. & Rombouts, H. 2008. The challenge of monitoring 
and evaluation under t he new aid modalities: Experiences from 
Rwanda. Journal of Modern African Studies, 46(4): 577-602. 
[42] Holvoet, N. & Rombouts, H. 2008. The Denial of Politics in 
PRSP’s Monitoring and Evaluation: Experiences from Rwanda, 
Discussion Paper. Institute of Developm ent Policy and 
Management, University of Antwerp, Antwerp. 
[43] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2010. Sixth 
National Development Plan 2011 -2015: Sustained Economic 
Growth and Poverty Reduction. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and 
National Planning. 
[44] Hwang, H. 2014. Building Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity in 
young systems: The experiences of Rwanda, Vietnam and Yemen. 
The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[45] Kanyamuna, V. 2013. Sector Monitoring and Evaluation Systems 
in the context of Poverty Reduction St rategies: A comparative 
case study of Zambia’s Health and Agriculture sectors.  
MSc-dissertation, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 
[46] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A., Ng’andu, E., Mizinga, C. & Mwale, 
A. 2018. An Assessment of the Demand -Side of the Monitor ing 
and Evaluation System of the Health Sector in Zambia. World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 4(2): 75-86. 
[47] Mubita, A., Mulonda, M., Libati, M., Mwale, N. & Kanyamuna, V. 
Urban Informality and Small Scale Enterprise (SME) 
Development in Zambia:  An Exploration of Theory and Practice, 
Journal of Behavioural Economics, Finance, Entrepreneurship, 
Accounting and Transport, 2017. 5(1): p.19-29. 
[48] Kanyamuna, V., Mulonda, M. & Mulele, C.S. 2019. Monitoring 
and Evaluation Legislation in Zambia–Gap Analysis. International 
Journal of Humanities, Art and Social Studies, 4(1): 15-25. 
[49] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2011. Fifth 
National Development Plan 2010 Annual Progress Review: Broad 
Based Wealth and Job Creation through Citizenry Participati on 
and Technological Advancement. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and 
National Planning. 
[50] Kusek, J. Z. & Rist, R. C. 2004. Ten Steps to a Results -Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems. A Handbook for 
Development Practitioners. The World Bank. Washington D.C. 
[51] Laguna, M. 2011. Chile's Monitoring and Evaluation System 
(1994-2010). Prem Notes, Special series on the Nuts and Bolts of 
M&E systems. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[52] Lopez-Acevedo, G., Rivera, K., Rivera, L. 2010. Challenges in 
Monitoring and Evaluation : An Opportunity To Institutionalize 
M&E Systems. Fifth Conference of the Latin America and the 
Caribbean Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Network. 
[53] Mupeta, S., Muleya, G., Kanyamuna, V., & Simui, F. (2020). 
Imperial Districts Civic Entrepreneurship: The Imp lementation of 
Civic Innovations in the Governance of the University of Zambia. 
Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal, 7(7) 674-685. 
[54] Lopez-Acevedo, G., Krause, P. & Mackay, K. (Eds.). 2012. 
Building Better Policies. Washington, D.C. The World Bank. 
[55] Mackay, K. 1999. Evaluation Capacity Development: A 
Diagnostic Guide and Action Framework, ECD Working Paper 
Series No. 6. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[56] Mackay, K. 2007. How to Build M&E Systems to Support Better 
Government. The International Bank for R econstruction and 
Development and World Bank. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[57] Bamberger, M. 2006. Evaluation Capacity Building, In: Segone 
and Ocampo (Ed.), Creating and Developing Evaluation 
Organizations) – Lessons learned from Africa, Americas, Asia, 
Australasia and Europe. 
[58] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2014. Report of 
the Final Evaluation of the Fifth National Development Plan  
2006-2010. Lusaka: Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[59] Bedi, T., Coudouel, A., Cox, M., Goldstein, M. & Thornton, N. 
2006. Beyond the numbers  : Understanding the institutions for 
monitoring poverty reduction strategies.  The World Bank.  
Washington, D.C. 
[60] Mackay, K. 2010. Conceptual Framework for Monitoring and 
Evaluation. The Nuts & Bolts of M&E Systems —The World 
Bank, 1, 8.  
[61] Mackay, K. 2011. The Australian Government’s Performance 
Framework, ECD Working Paper No. 25. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
[62] Mackay, K. 2006. Institutionalizing of Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems to Improve Public Sector Management, ECD Working 
Paper Series No. 15. IEG World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[63] GRZ. Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 2014. Revised 
Sixth National Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred 
Economic Growth and Development – Volume I. Lusaka: 
Ministry of Finance and National Planning. 
[64] Mark, M. M. 2008. Building a better evidence base for evaluation 
theory: Beyond general calls to a framework of types of research 
on evaluation. In N. Smith & P. R. Brandon (Eds.), Fundamental 
issues in evaluation (pp. 111-134). New York: Guilford. 
[65] Booth, D. & Lucas, H. 2002. Good Practice in the Development of 
PRSP Indicators and Monitoring Systems, ODI Working Paper 
172. Overseas Development Institute, London. 
[66] May, E., Shand, D., Mackay, K., Rojas, F. & Saavedra, J. (Eds.). 
2006. T owards the Institutionalization of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean: 
Proceedings of a World Bank Conference. The World Bank, 
Washington D.C.  
[67] Holvoet, N. & Renard, R. Putting the New Aid Paradigm to Work, 
Challenges for Monitoring and Evaluation, Discussion Paper No. 
2. Institute of Development Policy and Management, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, 2005. 
[68] Mehrotra, S. 2013. The Government Monitoring and Evaluation 
System in India: A Work in Progress, ECD Working Paper seri es 
28. IEG, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[69] Kanyamuna, V., Phiri, M., Kanenga, H. & Mulonda, M. (2020). 
“Role of Actors Outside Government in Strengthening the 
Country Monitoring and Evaluation System in Zambia.” World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, vol. 6, no. 1: 22-29.  
[70] Kusek, J.Z. 2011. Assessing Country Readiness for Results- Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation to support Results Informed Budgeting. 
The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[71] Kanyamuna, V., Mumba, M.H., Mkandawire, A., Munalula, M. & 
Kalonje, V. (2021). “Opportunities and Challenges in Using 
Information from Zambia’s Government Monitoring and 
Evaluation System”. World Journal of Social Sciences and 
Humanities, vol. 7, no. 1: 23-33. 
[72] Morra Imas, L. G. & Rist, R. C. 2009. The Road to Results:  
Designing and Conducting Effective Development Evaluations. 
The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[73] Mosse, R. & Sontheimer, L. 1996. Performance Monitoring 
Indicators Handbook. World Bank Technical Paper No. 334. The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[74] Mulonda, M., Kan yamuna, V. & Kanenga, H. 2018. State –Civil 
Society relationship in Zambia, International Journal of 
Humanities, Art and Social Studies, 3(4): 17-26. 
[75] Bamberger, M. 2008. Enhancing the utilisation of evaluations for 
evidence-based policy- making. In M. Segon e (Ed.). Bridging the 
Gap. Switzerland: UNICEF. 
[76] Naidoo, I. 2011. The role of monitoring and evaluation in 
promoting good governance in South Africa  : A case study of the 
Department of Social Development:  PhD–Thesis submitted to the 
Graduate School of Publi c & Development Management in 
fulfilment of the requirements for doctorate degree. University of 
Witwatersrand. 
[77] Kanyamuna, V., Mulonda, M. & Mulele, C.S. Monitoring and 
Evaluation Legislation in Zambia –Gap Analysis. International 
Journal of Humanities, Art and Social Studies, 2019. 4(1): 15-25. 
[78] Nelson, C. 2016. Exploring Monitoring and Evaluation within a 
Good Governance perspective: A case study of Stellenbosch 
Municipality, March, 2016. 
[79] OECD/DAC. 2005. Aid Effectiveness 2005 -10 : Progress in 
Implementing the Paris Declaration. Paris.OECD Publications.  
[80] Porter, S. & Goldman, I. 2013. A Growing Demand for 
Monitoring and Evaluation in Africa. African Evaluation 
Journal.1(1): 1-9. 
[81] Porter, S. 2012. ‘The Growing Demand for Monitoring and 
Evaluation in Africa’, i n Centre for Learning on Evaluation and 
Results CLEAR (ed.), African Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: 
Exploratory Case Studies (Johannesburg: University of the 
Witwatersrand). 
[82] Raimondo, E. 2016. What Difference Does Good Monitoring and 
Evaluation Make to  World Bank Project Performance? Policy 
Research Working Paper. IEG. The World Bank, Washington, 
D.C.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
105 World Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities  
[83] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A., Ng’andu, E., Mizinga, C. & Mwale, 
A. 2018. An Assessment of the Demand -Side of the Monitoring 
and Evaluation System of the Heal th Sector in Zambia. World 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 2018. 4(2): p. 75-86. 
[84] Schiavo-Campo, S. 2005. Evaluation Capacity Development —
Building Country Capacity for Monitoring and Evaluation in the 
Public Sector: Selected Lessons of Internatio nal Experience, 
Working Paper Series No. 13, OED, World Bank, Washington, 
D.C. 
[85] Segone, M. (Ed), 2010. From policies to results. Developing 
capacities for country monitoring and evaluation systems. 
UNICEF, DevInfo, IDEAS, ILO, IOCE, UNDP, UNIFEM, WFP 
and World Bank. 
[86] Shepherd, G. 2011. Conducting Diagnosis of M&E systems and 
Capacities. Prem Notes, Special series on the Nuts and Bolts of 
M&E systems. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[87] Smith, P. C., Nutley, S. M., Davies, H. T. O., Nutley, S. M. & 
Smith, P. C. 2 009. What works?: evidence -based policy and 
practice in public services. What works?: evidence -based policy 
and practice in public services. Bristol: The Policy Press. 
[88] Kanyamuna, V. Sector Monitoring and Evaluation Systems in the 
context of Poverty Reduction Strategies: A comparative case study 
of Zambia’s Health and Agriculture sectors. MSc –dissertation, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2013. 
[89] Srivastava, J., Kampen, J., Baker, G., Byerlee, D. & Sehya, M. 
2003. Good practices in Monitoring and Evalu ation and 
Management Information Systems for competitive Grant Progams 
in ECA Countries. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[90] Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat. 2012. Theory -Based 
Approaches to Evaluation: Concepts and Practices. 
[91] Trucano, M. (ed.). 2005. Mo nitoring and Evaluation of ICT in 
Education projects: A Handbook for Developing Countries. The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[92] UNAIDS. 2009. 12 Components of Monitoring and Evaluation 
System Assessment: Guidelines to Support Preparation, 
Implementation and Follow-up Activities. Geneva. 
[93] UNDP. 2009a. Handbook on Planning, Monitoring and Evaluating 
for Development Results. United Nations Development 
Programme, New York. 
[94] Kanyamuna, V., Kotzé, D. A. & Phiri, M. “Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems: The Missing Strand in the African 
Transformational Development Agenda.” World Journal of Social 
Sciences and Humanities, 2019. 5(3): 160-175. 
[95] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2017. Seventh 
National Development Plan (7NDP 2017 -2021), Accelerating 
Development Efforts towards Vision 2030 without Leaving 
Anyone Behind (Vol. 1). Lusaka: Ministry of National 
Development Planning. 
[96] White, H. 2009. Theory -Based Impact Evaluation: Principles and 
Practice (Impact Evaluation Working Paper 3). International 
Initiative for Impact Evaluation, Working Paper 3. New Delhi. 
[97] Wong, C. 2012. Toward Building Performance –  Oriented 
Management in China: The critical role of Monitoring and 
Evaluation and the Long road Ahead (ECD Working Paper No. 
27). The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
[98] Kanyamuna, V., Katowa, T., Mubita, A., Kanenga, H., Simui, F., 
& Kotze, D. A. (2020). Analysis of Structural and Organisational 
Arrangements of Monitoring And Evaluation Status For The 
Public Sector In Zambia. Advances in Social Sciences Research 
Journal, 7(6) 504-527. 
[99] World Bank. 2004. Assessing country readiness for results -based 
monitoring and evaluation systems. Prem Notes, Special series  
on the Nuts and Bolts of M&E systems. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C.  
[100] World Bank. 2007. A Diagnosis of Colombi a's National M&E 
System, SINERGIA. Evaluation Capacity Development. Working 
Paper Series No. 17. IEG. The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[101] World Bank. 2009. Institutionalising Impact Evaluation within the 
framework of a Monitoring and Evaluation System. IEG. T he 
World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[102] Segone, M. 2008. “Evidence-based policy-making and the role of 
monitoring and evaluation within the new aid environment”. In: 
Bridging the gap. The role of monitoring and evaluation in 
evidence-based policy-making. UNICEF, DevInfo, IDEAS, MICS, 
The World Bank.  
[103] World Bank. 2012. Designing a Results Framework for achieving 
Results: A How-To-Guide. IEG, Washington, DC. 
[104] Mulonda, M., Kanyamuna, V. & Kanenga, H. State –Civil Society 
relationship in Zambia, International Journal of  Humanities, Art 
and Social Studies, 2018. 3(4): p. 17-26. 
[105] World Bank. 2012. Improving the Quality of Public Expenditure 
through the use of Performance Information in Mexico. IEG, The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
[106] World Health Organisation. 2012. Monitoring  and Evaluation 
Indicators for Integrated Vector Management. WHO, Geneva.  
[107] Wotela, K. 2017. A proposed Monitoring and Evaluation 
Curriculum based on a model that institutionalises monitoring and 
evaluation. African Evaluation Journal, 5(1): 1-8.  
[108] Mackay, K. 2008. Helping countries build government monitoring 
and evaluation system. World Bank contribution to evidence -
based policy making. In M. Segone (Ed.). Bridging the Gap. 
Switzerland: UNICEF. 
[109] Lopez-Acevedo, G., Krause, P. & Mackay, K. (Eds.). 2012. 
Building Better Policies: The Nuts and Bolts of Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.  
[110] Zaltsman, A. 2006. Experience with Institutionalizing Monitoring 
and Evaluation Systems In Five Latin American Countries: 
Argentina, Chile, Colom bia, Costa Rica and Uruguay (ECD 
Working Paper 16 No. 16). Washington, D.C. The World Bank. 
[111] Kanyamuna, V., Mubita, A., & Kotzé, D. A. Is the policy 
environment for Zambia supportive of a thriving whole -of-
government monitoring and evaluation system? Advanc es in 
Social Sciences Research Journal, 2020. 7(1) 542-554.  
[112] Zambia Monitoring and Evaluation Association. 2018. National 
Evaluation Advocacy and Strategy–2018-2021. Lusaka. 
[113] Kusek, J. Z. & Rist, R. C. 2002. Building Results -Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: Assessing Developing 
Countries Readiness. Zeitschrift Für Evaluation, 1 (1): 151-158. 
[114] Kanyamuna, V. Analysis of Zambia’s Whole -of-Government 
Monitoring and Evaluation System in the context of National 
Development Plans. Doctorate Thesis. University of South Africa, 
2019.  
[115] Segone, M. (Ed.). 2009. Country -led Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems: Better evidence, better policies, better development 
results. UNICEF, Geneva. 
[116] GRZ. Ministry of National Development Planning. 2017a. 2016 
Annual Progress Repor t for the Revised Sixth National 
Development Plan 2013 -2016: People Centred Economic Growth 
and Development. Lusaka: Ministry of National Development 
Planning. 
 
 
© The Author(s) 2021. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
 
 
View publication stats