<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 8 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Paul Kariuki1
Purshottama Reddy2
Affiliations:
1Democracy Development 
Programme (DDP), University 
of KwaZulu-Natal,  
South Africa
2School of Management, IT 
and Governance, University 
of KwaZulu-Natal,  
South Africa
Corresponding author:
Paul Kariuki,  
pamirry@gmail.com
Dates:
Received: 07 May 2017
Accepted: 02 Oct. 2017
Published: 16 Nov. 2017
How to cite this article:
Kariuki, P ., Reddy, P ., 2017, 
‘Operationalising an effective 
monitoring and evaluation 
system for local government: 
Considerations for best 
practice’, African Evaluation 
Journal 5(2), a240. https://
doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i2.240
Copyright:
© 2017. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
Post-apartheid South Africa faces major challenges in ensuring that it provides high quality and 
sustainable services that meet citizens’ expectations. The public wants local government that is not 
only responsive to their needs but also provides ‘optimal and professional services’ across all areas 
(Meyiwa et al. 2014:4). Thus, government has the onerous responsibility to develop and implement 
a developmental framework that redresses apartheid legacies. This calls for municipalities to 
develop proactive responses that free citizens from poverty and underdevelopment.
Historically, local government operated in a manner where one group was more privileged while 
others were marginalised (Govender 2011:113). Basic services delivery did not cater for all; thus, 
the democratic government inherited significant backlogs. The new administration adopted a 
radical transformation policy that aimed to correct the anomalies created by the former regime by 
ensuring effective public administration. At the same time, it embarked on a programme to 
educate citizens on human rights, the Constitution and other important pieces of legislation. 
It was envisaged that this would empower them to demand better, high quality public services 
and at the same time hold government accountable for its actions (Naidu 2012:279).
Sadly, as the nation has developed over the past two decades, basic services delivery has been on a 
downward spiral, characterised by ongoing community protests in many local municipalities. 
According to Govender (2011:6), the root causes of poor service delivery include poor performance 
culture in many municipalities, a lack of competent technical human resources, political interference 
and poor financial management as well as an organisational structure that was not aligned. To 
Background: Post-apartheid South Africa faces major challenges in ensuring that it provides 
high quality and sustainable services that meet citizens’ expectations. The public wants local 
government that is not only responsive to their needs but also provides high quality services 
equitably to all people irrespective of their socioeconomic status. Sadly, basic services delivery 
has been on a downward spiral, characterised by ongoing community protests in many local 
municipalities. The article premises that municipalities need effective monitoring and 
evaluation systems to operate optimally.
Objectives: The article sought to show that monitoring and evaluation is a critical development 
tool that needs to be supported by municipal political and administrative leadership to ensure 
that it functions optimally by offering citizen-responsive services.
Method: The study focused on KwaZulu-Natal province, the second largest province in South 
Africa, predominantly rural with a significant poverty and underdevelopment. The study utilised 
a mixed method participatory design, comprising quantitative and qualitative approaches.
Results: The study found that monitoring and evaluation capacity is low in the majority of 
municipalities besides the Metro. The municipalities were inadequately resourced with 
competent monitoring and evaluation human personnel, thereby stifling their capacity to 
deliver quality monitoring and evaluation services.
Conclusion: The article concluded that effective monitoring and evaluation in local government 
that is responsive to citizens’ needs is a non-negotiable imperative for government. It 
recommended that municipalities be adequately resourced with competent monitoring and 
evaluation human personnel. This is important for strengthening their capacity to deliver 
efficient monitoring and evaluation services.
Operationalising an effective monitoring and evaluation 
system for local government: Considerations  
for best practice
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
correct these anomalies, the government adopted a people-
centred framework in 1997, commonly referred to as the ‘Batho 
Pele’ (a Sesotho phrase meaning ‘people first’) principles 
(GGLN 2012:19). The primary aim of this policy instrument is 
to encourage public servants to pursue and sustain excellence 
in basic services provision. Furthermore, the framework aims 
to transform basic services delivery with regard to service 
standards, courtesy, information, transparency and openness. 
It can be argued that these principles facilitate accurate 
measurement of local government’s commitment to deliver 
sustainable and high quality basic services. For this to become 
reality, a monitoring and evaluation system is required to 
enhance corporate governance at the local government level 
(Hargreaves 2010:35). This article argues that a monitoring and 
evaluation system is a critical development tool that enhances 
the legitimacy of this sphere of governance because it ensures 
that it functions optimally by offering citizen-responsive 
services. The article is organised as follows: following the 
introduction in the first section, the second section defines 
selected key terms specific to the article, followed by a brief 
discussion on institutionalising monitoring and evaluation in 
local government in the third section. The fourth section 
discusses the challenges associated with the institutionalisation 
of the system, while the fifth explores possible solutions to 
these challenges and the sixth section briefly examines how to 
operationalise and sustain an effective municipal-wide 
monitoring and evaluation system (MWMES). The article 
concludes by making recommendations and identifying good 
practices that local municipalities can adopt to maintain an 
effective monitoring and evaluation system that ensures that 
basic services are provided efficiently and sustainably.
Definition of key terminology
Monitoring
Monitoring is defined as:
a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data on 
specified indicators to provide management and the main 
stakeholders of an ongoing development intervention with 
indications of the extent of progress and achievement of 
objectives and progress in the use of allocated funds. (Public 
Service Commission [PSC] 2008:11)
According to Engela and Ajam (2010:11), monitoring refers to 
an ongoing process that focuses on assessing whether projects 
and their routine activities achieve the anticipated results 
with performance tracked through data collection and 
reviews. Uys (2010:12) expands this definition, noting that 
monitoring is a routine internal organisational activity aimed 
at ensuring that projects deliver their expected results.
Evaluation
According to Rossi, Lipsey and Freeman (2004:16), evaluation 
is ‘the systematic application of social research procedures 
for assessing the conceptualization, design, implementation 
and utility of social intervention programmes’.  The 
Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation 
(DPME 2011:vii) understands evaluation as the systematic 
collection and objective analysis of evidence on public 
policies, programmes, projects, functions and organisations 
to assess issues such as relevance, performance (efficiency 
and effectiveness), value for money, impact and sustainability 
and recommend the way forward. In this sense, evaluation is 
a time-bound activity conducted over predetermined periods 
that compare planned and actual performance (Govender 
2011:75).
Interrelationship between monitoring and 
evaluation
Conceptually, monitoring and evaluation are complementary 
activities. While monitoring is a routine activity that assesses 
an intervention’s progress towards the realisation of its goals, 
evaluation is an in-depth assessment of its value that seeks to 
determine the reasons for the observable effects of a 
programme. Therefore, monitoring and evaluation reinforce 
each other. This is shown in Table 1.
Benefits of monitoring and evaluation in local 
government
In broad terms, both monitoring and evaluation activities 
offer certain benefits if they are conducted correctly and the 
results are correctly interpreted. In local government, 
monitoring and evaluation facilitates policy development 
and proper financial management as well as enabling 
municipal functionaries to align their interventions with 
national government’s priorities (National Treasury 2010:5). 
According to Engela and Ajam (2010:11), monitoring and 
evaluation systems are used to provide information that 
enables the promotion of good governance and accountability 
in government.
It follows that monitoring and evaluation provides the 
necessary impetus to enhance basic services delivery 
(Schurink & Schurink 2010:16). While the provision of basic 
services has remained a continuing challenge in South 
African local government, renewed understanding of the 
importance of monitoring and evaluation among public 
servants could change this situation. Furthermore, public 
servants are beginning to understand their role in ensuring 
the timeous achievement of set goals.
TABLE 1: Complementary roles of monitoring and evaluation.
Monitoring Evaluation
It is continuous – analysis on the ongoing 
progress of a project towards achieving 
planned results.
It is periodic – judging the overall merits 
of an intervention.
Ensures accountability of an  
intervention.
Relies more on detailed data for 
decision-making.
Routinely collects data on indicators. Assesses the contributions of activities to 
results.
Translates programme objectives into 
performance indicators, capturing 
planned results as well.
Captures both intended and unintended 
results.
Conducted by people usually involved 
directly in implementing an  
intervention.
Conducted usually by an independent 
assessor who is impartial in his or her 
judgement of an intervention.
Produces regular reports and updates  
for management and project staff.
Produces evaluation reports with 
suggested recommendations for changes 
to an intervention.
Source: Govender 2011:77
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
There is growing appreciation of the fact that the outcomes 
and impact of government interventions are linked to basic 
services provision; therefore, local government that is not 
delivering quality sustainable services is failing in its 
constitutional mandate. This has prompted national 
government to implement performance contracts for all 
public servants, especially those in leadership positions to 
accurately measure individual staff productivity. The benefits 
of monitoring and evaluation are summarised in Box 1.
Institutionalisation of monitoring 
and evaluation in South African 
local government
As the sphere of government that is closest to citizens, the 
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa mandates local 
government with the responsibility of delivering public 
services equitably and fairly (Koma 2010:113). The primary 
aim of this constitutional mandate is to reverse the 
underdevelopment created by the apartheid regime. In this 
regard, national government envisages local government that 
is capable of working with citizens in their locality to address 
their challenges and provide collaborative, sustainable 
solutions. However, Davids (2011:3573) notes that many 
municipalities across the country are struggling to fulfil this 
mandate, especially given the change from an inward-looking 
approach, that is, an approach focusing on municipal internal 
processes, to an outward-looking approach, meaning one 
that focuses primarily on citizens. Regrettably, most citizens 
are still wallowing in abject, chronic poverty, while 
unemployment and inequality are growing apace. The onus 
is on local government to address these challenges.
In response to this dilemma and in order to improve 
government performance, the national government 
developed the Government-Wide Monitoring and Evaluation 
System. This framework aims to enable national government 
to improve governance and resource allocation across all 
departments and agencies. It sets out specific intervention 
objectives, inputs, outputs, outcomes and expected impact to 
ensure that government delivers in line with citizens’ needs 
(Presidency, 2011:11). The government envisages a functional 
and effective public service that:
•	 facilitates intergovernmental planning
•	 facilitates cooperative governance in achieving effective 
and sustained services delivery
•	 effectively monitors the implementation of government 
interventions
•	 continuously and accurately evaluates these interventions 
to generate insights that inform future interventions, 
decision-making and policy development
•	 provides advisory services to government departments 
with regard to their interventions and suggests corrective 
actions if they are not delivering the desired results.
It is important to note that the success of this framework 
depends on support from other key stakeholders who provide 
oversight of different critical aspects. For instance, the 
Presidency is responsible for coordinating the implementation 
of national policies through government departments to 
ensure integrated service delivery (National Treasury 2010:17). 
Another key stakeholder is Statistics South Africa, the 
government agency responsible for collecting and analysing 
data to generate accurate information to inform government 
policy planning processes as well as decision-making 
(Govender 2011:71). The Public Administration Leadership 
and Management Academy, now the National School of 
Government, is a critical stakeholder as it is tasked with 
building the leadership and management capacities of middle 
and senior government officials, including their knowledge 
of monitoring and evaluation (Govender 2011). These and 
other stakeholders, such as the DPME, office of the Auditor-
General, office of the Premier and the Public Service 
Commission, need to ensure that government-wide 
monitoring and evaluation is undertaken responsibly by 
relevant line departments as shown in Figure 1.
BOX 1: Summary of the benefits of a monitoring and evaluation system in local government.
 1.  Development of accurate baselines that are used to set realistic targets;
 2.  Generation of useful information that enhances decision-making and policy development processes within a local municipality;
 3.  Improved utilisation of financial and other resources, leading to better basic services provision;
 4.  Reporting on programmes and projects is enforced as the system demands that information is collected and processed so that it can inform policy development and decision 
making;
 5.  Increased interdepartmental and inter-unit collaboration as a result of the interlinked nature of government interventions, ultimately increasing intergovernmental 
coordination;
 6.  Heightened awareness by municipal functionaries of the importance of understanding a government intervention for effective execution, especially when goals, inputs, 
outputs, outcomes and impact are clearly spelt out;
 7.  Enhanced quality of information required as the culture of monitoring and evaluation is embraced and appreciated by municipal functionaries;
 8.  Increased accountability within local municipalities, as municipal functionaries are assessed against agreed performance targets;
 9.  As a result of increased accountability, good governance is enhanced, thereby restoring the dignity of local government as the sphere of government closest to citizens;
10.  Improved capacity to manage change at local municipality level because of information gathered through the system.
Source: Kariuki 2017:211
Source: Phillips et al. 2014:394
FIGURE 1: Government departments responsible for monitoring and evaluation 
in the public service and their source of authority.
Cons/g415tu/g415onal Power Legal Power Execu/g415ve Power
Auditor-General Na/g415onal Treasury Presidency
• Independent monitoring
   of compliance;
• Auditing of performance
   information;
• Reporting to parliament
• Expenditure reviews;
• Budget and quarterly
   ﬁnancial repor/g415ng;
• Regulate ﬁve-year and
   annual plans and
   quarterly repor/g415ng
National Planning
Commission (NPC)
• Produce 20-years
   plan;
Department of
Performance and
Evaluation (DPME)
• Produce government-
   wide frameworks;
• Facilitate government
   ﬁve-year plans for
   priorities;
• Monitor and evaluate
    plans for priorities;
• Monitor management
   practices of 
   government 
Public Service
Commission
Department of
Coopera/g415ve Governance
(COGTA)
• Independent monitoring
   and evaluation of public
   service;
• Focus on adherence to
   public service principles
   in constitutions;
• Reporting to parliament
• Regulate local
   government planning;
• Monitor performance
   of local government;
• Intervention powers
   over local government
Department of Public
Administration (DPSA)
Line departments 
(na/g415onal/provincial)
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
At the provincial level, provincial-wide monitoring and 
evaluation systems are established to ensure that provincial 
developmental objectives are realised. This includes the 
coordination of interdepartmental efforts in terms of policy 
formulation, review and planning as well as overseeing basic 
services delivery (Govender 2011:106). However, challenges 
have been reported in institutionalising monitoring and 
evaluation systems at the provincial level, including complex 
reporting mechanisms and non-alignment of provincial 
objectives with national priorities. It is important to note that 
both national and provincial monitoring and evaluation 
levels are interlinked and interdependent. They are designed 
to complement and depend on one another in order to ensure 
consistency in tracking government performance on its 
programmes. At local level, the integration of monitoring and 
evaluation has been fragmented and uncoordinated. Because 
of a lack of human and financial resources, municipalities 
have not implemented a MWMES (Go vender 2011:107). 
Monitoring and evaluation have thus not been institutionalised 
at this level. The following section discusses this question.
Challenges associated with the 
institutionalisation of monitoring 
and evaluation in South African 
local government
As noted in the previous section, an effective monitoring and 
evaluation system delivers because it is owned by those 
responsible for leadership at any level of governance. 
Govender (2011:88) argues that in order to institutionalise a 
monitoring and evaluation system in a sustainable manner, 
municipal leadership should appreciate that the system is a 
critical management tool to guide its performance. That this 
is not the case at present is demonstrated by the increase in 
service delivery protests by citizens who are frustrated by the 
slow pace of basic services provision.
The second challenge associated with the institutionalisation 
of monitoring and evaluation at the local government level is 
the lack of competent technical personnel skilled in 
monitoring and evaluation (Uys 2010:4–5). While significant 
investment has been made in improving public servants’ 
skills, the State of Municipal Capacity Report for 2010/2011 
reveals that major capacity shortfalls persist in most local 
municipalities (SMCR 2012:8). The deficits are generally 
higher in rural than urban municipalities (Ajam 2012:4–5). 
The lack of critical personnel is a catastrophic situation that is 
a significant impediment to basic services provision.
Thirdly and connected to the above point, most municipalities 
are unable to accurately align their integrated development 
plans with the provincial growth and development strategy, 
which leads to lack of alignment of priorities between 
municipalities and premiers’ offices. Therefore, the vision that 
municipalities set for themselves is often not realised because 
of a lack of technical human resource capacity to enable 
accurate interpretation and subsequent implementation of 
provincial goals at local government level.
Fourthly, according to the Role of Premiers’ Offices in 
Government-Wide Monitoring and Evaluation Practice Guide: A 
Good Practice Guide (Presidency 2008:4), there is a general lack 
of understanding of municipal processes and systems among 
employees. This poses serious challenges to municipalities 
insofar as performance management is concerned as the 
quality of services provided may be compromised. Increased 
service delivery-related protests may result.
Fifthly, the same guide highlights that the monitoring 
and evaluation data collected are usually of poor quality 
and inaccurate (Presidency 2008:4). This suggests that 
municipalities have significant capacity limitations in 
generating useful, evidence-based decision-making as a 
result of a lack of accurate data. It also means that many 
municipalities will continue lagging behind as far as basic 
services provision is concerned because they cannot accurately 
track progress made towards reducing basic services backlogs.
Sixthly, limited understanding of the importance of 
performance measurement among municipal management 
and staff is a key impediment to institutionalising monitoring 
and evaluation in municipalities (Govender & Reddy 2014b:70). 
Thus, there is no organisational buy-in to sustain effective 
monitoring and evaluation practices in local government.
Seventhly, the inertia to change mindset about the way 
performance measurement has been made has complicated 
institutionalising monitoring and evaluation in local 
government (Govender & Reddy 2014b:70). For a long time, 
municipal staff have operated within a mindset of the past, 
‘we have always done things in this way’ (Govender & 
Reddy 2014b). This kind of mindset resists anything new or 
change that challenges the status quo. Without a paradigm 
shift internally with municipal staff and management, 
institutionalising monitoring and evaluation in local 
government will remain a distant reality.
While municipalities are complex structures, there is an 
urgent need to explore ways to address the challenges that are 
hampering the institutionalisation of monitoring and 
evaluation at this level. This is based on acknowledgement 
that monitoring and evaluation is a crucial management and 
performance tool that helps to assess the impact of government 
interventions on citizens. The following section discusses the 
various ways in which these challenges can be mitigated.
Mitigating the challenges associated 
with the institutionalisation of 
monitoring and evaluation in local 
government
In every challenge lie possibilities for innovation, which 
normally lead to improved services. The challenges that 
local municipalities have experienced as they attempt to 
institutionalise monitoring and evaluation are not uncommon. 
The main issue is the way institutionalisation should occur to 
facilitate the process. This section discusses strategies to 
mitigate the challenges identified.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Address the systemic factors that beleaguer 
municipalities by strengthening accountability 
of municipal leadership in the municipality
Municipalities are complex structures with numerous actors in 
their operational space; this complicates the institutional 
response to citizens’ needs. The various interactions are the 
result of the interdependent nature of local government as it 
cannot fulfil its mandate in isolation. One systemic factor that 
plays a significant role in the way municipalities operate is the 
dwindling revenue base. Many local municipalities, including 
metros, are constantly exploring innovative ways to increase 
their revenue to be able to offer better and more sustainable 
services to citizens. The challenge lies in managing the 
tension between political mandates and the socioeconomic 
development agenda that aims to redress the apartheid legacy 
of underdevelopment. Therefore, while increasing the revenue 
base through rates and taxes is a sound strategy, systemic issues 
such as maladministration of resources characterised by 
corruption must be dealt with decisively by municipalities and 
the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional 
Affairs (DCOGTA) leadership. Another key systemic issue is 
the demarcation of areas under municipalities’ jurisdiction. 
Kroukamp and Lues (2008:111) contend that demarcation has 
increased the distance between municipalities as service 
providers, and communities as clients. Given the shortage of 
human resources, municipalities are unable to ensure that all 
citizens receive equal services without compromising the 
quality of the services provided. Therefore, by strengthening 
accountability within the municipality and holding municipal 
leadership accountable for their performance, systemic 
challenges will be addressed and eliminated to enhance quality 
service provision.
Depoliticise municipalities and entrench the 
culture of evaluation by enforcing independency 
and transparency of monitoring and evaluation 
processes
Municipalities attract significant interest from political 
parties. For some time, local municipalities have been 
plagued by intra- and inter-political conflicts as political 
parties seek to promote their own interests (DCOGTA 
2010:4). The net effect of such political interference is 
polarisation within municipalities that impacts on basic 
services provision. Because monitoring and evaluation is a 
highly contested phenomenon in municipalities, municipal 
leadership should regard it as a management tool aimed at 
facilitating effective delivery of public services in a responsive 
manner that matches citizens’ needs and expectations. If 
municipal leadership were to conduct monitoring and 
evaluation in their municipalities in a way that it promotes 
respect of independency and transparency of the process, 
there is a high likelihood that their staff would embrace the 
practice and inculcate it as part of the organisational norm.
Enhance staff monitoring and evaluation 
capacity through skilling and re-skilling
One of the major challenges facing local municipalities is 
a severe shortage of skills as well as human resources, 
especially in core technical areas such as information 
technology and engineering as well as monitoring and 
evaluation. This situation is dire and can have severe 
consequences for the entire local government sphere 
(Govender 2011:123). Local municipalities should prioritise 
the skilling of their current staff responsible for monitoring 
and evaluation functions to increase demand for monitoring 
and evaluation information. This is a policy imperative and 
should cover all municipalities, rural, peri-urban and urban. 
At the same time, they should create an environment that 
attracts and retains technical staff by offering incentives 
such as training opportunities. The high staff turnover 
experienced by most local municipalities limits their capacity 
to deliver effectively on their constitutional mandate.
Enhance intergovernmental and 
interdepartmental relations for support and 
oversight
Another critical element that is necessary for institutionalising 
monitoring and evaluation in local government is supportive 
intergovernmental and interdepartmental relations. 
Intergovernmental interactions enhance work relations among 
colleagues and help to address challenges at different levels 
(DCOGTA 2010:3). At present, such interactions are fragmented 
and poorly coordinated, with little oversight offered to local 
municipalities by DCOGTA at both provincial and national 
levels. If this aspect is addressed and strengthened, there will 
be significant sharing of practices and learnings from various 
interventions, thereby further entrenching a culture of 
collective responsibility for the results.
Enforce financial accountability in local 
municipalities
Financial accountability is critical in both the public and 
private sectors. It is a governance ingredient that persuades 
citizens to support a cause with unrelenting commitment. 
In many municipalities, this virtue is absent; given the 
atrocious levels of corruption and mismanagement of 
financial resources, citizens do not feel that officials are 
concerned about their plight. This situation is exacerbated 
when no one is held to account and when culprits are let off 
the hook without being punished or held responsible for 
their actions. The net effect is very low levels of confidence 
and trust among citizens (Kariuki, 2017:270).
Municipal leadership supported by law enforcement agencies 
can stem corruption in local government by enforcing the law 
as described by the Public Finance and Management Act (PFMA) 
against illegal activities as well as prosecuting corrupt 
officials misusing public resources for personal gratification.
Operationalising and sustaining an 
effective municipal-wide monitoring 
and evaluation system: 
Recommendations for good practice
A sustainable and an effective MWMES is important for a 
developmental local government. This is because it provides
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
a framework of operation that guides municipalities to 
deliver their interventions according to set objectives and 
targets while being cognizant of citizen’s needs. Therefore, to 
ensure that an effective MWMES is established and sustained, 
the following aspects need to be considered:
•	 Municipal leadership should address the challenge of 
political and administrative bureaucracy in its system 
which often stifles innovation. Bureaucracy in this case 
constitutes the polity responsible for executing established 
policies by politicians (Olumuyiwa 2015:7). It concerns 
itself with policy implementation and policymaking. 
While these duo responsibilities are critical for effective 
municipal functioning, they sometimes stand in the way 
of innovation especially as it relates to implementing 
systems such as monitoring and evaluation aimed at 
improving systemic efficiencies. MWMES is an innovative 
mechanism aimed at improving local governance through 
provision of quality public services that meet citizens’ 
expectations. If municipal political and administrative 
leadership, which often is responsible for policy 
implementation, is not enthusiastic about supporting 
MWMES, it will hinder its successful establishment in 
municipalities. Thus, the crucial task of municipal 
leadership is to find out what barriers stand in the way of 
efficiency and address them to ensure municipal services 
are delivered resourcefully (Koma 2010:115).
•	 Municipal political leadership should be cognizant of 
the costs associated with implementing and sustaining a 
results-oriented MWMES and plan accordingly to 
ensure quality service provision. Some of the critical 
costs to consider include attracting and retaining 
qualified and experienced monitoring and evaluation 
human resources who assist the municipalities in quality 
reporting about interventions to enhance decision-
making processes. Knowing these costs upfront and 
associated benefits of a results-based monitoring and 
evaluation system will enable the municipal political 
leadership to plan better and support monitoring and 
evaluation units in their work.
•	 Strengthen intergovernmental relations to enhance 
utilisation of monitoring and evaluation systems in 
supporting municipalities to deliver on their mandates. 
Essentially, cooperative governance means that all the 
three spheres of government should work together 
(cooperate) to provide citizens with a comprehensive 
package of services (co-relationship) (Khawula 2016:13). 
While the cooperative governance is an important concept 
for ensuring an integrated and coherent government, 
there are inherent weaknesses within the national and 
provincial departments of Cooperative Governance and 
Traditional Affairs (COGTA) (Motingoe 2012:204). Some 
of these weaknesses include lack of interdepartmental 
coordination, limited information sharing among 
departments as well as limited municipal consultation by 
provinces on draft provincial policies and laws (Mpisi 
2013:8). Many key provincial policies and laws affecting 
municipalities are passed without municipalities’ 
participation (Jordaan & Fouri e 2013:25). These 
weaknesses impact on m unicipalities’ capacity to render 
their services efficiently to citizens. To address these 
weaknesses, effective interlinkage between national and 
provincial COGTA departments is recommended. The 
provincial COGTA department then connects with 
municipalities to ensure they are capable to interpret 
government programmes and support them to implement 
them successfully (DCOGTA 2010:4).
•	 Connected to the above point, to ensure that MWMES 
is sustained, a strong municipal political leadership 
promoting utilisation of monitoring and evaluation data 
is needed. This leadership is needed because it has the 
capacity to build and strengthen interdepartmental trust 
so that data can be shared across different units to 
enhance interdepartmental cooperation (Govender & 
Reddy 2014b:174). This cooperation is important for 
strategic policy development in municipalities because of 
effective data management systems. A coordinated data 
management system lessens duplication of information, 
thereby minimising errors in decision-making processes. 
It is imperative for the monitoring and evaluation unit of 
a municipality to ensure that data quality at every phase 
of the data management process (data sourcing, data 
collection, data collation, data analysis, data reporting 
and data use) is of high quality. Data must be accurate, 
reliable, exact, comprehensive, timely and of high 
integrity, meaning data that are not biased or manipulated.
•	 Connected to the above point, it is imperative to 
strengthen municipal monitoring and evaluation 
information systems. This would mean that, with time, 
quality data will be collected and analysed accurately to 
provide insights that inform decision-making, budgeting 
processes and policy development, among other aspects 
of municipal governance. Moreover, this would increase 
demand for monitoring and evaluation information as 
well as its utilisation.
•	 Create a strong performance culture with effective 
rewards and sanctions (Engela & Ajam 2010:14). It is 
important that rewards are linked to performance to 
ensure agreed goals and deliverables are met. Essentially, 
the achievement of set goals and the standard of 
performance to which the goals have been achieved are 
the two main sets of criteria for determining rewards 
(Bussin 2017:23). This implies that the way a municipal 
employee meets the defined norms of quality determines 
the reward due to them. In a similar vein, every 
municipality should have a clearly defined policy that 
defines the consequences of non-performance.
•	 As a norm, municipalities should always conduct baseline 
assessments before implementing government programmes. 
In most cases, local municipalities lack the necessary 
baseline data to inform their interventions (Engela & Ajam 
2010:18). It is imperative that local municipalities establish 
systems that capture critical data that are subjected to 
stringent verification processes to ensure their authenticity. 
They are then processed to inform decision making and 
other pertinent governance processes.
•	 Develop technology-responsive systems that will 
facilitate proper and accurate reporting of municipal
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
interventions (Govender & Reddy 2014a:71). An example 
of such technologies includes electronic data dashboards 
and other web-based information systems that facilitate 
real-time collection of monitoring and evaluation data. 
They can produce reports timeously that can be integrated 
with other reports generated from non-electronic systems. 
It is important that all data-producing mechanisms be 
integrated with existing data management processes to 
enhance coherent reporting and decision-making in 
municipalities.
In summary, operating an efficient and sustainable 
MWMES requires significant coordination of multiple role 
players to ensure it delivers results as expected. However, 
it also requires a significant level of support from political 
and administrative leadership at the municipal level, 
who should work in tandem with each other to ensure 
they support municipalities in delivering quality public 
services.
Conclusion
Monitoring and evaluation is critical for ensuring that local 
government that is responsive to citizens’ needs. Admittedly, 
there is no one-size-fits-all approach for tackling the 
challenges facing local government. However, to create 
conditions for improvement and sustained good performance 
of the sector, both political and administrative leadership in 
municipalities must work with each other in delivering their 
services to the public sustainably. They must also possess 
requisite technical skills and competencies in order to execute 
municipal monitoring and evaluation responsibilities with 
discretion and sensitivity.
Moreover, the three spheres of government need to work 
more closely to ensure an integrated effective and efficient 
service delivery. Monitoring and evaluation plays a crucial 
role in connecting these spheres through a coordinated 
linking of critical activities such as information flow inter-
departmentally to ensure accurate reporting of government 
programmes. This means intergovernmental relations among 
these governance spheres must be strong to ensure mutual 
accountability.
To realise this ideal on a consistent basis, there must be a 
commitment geared towards embracing municipal-wide 
monitoring and evaluation as a tool for enabling a results-
oriented developmental local government. In pursuit of a 
developmental local government, municipalities must 
prioritise upskilling and re-skilling their human resources 
(municipal officials), in order to standardise performance 
and outputs from the system. This implies that there shou ld 
be better coordination of monitoring and evaluation efforts 
across departments and units, to ensure timely and 
effective decision-making for better outcomes. To this end, 
monitoring and evaluation in municipalities needs to move 
beyond compliance towards institutionalisation in an 
incremental way, to improve monitoring and evaluation 
practice in the sector. The implementation of monitoring 
and evaluation systems contributes to the pursuit of good 
governance. Failure to move towards institutionalisation 
means that monitoring and evaluation practice in 
municipalities is reduced to a mere checklist exercise. 
Ultimately, the ability of municipalities to be accountable 
may be compromised.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
We declare that we have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced us 
in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
P .K. conducted the research, analysed the findings and wrote 
the paper for publication and also actioned all the revisions 
for the manuscript as requested by the Editor. P .R. supervised 
the research and quality assured the paper to ensure it is 
appropriate for submission.
References
Ajam, T., 2012, ‘Proposals on municipal capacity building: Doing things differently or 
re-packaging the past initiatives’, in Dullar Omar Institute (ed.), Local Government 
Bulletin, pp. 1–16, Community Law Centre, Cape Town.
Bussin, M., 2017, Performance management reboot, KR Publishing, Randburg.
Davids, G.J., 2011, ‘Local government capacity challenges in post-apartheid South 
Africa: Lessons learnt’, African Journal of Business Management 5(7), 3570–3576.
Department of Co-operative Governance & Traditional Affairs (DCOGTA), 2010, 
KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Government, Toolkit: Performance Management Made 
Simple, DCOGTA, Pretoria, pp. 3–4.
Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME), 2012, Evaluation 
Competency Framework for Government, The Presidency, DPME, Pretoria.
Engela, R. & Ajam, T., 2010, Implementing a government- wide monitoring and 
evaluation system in South Africa , ECD Working Paper Series, No. 21, The World 
Bank, Washington, DC, pp. 11, 14, 18.
Good Governance Learning Network (GGLN), 2012, Advancing active citizenship: A 
Citizenship Academy as a means to strengthen local democracy? , A Discussion 
Paper and Roundtable Report, GGLN, Cape Town, pp. 15–20.
Govender, I., 2011, ‘Monitoring and evaluation systems enhancing corporate 
governance in local government: A case study of KwaZulu-Natal’, unpublished 
doctoral thesis, Public Administration, School of Public Administration and 
Development Management, Faculty of Management Studies, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, pp. 6, 106, 107, 113, 123.
Govender, I. & Reddy, P ., 2014a, ‘Monitoring and evaluation in local municipalities: A 
case study of KwaZulu-Natal Province’, Administratio Publica 160(22), 4.
Govender, N. & Reddy, P ., 2014b, ‘Performance monitoring and evaluation. The 
eThekwini experience, South Africa’, African Journal of Public Affairs 7(1), 58–79.
Hargreaves, M.B., 2010, Evaluating systems change: A planning guide, Mathematica, 
Policy Research Inc., Princeton, NJ, p. 35.
Jordaan, J. & Fourie, D., 2013, ‘Towards best practice financial performance 
management: A platform design for stewardship in public administration’, African 
Journal of Public Affairs 6(1), 19–40.
Kariuki, P ., 2017, ‘Developing a human resource framework for monitoring and 
evaluation personnel in selected municipalities of KwaZulu-Natal’, unpublished 
doctoral thesis, Public Administration, School of Management, IT and Governance, 
Faculty of Management Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal.
Khawula, B., 2016, ‘An evaluation of community participation in the integrated 
development planning (IDP) process: A case study of Umzumbe municipality in 
the province of Kwazulu-Natal in South AFRICA’, unpublished master’s thesis, 
Public Management, Faculty of Public Management and Economics, Durban 
University of Technology.
Koma, S.B., 2010, ‘The State of Local Government in South Africa: Issues, trends and 
options’, Journal of Public Administration 45(1.1), 111–120.
Kroukamp, H. & Lues, L., 2008, ‘Improving local management’, in M.S. de Vries, P .S. 
Reddy & M. Haque (eds.), Improving local government: Outcomes of comparative 
research, p. 111, Governance and Public Management Series, Oxford Press, 
London, England.
Meyiwa, T., Nkondo, M., Chitiga-Mabugu, M., Sithole, M. & Nyamnjoh, F., 2014, State 
of the nation 2014. South Africa 1994–2014: A twenty-year review , HSRC Press, 
Cape Town.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 8 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Motingoe, R.S., 2012, ‘Monitoring and evaluation system utilisation for municipal 
support’, unpublished doctoral thesis, Degree of Public Management and 
Governance, Potchefstroom campus, North-West University.
Mpisi, M., 2013, The model of inter-governmental relations: Presentation in the 
Technical Premier’s Co-ordinating Forum on 29 November 2014 in Durban , 
KwaZulu Natal Premiers Office, Durban.
Naidu, R., 2012, ‘Subduing local voice-public participation and ward committees’, in S. 
Booysen (ed.), Local elections in South Africa: Parties, people, politics , pp. 279–
293, SUN MeDIA MeTRO, Bloemfontein.
National Treasury, 2010, Treasury guidelines: Preparation of expenditure estimates for 
the 2011 medium term expenditure framework, National Treasury, Pretoria, p. 5.
Olumuyiwa, A., 2015, ‘Bureaucratic politics and policy development: Issues and 
challenges’, African Journal of Political Science and International Relations  10(2), 
16–24.
Phillips, S., Goldman, I., Gasa, N., Akhalwaya, I. & Leon, B., 2014, ‘A focus on M&E of 
results: An example from the Presidency, South Africa’, Journal of Development 
Effectiveness 6(4), 392–406.
Presidency, 2008, The role of premiers’ Offices in government wide monitoring and 
evaluation: A good practice guide, Presidency, Pretoria.
Schurink, W. & Schurink, E., 2010, ‘Outcomes-based evaluation within a systems 
perspective: Moving beyond a theory of change to system change reform in public 
governance’, Administration Publica 18(2), 13–38.
Public Service Commission (PSC), 2008, Basic concepts in monitoring and evaluation, 
PSC, Pretoria.
Rossi, P ., Lipsey, M. & Freeman, H., 2004, Evaluation: A systematic approach, 7th edn., 
SAGE, Thousand Oaks, CA.
State of Municipal Capacity Report (SMCR), 2012, State of municipal capacity report 
(SMCR) for the 2010/11 financial year , viewed 06 September 2014, from www.
dplg.gov.za
The Presidency, Republic of South Africa, 2011, National Evaluation Policy Framework, 
The Presidency, Pretoria, p. 11.
Uys, F.M., 2010, ‘Improving performance in the public sector’, Administration Publica 
18(2), 54–73.