<<<PAGE=1>>>
7 The inﬂuence of local 
ownership and politics  
of the use of evaluations  
in policy making
The case of the public 
procurement evaluation in Uganda
Ismael Kawooya, Timothy Lubanga, Abdul Muwanika, 
Edwin Muhumuza and Rhona Mijumbi-Deve
Summary
This case study sought to understand the mechanism leading to the use of evi-
dence from an evaluation of public procurement systems in Uganda undertaken 
in 2012–13, led by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and the Public Pro-
curement Development Authority (PPDA). The public procurement sector had 
undergone major changes over the years. The impetus for the evaluation was the 
need to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the system, and was agreed to 
by Cabinet and supported by the World Bank through its T echnical Advisory Sup-
port Unit. An independent consultant undertook the evaluation, working closely 
with the PPDA. Various structures oversaw the evaluation, including OPM and the 
Evaluation Sub-committee. The consultant was responsive to government requests 
for advice and maintained regular communication, reporting on a monthly basis. 
Ultimately, this resulted in an evaluation that was owned by government and seen 
to be of high quality. The evaluation led to revision of procurement thresholds and 
flexibility for sectors that need specialised procurement. It demonstrated to the 
PPDA the importance of regularly reviewing and updating regulations, standards 
and guidelines.
Background
Uganda has established mechanisms within government to improve the qual -
ity of policies through the use of evidence. OPM has, since 2005, led efforts to 
strengthen the national Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system, including 
setting up a national evaluation system with an Evaluation Sub-Committee  
(ESC) and a Government Evaluation Facility (GEF), M&E units in each gov-
ernment ministry, department or agency (MDA), and building their M&E 
capacity. T o date, over 30 evaluations have been conducted with various inputs 
into policies using this system. However, little is known of how these evalua-
tions have actually been used in policy making.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
116 Ismael Kawooya et al.
This case study focuses on evidence from an evaluation carried out in 2012 to 
assess and learn of the impact of public procurement reforms. The evaluation was 
completed after the laws amending the Public Procurement and Disposal (PPD) 
Act had been assented to by the president but before regulations and standards 
were enacted. Although the process for amending this Act had begun, not enough 
was known about how the previous law performed and it was felt to be necessary 
to understand how the current law might work. This prompted a request for an 
evaluation into the effectiveness of public procurement reforms in Uganda. This 
case sought to understand how the evidence from the evaluation was used during 
the amendment process of the PPD Act and the factors influencing its use. The 
case draws out lessons on how evidence might be used in similar settings in other 
countries in Africa. It specifically focuses on the complex relationships and inter-
play between the actors, institutions and processes within public procurement and 
how these affected the use of evidence in this process.
The research was undertaken from October 2018 to August 2019 using 
qualitative data collection methods and analysis, including document review 
and semi-structured interviews. Documents reviewed included both published 
and unpublished documents. Semi-structured interviews involved key inform-
ants from (1) government institutions: OPM, Ministry of Finance, Planning 
and Economic Development (MoFPED), Uganda National Roads Authority 
and PPDA; (2) the donor community; and (3) an evaluator representative. The 
participants interviewed were identified from stakeholder lists included in the 
appendices of evaluation reports and snowball sampling. Of the 12 potential 
interviewees, nine responded and were interviewed.
The context
Background to Uganda
The Government of Uganda outlines key strategic priorities for development 
every five years in a National Development Plan (NDP). The current NDP II 
introduces an ambitious goal, Vision 2040, which sets out strategies to trans -
form Uganda’s economy to middle-income status by 2040 through infrastruc-
ture development in energy, oil and roads (European Commission et al., 2015; 
National Planning Authority & National Planning Authority, 2009).
Uganda receives significant budget support from development partners 
(DPs), and the World Bank is the biggest contributor, with a contribution esti-
mated at 4.8% of GDP in 2012/13 ( European Commission et al., 2015 ). As 
such, the interests of DPs have had significant influence on the public financial 
management reforms undertaken by the government.
Critics often point out that, despite apparently good policy frameworks, imple-
mentation is lacking. For example, the World Bank’s Country Policy and Insti-
tutional Assessment showed that Uganda scored an average of 3.6 against the 
average score of 3.1 in sub-Saharan Africa.1 However, on accountability, transpar-
ency and corruption in the public sector, Uganda scored a miserly 2.0 against a 
sub-Saharan Africa average of 2.7 (World Bank & Government of Uganda, 2004).
<<<PAGE=3>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 117
The institutional context to the procurement sector
An estimated 60% of the country’s budget is spent on public procurement, 
which is comparable to a range of 40%–70% spent by developing countries 
(Khi V . Thai, 2009). Public procurement is organised in Uganda through the 
PPDA Act 2003, which defines procurement as ‘acquisition by purchase, rental, 
lease, tenancy, franchise, or any other contractual means, of any type of works, 
services, or supplies or any combination’ (Government of Uganda, 2003).
Public procurement is decentralised, meaning that central and local govern-
ment entities are responsible for their own procurement processes from planning 
to implementation (Government of Uganda et al., 2003; Procurement and disposal 
of assets authority, 2004, 2005). Public procurement processes with government 
MDAs are managed through a procurement cycle at the procuring and disposing 
entity (PDE), which includes a user department that initiates the process to procure 
a service or good, and a procuring and disposal unit (PDU) that coordinates the 
administrative process. An accounting officer designated by the secretary to the 
Treasury is responsible for the accountability of funds disbursed to the PDE.
A number of different surveys have concluded that corruption in the gov -
ernment is an acknowledged way of ‘doing’ business (Procurement and disposal 
of assets authority, 2011). The World Bank estimated that Uganda lost about 
USD 500 million to corruption annually before 2011 (Procurement and dis -
posal of assets authority, 2011). During the OPM and the Karuma dam scandals 
in 2009 and 2002, DPs withdrew and/or froze aid to the government (Harold, 
2012; Michael, 2002; Walubiri, 2012).
Inﬂuential actors and stakeholders
State actors and stakeholders
The president of Uganda is a leading proponent of public sector reforms and 
has on several occasions made political proclamations that set the precedent for 
reforms (Nabyonga-Orem et al., 2014).
Public financial management (PFM), including procurement, falls under the 
MoFPED, which is responsible for policy formulation, while the PPDA has 
been established as an autonomous regulatory body that regulates and moni -
tors compliance to the PPDA Act by all government ministries, departments 
and agencies (MDAs). The MoFPED’s Procurement Policy and Management 
Department is responsible for managing and coordinating public procurement 
reforms through initiation of public procurement policy reviews.
The PPDA Authority is mandated by the PPDA Act to regulate and moni-
tor compliance and performance and ensure the necessary capacities are in 
place for public procurement. The Authority recruits and supports procure -
ment officers for all government entities, ensuring interaction between the 
regulator and implementing entities through capacity building (Government of 
Uganda, 2003). The PPDA Authority has a research unit and has been involved 
in a number of research activities to improve the efficiency and effectiveness 
of procurement reforms. Structural mechanisms are established to ensure that
<<<PAGE=4>>>
118 Ismael Kawooya et al.
the reports from the research unit are discussed and decisions are made by the 
Procurement Performance Monitoring System.
The OPM coordinates and implements the strengthening of the national 
M&E system. The Evaluation Sub-Committee (ESC) is an initiative within 
OPM to support public sector evaluations through technical guidance and is 
composed of experts from development partners (DFID and the World Bank), 
OPM, MoFPED, Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the Economic Policy Research 
Centre at Makerere University. The topics for evaluation are identified by the 
permanent secretaries or directors of respective government entities, presented to 
Cabinet, and discussed in the Joint Budget Support Framework (JBSF). Engaging 
Cabinet ensures that there is high-level buy-in from government. The prioritised 
list of evaluations is then agreed on and forwarded to the ESC. The purpose, 
methods and finances of the evaluations are discussed within the ESC.
I think the public sector M&E policy is also important because in that policy, we 
(OPM) articulate requirements, for example, that evaluations should be inde-
pendent; therefore, we procure evaluators for the public sector; therefore, we are 
required to follow the necessary laws and regulations concerning procurement.
(Respondent 7 – Government)
As the system is decentralised, all government entities have discretion over their 
own procurement. Sectors with unique practices (such as engineering, roads 
and health) have separate procurement standards and regulations. These institu-
tions are able to instigate reforms, in consultation with PPDA, to ensure that the 
necessary procurement regulations and guidelines are in place.
Non-state actors and stakeholders
Services and goods are provided to MDAs by the private sector under the 
guidance of the PPDA. These providers can influence the procurement process 
through lobbying the MDAs or the PPDA for more flexible policies and stand-
ards in accountability, corruption and fraud.
Civil society organisations such as non-governmental organisations, faith-based 
and community groups are instrumental in presenting community opinions on 
corruption and malpractices in public procurement. They do so under the umbrella 
of the Anti-Corruption Coalition Unit as well as other laws, such as the Access to 
Information Act, 2005, that provide for the right to access of information.
Communities also have an influence through community barazas, which 
were started by OPM in 2009. These are open events, organised by local gov-
ernments, at which district service providers report on progress and the public 
is able to discuss issues related to implementation of services and infrastructure 
in their area. The PPDA also uses them to provide and receive information on 
specific procurement processes.
Those Barazas . . . are holding the accounting officers accountable. PPDA 
is presenting those findings to civil society organisations that are making 
noise when those contracts are not made.
(Respondent 6 – Government)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 119
Development partners
DPs providing substantial budget support through the Poverty Eradication 
Action Plan and Poverty Action Fund include the World Bank, DFID, Afri -
can Development Bank (ADB), United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and 
Deutsche Gesselleschaft für internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). DPs are 
particularly interested in how their funds are spent, as they have to report to 
their respective country’s taxpayers. Consequently, they have a high interest 
in financial accountability and transparency of funds, which led to sustained 
pressure to institute public financial management reforms, including those on 
procurement. DPs also support evaluation through providing funding to evalu-
ations, now formalised through pooled funds under the GEF .
They (DP) have their own rules and guidelines . . . they have the financing 
agreements – they can make certain policy decisions. So, they (DP) have 
had a huge influence on public procurement in this country – ADB, World 
Bank and the like.
(Respondent 5 – Government)
The policy timeline
The public finance (T ender Board) regulations of 1977 were passed under the 1964 
Public Finance Act, which replaced the colonial system where public procurement 
for most government entities was conducted through a central tender board (Dza 
et al., 2013; Khi V . Thai, 2009; Sabiiti and Muhumuza, 2012). However, the promul-
gation of a new constitution in 1995 expanded the size of government:
The first thing that happened was the decentralisation policy, the many 
constitutional bodies got created, then acts of parliament created many 
agencies, privatisation, so many regulators. . . . So it was not feasible to con-
tinue with . . . sending requests to a certain unit in the Ministry of Finance 
to procure a phone, a car, building. It was just not possible anymore.
(Respondent 5 – Government)
In 1997, a national task force set up by the MoFPED affirmed that the cen -
tralised procurement model had outdated regulations and procedures and was 
fraught with inefficient and fragmented processes, corruption and fraud. The 
National Task Force made four recommendations for public procurement: 
drafting and enacting a legal and regulatory framework for public procure -
ment, decentralising public procurement to the procuring entities, establishing 
a statutory autonomous body to set rules, monitoring procurement and review 
complaints, and harmonising procurement policies and practices at both central 
and local levels of government.
In 2001 the public (procurement) finance regulation was enacted, dissolving 
the Central T ender Board (Khi V . Thai, 2009; Sabiiti and Muhumuza, 2012 ). 
In the same year, the World Bank supported the first Country Procurement 
Assessment Review 2001 (CPAR) to benchmark key performance criteria and
<<<PAGE=6>>>
120 Ismael Kawooya et al.
the organisation of a public procurement system, which formed the basis of 
establishing indicators for M&E within the sector. This culminated in the pass-
ing and enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets 
Act, 2003, regulations, guidelines and policies (Act 1 of 2003) (Government of 
Uganda et al., 2003), which provided for the establishment of an autonomous 
body known as Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Author -
ity (PPDA). The Act prescribed the objectives, functions and powers of the 
Authority, but without provisions for local governments. Therefore, in 2006, the 
Local Government Act was amended to include these.
In 2009, the government initiated the amendment of the PPDA Act 2003 to 
include the Local Government Act amendments which was passed by Parlia -
ment in 2011. The regulations, standards, guidelines and circulars were com -
pleted in 2014 and the Act finally enacted.
The evidence journey
In 2010, priority topics for evaluation had already been decided on between 
the government and DPs, and the amendments to the PPDA Act of 2003 were 
underway. Concerns were raised that the amendments did not address the chal-
lenges that had previously existed in procurement. The World Bank, in particu-
lar, argued that there was a need for an evaluation of the procurement sector to 
better understand these challenges. The evaluation was commissioned in 2011 
by the Government of Uganda through the OPM, with technical assistance 
from the T echnical Administration Support Unit (TASU) of the World Bank 
and funding from the World Bank and DFID. In October 2012, an Indian 
consulting firm was contracted by TASU through open tender to carry out the 
evaluation.
The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the effectiveness of the PPDA 
Authority on procurement practices in the public sector, with particular focus 
on the roads and energy sectors. The evaluation had three specific objectives:
• T o assess the effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of procurement 
reforms/interventions undertaken in Uganda since 2003
• T o identify lessons learnt and provide recommendations for informing 
future PFM interventions in public procurement
• T o draw lessons learnt from both intended and unintended results and pro -
pose solutions/measures to provide sustainability of successes realised so far.
A three-level management system was set up to provide support and oversight 
to the consultants during the evaluation – a management committee, a refer -
ence group and an evaluation sub-committee to provide support and guidance. 
These included technical experts in procurement and evaluation from PPDA 
and OPM. The steering committee played the oversight role, together with 
TASU.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 121
2014
2011
2006
2004
2003
2001
19981977
1995
PPDA Act Amendment 
comes into force
Standards, guidelines, 
circulars and regulations 
Local government act 
amendment
Local government act 
amendment reorganises 
procurement at the districts 
and municipalities
PPDA Act 2003
Public Procurement and 
Disposal (PPDA) Authority 
setup
Organized public 
procurement 
Public ﬁnance 
regulations
Replaced crown agents in 
the 1964 public ﬁnance act
Central Tender boards for 
public procurement
National Task force 
setup
Comprehensive review of 
the public procurement 
system
PPDA Act Amended
Evaluation on 
procurement 
commissioned
Conference on procurement
Reformed Central tender 
board setup
World Bank Country 
Performance Assessment 
report (CPAR)expanded government
1995 Constitution CPAR II
Figure 7.1 Procurement timeline reform
Source: Author generated.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
122 Ismael Kawooya et al.
The evaluation was initiated with a scoping mission, during which the con-
sultants met with key stakeholders. Of significance was ensuring buy-in from 
the PPDA Authority as the lead government agency in the implementation  
of the evaluation. This was done through meetings and personal contact 
between the consultant and officials from OPM and the PPDA Authority. The 
Authority identified and delegated a contact person to act as liaison for the 
consultant, and office space was provided.
At the beginning, the consultants were invited to comment on the amendment 
to the PPDA 2003 before it was passed (such as on definitions and clarifications 
where confusion might ensue), as the amendment process was already underway.
Now if PPDA Authority did not agree or was not on board in terms of the 
purpose/ usefulness of this evaluation . . . then whatever came out would 
not be taken on board that easily. That is . . . the consultants were presenting 
their findings every week and these players were picking out what mat -
tered to them.
(Respondent 3 – Government)
The consultants conducted an initial assessment to understand the context of 
public procurement in Uganda, from which an inception report was drafted 
and commented on by the steering committee and the PPDA Authority. They 
then proceeded to implement the evaluation, keeping the steering committee 
and TASU appraised of the field findings on a monthly basis. The final report 
was drafted and approved in 2013, commented on, discussed and revised with 
guidance from the steering committee and the PPDA Authority.2
Overall, the evaluation was received positively. The OPM’s M&E department 
considered the evaluation to have had a rigorous methodology and findings 
were robust.
We rate this as one of the very good evaluations undertaken – done  
properly – satisfied with the quality of results. It was international competitive 
bidding-firm from India became the best. The evaluation sub-committee  
approved the evaluation report with many comments but were satisfied 
with the final product.
(Respondent 8 – Government)
Using the ﬁndings of the evaluation
In this research, use has been categorised as conceptual, instrumental, process 
or symbolic (see Chapter 2). Instrumental use of evidence involves respond -
ing to specific findings or recommendations, while conceptual use is generally 
when the evaluation is used to enlighten, influence, inform or clarify a policy 
issue indirectly ( Amara et al., 2004). Negative symbolic use involves apply -
ing research results to legitimise or support an already determined decision or
<<<PAGE=9>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 123
policy (Amara et al., 2004), while positive symbolic use increases the profile of 
the sector or topic.
In terms of instrumental use, the evaluation report had specific recommen -
dations that were adopted in the guidelines, standards and circulars passed by 
Parliament in 2014, including:
• Revision of procurement thresholds for different bidding methods and 
implementing a system to update these;
• Flexibility for sectors that need specialised procurement, for example, roads, 
electricity and health;
• The solicitor general’s approval was required for all procurement above 
UGX 50 million but this created unnecessary delays, especially in sectors 
that deal with huge budgets (e.g. construction). This was revised to above 
UGX 200 million but there is still contestation that this is too low for some 
sectors.
The PPDA Authority was in the middle of revising the Act and the  
regulations – this evaluation enriched the argument for the revision of the Act 
and regulations (Key informant 8).
In terms of conceptual use, the evaluation demonstrated to PPDA the impor-
tance of regularly reviewing and updating regulations, standards and guide -
lines. Government had undertaken the amendment of the PPDA Act without 
reviewing its effectiveness and efficiency. Indeed, it can be argued that the eval-
uation also influenced the use of evidence in the revision of the law in the pub-
lic procurement sector. This can be shown with the current amendments for 
the procurement law that are considering using the evaluation as a blueprint for 
the next evaluation. The evaluation was also reported to have had a significant 
effect on the conduct of evaluations in Uganda and has been incorporated into 
the curriculum of students learning about evaluation.
Understanding factors inﬂuencing use of evaluation
Demand for evaluation
The evaluation priorities had already been identified and did not include pro-
curement, while the amendment process of PPDA 2003 was already underway 
(Respondent 8 – Government). It is unlikely that the evaluation would have 
taken place without pressure from the World Bank and the influence DPs had 
on government because of the budget support they provided. In addition, there 
was broad agreement among key players about the complexity of the challenges 
that the sector had experienced in the past and the need to gather evidence and 
insights into the underlying reasons behind these.
It is also important to note that while pressure from the DPs was the key driver 
behind demand, the existence of an evaluation culture with well-developed
<<<PAGE=10>>>
124 Ismael Kawooya et al.
frameworks and mechanisms provided a mechanism for demand to be imple -
mented, including:
• The existence of a National Evaluation Policy and Board with require -
ments for and guidance on evaluation;
• Process of identification and prioritisation of evaluation topics involving 
and driven by leadership within government (permanent secretaries or 
directors of respective government entities and Cabinet);
• The JBSF , comprising key government institutes and development partners 
and providing a platform for discussion and influence on prioritisation of 
evaluation topics.
Interventions that promoted and ensured use
This section hypothesises mechanisms between the approaches and interven -
tions used prior, during and after the evaluation and how this affected the use of 
evaluation findings and recommendations. These are summarised in Table 7.1 
and used to inform lessons and reflections in the final section.
T able 7.1 Use interventions and their effect
Use intervention Effects and change mechanisms activated enabling use of evaluation
National M&E Policy and Provided requirements for and guidance on evaluation to 
National Evaluation ensure credibility of evaluations
Board
Independence of On setting up evaluation, it was decided that an independent 
implementing agency agency oversee it to minimise bias in the event of conflicts 
from beneficiary agency of interest. The OPM was the implementing agency 
and the beneficiary agency, PPDA, provided guidance 
throughout the evaluation. This was pivotal to the eventual 
agreement with evaluation results, and so likely to be used.
ESC, which selected Provided clearly defined mechanisms for collaborative 
evaluations and JBSF identification and prioritisation of evaluation topics involving 
leadership within government across multiple sectors, arms 
of government and DPs. This enabled agreement between key 
actors such as OPM and PPDA Authority in particular on 
the need for evidence to better understand and address policy 
challenges within the public procurement sector.
Structures and processes These ensured credibility (independence, engagement of 
for commissioning highly experienced consultants and use of rigorous and 
and managing the robust methods etc.), thereby ensuring trust in evidence 
evaluation generated from the evaluation
Regular meetings and This created a platform for building trust and agreement on 
consultations between evaluation objectives, methodology and approach and the 
evaluation team and way forward at every stage of the evaluation, enabling a 
PPDA sense of ownership and acceptance of findings
Regular meetings with Increased awareness, conﬁdence  and ability of stakeholders to 
stakeholders of the engage with evaluation process and findings
evaluation
<<<PAGE=11>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 125
A key factor identified as influencing use was the extent to which there was 
a sense of ownership of the process and findings. Ownership can be affected 
by multiple things: drivers behind demand; ensuring a shared agreement and 
understanding around the purpose, objectives and methods; the entity commis-
sioning the evaluation (particularly if different from end users), the extent to 
which political and technical leadership is involved, the way in which consulta-
tions and discussions are carried out and so forth.
One of the challenges was that ownership question. Once these evaluations 
are decided by somebody outside and that person manages the funds and 
procures and just sends the person, you rarely find the kind of ownership 
needed to implement some of these things. Y es, I might have been involved 
at my level, but we tended to sense that you are briefing the owner (really) 
like a second party. If an evaluation is being done on impact of procure -
ment reforms, the Executive Director and the highest level should really be 
at the centre of it all. But if they are being briefed – it is like me coming 
to tell you stuff about your house. Y ou are listening to it like I should be 
knowing better. That ownership question still has to be answered.
(Key informant 5)
Table 7.1 shows the use interventions that played a role with this evaluation. 
Many of these arise from the emerging national evaluation system and reflected 
the need for credibility and ownership.
Barriers and enablers to evidence use
This section identifies and reflects on some of the factors in the wider context 
which influence use of evidence.
Abilities to understand and navigate the realities of the wider  
political and social environment
Policy making is a political process that considers the interests of diverse 
groups. These interests have to be weighed with the greater good by policy 
makers, taking into consideration factors such as ethics, culture, costs and poli-
tics. Whereas Uganda has had a multiparty political system for 13 years, the 
ruling party has been in power for 30 years. Policies for politically sensitive 
sectors are often made in favour of the party in power, regardless of the avail -
able evidence. Some respondents indicated that politically sensitive sectors are 
cautious of how they use evidence, as their decisions may be overridden by 
political decisions.
Of course, you can’t do away with political interference/workmanship 
because these are political decisions. Evidence is only used to inform these 
decisions. Y ou need to be aware of the political situation in the country 
and if it is considered politically sensitive – for example, the agriculture
<<<PAGE=12>>>
126 Ismael Kawooya et al.
evaluation was so politically sensitive. This means that the evidence would 
still get disregarded.
(Respondent 2 – Non-government)
Political events such as elections, strikes or protests often create environments in 
which individuals are sensitive to sharing information that may be used against 
them. Another factor influencing willingness of individuals to provide infor -
mation is perceived risks associated with confidentiality. In the case of a sector 
such as procurement that has multiple players, it is easier to trace information 
back to individuals at the district level than at the national level. This, in turn, 
created challenges for ensuring that evidence gathered was comprehensive and 
accurate, which is necessary to ensure credibility and therefore use.
Familiarity with the context is key for findings to be relevant and recommenda -
tions feasible.
It was done by foreigners from India. . . . They did very well in terms of 
their competencies but . . . all recommendations should have context. Y ou 
must . . . understand all the different social, political and technological con-
text you are dealing with.
(Respondent 5 – Government)
The timing as well as time taken to undertake and finalise an evaluation are 
important in this regard. This evaluation took two years to complete which may 
have possibly affected the quality of the discussions during the policy process.
If, for example, you do an evaluation on energy towards a general election, 
you will not get a lot of evidence. They will even say why are you doing 
it at this time when we are going for general elections. So, the timing 
becomes critical. For example, in this case the PPDA had been in place 
for some number of years and maybe the findings of the evaluation would 
trigger the need for a mini or comprehensive review of the Act because 
much as it was focusing on the two sectors, the principle would cut across.
(Respondent 3 – Government)
National systems and processes guiding evidence
At the national level, there are well-established systems for M&E in the public sec-
tor, such as the GEF at the OPM, discussions of performance monitoring reports 
from the OPM, M&E unit by the Cabinet Secretariat and so forth. Another is the 
regulatory impact assessment guidelines used by policy makers when considering a 
policy review (Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, 2004).
Inﬂuence of DPs
DPs were influential in evidence use, both positively and negatively. On the 
one hand, their interest in an environment with proper fiduciary mechanisms 
and level of influence was instrumental in ensuring that the evaluation was
<<<PAGE=13>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 127
commissioned and used. On the other hand, some respondents spoke about 
donors pushing their own agendas that might not necessarily be in the best 
interest of the host country (such as the structural adjustment reforms). In addi-
tion, in a situation with limited trust between the host and the donors, the host 
country might simply agree to an evaluation supported by the donor to appease 
the donor. However, this often leads to a lack of ownership with the report 
being shelved and findings not even discussed.
The World Bank was interested in procurement and paid for the evalua -
tion. There was a lot of push from the World Bank during the process. This 
could have introduced bias. . . . But I do not think it should matter because 
procurement is very important.
(Respondent 2 – Non-government)
Cultures, systems and capacities
Decision-making structures within the PPDA Authority established a culture 
in which evidence is reflected on. These structures consider evidence generated 
through reports from PDEs, audit reports or the government procurement portal 
and use evidence at different managerial levels. The PPDA has a research unit 
responsible for gathering evidence about public procurement through monthly 
reports to the Authority, investigations and audits, in addition to coordinating with 
research institutions to conduct relevant policy research (e.g. integrity surveys). 
The reports from the evidence-gathering activities are discussed through structural 
mechanisms established within PPDA, such as meetings and presentations at each 
hierarchical administrative level up to the board, so that decisions can be made.
It has been argued that organisations with mechanisms for generating evi -
dence are more likely to build a culture that values the use of evidence within 
policy making (Goldman, 2018). This was the case with PPDA, which estab -
lished the PPMS in 2009 as a mechanism for regular gathering of quantitative 
data. The data collected is summarised and reported on a monthly basis and these 
reports are shared with the MoFPED, which initiated procurement policies.
The capacity of policy makers to use evidence was raised, and that policy 
makers’ background influences their ability to interpret evidence. Policymakers 
should understand the value of evidence in policy decisions and how to inter-
pret it to motivate them to use the evidence.
Leaders and champions
In this evaluation, for example, individuals in leadership positions pushed for 
a stronger M&E function in all government programmes, such as the former 
permanent secretary in the OPM and the prime minister, championing the use 
of M&E evidence.
The PS at the time had just started and thought this was a difficult job. He 
then looked at what he could use as leverage and discovered that the OPM 
was responsible for coordination of government business. He empowered
<<<PAGE=14>>>
128 Ismael Kawooya et al.
OPM. He looked at the mandate and wondered how you do that. So, there 
he looked at evaluations.
(Respondent 2 – Non-government)
The experience of the procurement sector showed that adequate and compre-
hensive stakeholder consultations positively influence the use of evidence in 
policy-making processes. Engaging enough stakeholders increases the oppor -
tunities for evidence to be used in the decision-making processes. During the 
engagement processes, some of these stakeholders might champion the use of 
evidence or at times use the evidence directly for policy decisions.
Interview respondents also identified risks associated with the use of evidence 
by influential individuals. For example, policy makers interested in pushing 
their own agenda may use the evidence to support an already predetermined 
position (an example of negative symbolic use).
The nature of the evidence itself
Interview respondents also noted that the reliability of data (actual or per -
ceived) affects how the evidence is used in the policy-making process. Govern-
ment data is often incomplete or inaccurate leading to lack of trust by policy 
makers in the data or the sources (Respondent 5 – Government).
Equally important is how evidence is communicated. Researchers need to 
ensure that it is packaged in an accessible format and easily obtainable and 
understood. This includes considerations around language, accessibility or 
media. Evidence and recommendations also need to be specific, providing clar-
ity in findings and guidance. The more generic, the less likely they will be used.
Reﬂecting and learning from experience
How the context and intervention inﬂuence the use of evidence
Context is key, and in that particular context, which mechanisms have led to 
what outcomes, which we summarise as the Context-Mechanism-Opportunity  
configuration. We take the mechanisms to include the actual evidence generation, 
interventions applied to promote use and change mechanisms (such as building 
agreement or awareness) that these use interventions sought to achieve. The 
immediate outcomes were changes in capability, opportunity or motivation to use 
evidence, while the wider outcomes were actual changes in policy or practice.
Key elements in the wider context in this case study were a fairly well-
established national evaluation system which provided a framework for eval -
uations required and informed decision-making processes. There was also a 
recognised need for reforms within the procurement sector and pressure from 
the World Bank to undertake the evaluation to support the reform process. The 
evidence generation process was felt to be robust and credible, carried out by
<<<PAGE=15>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 129
a well-qualified independent consultant guided by evaluation clients and the 
beneficiary agency, PPDA.
Mechanisms critical to ensuring use of the evaluation findings included pro-
cesses and structures that enabled ownership and trust in the process. These 
included the use of committees for oversight and technical guidance, involve-
ment of stakeholders and credible consultants at all stages. In addition, regular 
meetings with the client, beneficiaries and wider stakeholders strengthened 
awareness, confidence and the ability of stakeholders to engage with the evalu-
ation process and findings. The quality of the evaluation and trust in the process 
ensured the motivation to utilise findings, and the sector reform process created 
the opportunity to do so.
Ultimately, this resulted in revision of the Act and regulations (i.e. instru -
mental use of the evaluation findings). In addition, the evaluation demonstrated 
the value and importance of evidence in decision making and is informing the 
conduct of evaluation in the country.
Lessons for the country and beyond
Ensuring independence
For a sector such as procurement, with significant levels of funding and affect-
ing multiple other sectors and stakeholders, the level of independence, real or 
perceived, is critical to maintaining a sense of credibility and trust, and therefore 
ensuring use of evaluation findings.
In this case, independence was maintained by a separation of roles between 
the agencies commissioning, implementing, and the ultimate users of the evalu-
ation. The organisational structure of the evaluation provided the process with 
independence from political interference, which also enabled the evaluation 
team to engage with respondents at ease. Some of the key features of this struc-
ture included agreement on purpose and relevance of the evaluation by key 
decision makers in Cabinet and the JBSF , while PPDA’s role was primarily to 
provide technical guidance, ensuring that evaluation was aligned with the sec-
tor policy needs, providing feedback, commenting on reports and so forth.
Ownership
Across many countries in Africa, the role and influence of DPs is significant as 
a result of budget and other support. In situations where DPs are involved in 
evidence generation and use, attention needs to be paid to ensuring local own-
ership of the process and findings.
This case study demonstrated the importance of an evaluation process 
that the PPDA considered its own. The stakeholders had preparatory meet -
ings with GPCL consultants, chaired by the executive director of the PPDA. 
A liaison officer was selected as the PPDA contact person to work with the
<<<PAGE=16>>>
130 Ismael Kawooya et al.
consultants and office space was provided for them by the PPDA. In initial 
meetings, stakeholders agreed on the purpose of the evaluation and way for -
ward. There was constant interaction between consultants and the PPDA. The 
positive nature of the relationship was reflected by the invitation extended to 
the consultants to comment on the amendment before it was passed by Parlia-
ment. However, there was also a feeling that since the initiation of the evalua-
tion came from the OPM and not the PPDA, the evaluation was imposed on 
the PPDA without significantly involving senior management. Overall, there 
was a positive effect on the openness of the Authority to the evaluation and 
willingness to utilise findings in the regulations, guidelines and standards in the 
amendment process.
Credibility and trust
Evidence that is not trusted and perceived as credible is unlikely to be used. 
Efforts to ensure credibility of the evaluation included using an independent 
agency to provide oversight (OPM), procuring a competent consultant for the 
task and ensuring rigorous and robust methods. The consultants undertook 
a scoping mission to understand the context, and baseline surveys on pub -
lic procurement. During the evaluation, the consultant had monthly progress 
meetings with the evaluation sub-committee to update on progress and agree 
on a way forward. These meetings kept the stakeholders appraised of and pro-
vided valuable feedback to the evaluation process. In addition to the meetings, 
the consultant provided reports – inception, activity, scoping and final – that 
were commented on by the PPDA and evaluation sub-committee before being 
adopted as final reports. These efforts allowed the stakeholders to trust the find-
ings from the evaluation and consider them during the amendment of the 
regulations, guidelines and standards.
Continuous feedback in the process is critical because it brings out the 
challenges that one is encountering during the evaluation process and that 
helps with coming up with strategies to address them before the final thing. 
But also, weekly feedback helps the stakeholder, the beneficiary, to know 
whether the evaluation is on track and likely to meet the purpose why it 
was initiated.
(Respondent 3 – Government)
Capability
Irrespective of how credible or robust an evaluation may be, it needs to be 
received within an environment that is capable of utilising the evidence. This 
capability is determined by culture, structures and processes, skills and technical 
experience.
The PPDA put in place structures and processes such as public procure -
ment management system (PPMS) to continuously gather data and statistics
<<<PAGE=17>>>
The use of evaluations in policy making 131
on the state of public procurement and processes and to discuss these results 
at different managerial levels. The authority had also previously commissioned 
surveys, especially on corruption within the public procurement system, and 
had in place structures to discuss and consider the findings from all evidence-
gathering activities. The evaluation was jointly conducted by consultants and 
members of the PPDA, thereby increasing the PPDA’s skills in conducting 
evaluations, as well as interpreting and communicating the evidence to policy 
makers.
A ﬁnal thought
The Ugandan government has taken steps in institutionalising the use of evi -
dence with structures and policies to support evidence generation, translation 
to policies, and implementation. The OPM has been at the forefront of driving 
the evidence agenda in government through the GEF and Evaluation Sub-
committee and through chairing the JBSF . There is also a M&E framework 
and regulatory impact assessment guide among policies that guide govern -
ment entities in the implementation of evidence-informed policy making in 
their departments. However, in practice, evidence-informed policy making in 
Uganda is always going to be a challenge because many decisions are political 
and made without consideration of the evidence. This case study presents an 
opportunity to understand some of the reasons behind this and hopefully the 
insights generated may contribute to addressing the persistent challenges and 
barriers to use.
Notes
 1 A weighted score that assesses a country’s sustainable growth and reduction of poverty 
across 16 criteria. It has a minimum score of 1 and maximum of 6.
 2 Examples of bottlenecks and issues identified by evaluation include:
• Procurement thresholds have not been revised since 2003;
• The procurement plan is not systematically used as a monitoring tool;
• Absence of specialised standard bidding documents for infrastructure sector such as 
design and build, performance-based contracting;
• Delays in approval from contracts committee at almost all stages of procurement 
cycle;
• Delays in obtaining approval from the Solicitor General for contracts above UGX 
50 million.
References
Amara, N., Ouimet, M. and Landry, R. 2004. New evidence on instrumental, conceptual, and 
symbolic utilization of university research in government agencies. Science Communication, 
26(1), 75–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547004267491
Dza, M., Fisher, R. and Gapp, R. 2013. Procurement reforms in Africa: The strides, chal -
lenges, and improvement opportunities. Public Administration Research , 2(2). https://doi.
org/10.5539/par.v2n2p49
<<<PAGE=18>>>
132 Ismael Kawooya et al.
European Commission, Independent Evaluation Group, & Government of Uganda. 2015. 
Joint evaluation of budget support to Uganda ﬁnal report . Kampala: European Commission, 
Independent Evaluation group, Government of Uganda.
Goldman, I. 2018. Baseline on performance M&E culture in the public sector in Uganda, Benin and 
South Africa. Wits.
Government of Uganda, Ministry of Health, & Ministry of Agriculture, F . and A.I. 2003. 
Uganda food and nutrition policy.
Harold, E.A. 2012. What lies beneath the corruption in the office of the Prime Minister? 
Daily Monitor.
Khi, V .T. 2009. International handbook of public procurement. 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW , 
Suite 300 Boca Raton, FL 33487–2742: Taylor and Francis.
Michael, P . 2002. AES uncovers bribery in Bujagali Dam Project. NewVision.
Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development 2004. A guide to good regula -
tion. In: PROGRAMME, R. B. P . (ed.). Kampala: Government of Uganda.
Nabyonga-Orem, J., Ssengooba, F ., Mijumbi, R., Kirunga Tashobya, C., Marchal, B. and 
Criel, B. 2014. Uptake of evidence in policy development: The case of user fees for health 
care in public health facilities in Uganda. BMC Health Services Research, 14(1), 639. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12913-014-0639-5
National Planning Authority, & National Planning Authority. 2009. National development plan 
2010/11–2014/15 .
Procurement and disposal of assets authority. 2004. Annual report (Year Ended 2004). Procure-
ment and Disposal of Assets Authority.
Procurement and disposal of assets authority. 2005. Report of the ﬁfth procurement sector review . 
Workshop held on 29 June 2005 at Speke Report Munyonyo.
Procurement and disposal of assets authority. 2011. Annual report for ﬁnancial year 2010/11 . 
Kampala: Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority.
Sabiiti, C.K. and Muhumuza, E. 2012. Second generation procurement. Moving from compliance 
to results in public procurement. Trends, challenges and opportunities from the Uganda experience . 
Presented at the International Public procurement conference, Seattle, USA.
Walubiri, M. 2012. Nsibambi regrets OPM scandal. NewVision.
World Bank & Government of Uganda. 2004. Country procurement assessment report (CPAR). 
Kampala: The World Bank.