<<<PAGE=1>>>
9 The potential and the 
challenges of evaluations to 
positively influence reforms
Working with producers in the 
Benin agricultural sector
Bonaventure Kouakanou, Dossa Aguemon,  
Marius S. Aina, Abdoulaye Gounou and  
Emmanuel M. David-Gnahoui
Summary
In 2006, a new President of Benin was elected with a particular interest in good 
governance. He considered public policy evaluation as key to good governance 
and established an Office for Evaluation of Public Policies and a national evalu-
ation system (NES). This chapter focuses on an evaluation of the agricultural 
sector development policy in Benin that was carried out in 2009 at an early 
stage of the NES, and how the evidence was used to inform later policies. The 
research for this case study used qualitative and participatory methods, including 
a document review, 20 interviews and three mini-workshops. The 2009 evalua-
tion was not used instrumentally, but it made a significant conceptual contribu-
tion in terms of understanding the needs of the sector. In 2008 to 2009, the role 
of civil society and agricultural producer organisations in policy development 
was transformed, and they began to play a key role in management of the sector. 
This case illustrates the potential for evaluations to inform policy making and 
implementation in Benin, and the challenges of doing so. The role of producer 
organisations was key to the uptake of evidence into policy, based on a more 
inclusive and effective process of evidence generation and use.
Background
In 2006 a new President of Benin was elected. President Boni Yayi considered 
public policy evaluation as key to good governance and established an Office 
for Evaluation of Public Policies ( Bureau d’Évaluation des Politiques Publiques  
(BEPP , later BEPPAAG)) and a national evaluation system (NES). Benin is now 
one of three African countries with a formal national system for the evaluation 
of public policies and programmes, along with Uganda and South Africa.
This chapter focuses on an evaluation of the agricultural sector develop -
ment policy which was carried out in 2009. The research for the chapter 
involved qualitative and participatory methods that included document review, 
20 interviews and three mini-workshops. Participants in the workshops and
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 153
interviews included the minister, senior officials and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) managers of the Ministry of Agriculture and other ministries, develop-
ment partners (DPs), representatives of civil society organisations (CSOs) and 
members of producer unions and agricultural professional organisations. The 
co-authors include the deputy minister and senior officials from the ministry.
The use of evidence in agricultural policy in Benin
Background to the case
The main stakeholders in the agricultural sector include the presidency, the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries (MAEP) and ministries 
involved in related activities (finance, development, environment, decentralisa-
tion, water and sanitation, health, education, etc.). Decentralisation to com -
munes (local governments) means local governments have a role in projects in 
their area (MDGLAAT, 2010
, p. 25).
In terms of non-government actors, the Platform of Civil Society Organisa-
tions in Benin (PASCiB) is a national organisation which is influential in decision 
making in the agricultural sector. The National Platform of Agricultural Farmer 
and Producer Organisations (PNOPPA) also plays a strong role. Producer unions 
are federated to PNOPPA, which organises services to members such as procure-
ment, market research, marketing support and facilitation of access to finance.
DPs have been catalysts and facilitators in the development and even imple-
mentation of agricultural policies in Benin. DPs support evaluations and 
research and most evaluations are funded by DPs. In several cases DPs have 
supported professional or civil society organisations, which has strengthened 
their influence in decision making. At present DPs are very influential in shap-
ing public-sector policy.
The journey of the agricultural sector development policy
From 1990 to 2019 Benin’s agricultural sector underwent various policy 
changes. In this section we follow this evolution and highlight the mechanisms 
that influenced their development.
1 Figure 9.1 provides an overview.
In July 1990 the Marxist military government was replaced by a democrati-
cally elected government. The Letter of Declaration of Rural Development Policy 
(LDPDR) of May 1991 was the first policy document of the so-called democratic 
renewal era in Benin and it initiated the state’s withdrawal from the activities of 
production, marketing and processing, and the transfer of those roles to other stake-
holders including producer organisations and the private sector (MDR, 2000
, p. 4).
The second policy document, the Declaration of Rural Development Policy 
(DPDR), came into force in July 2000.
In March 2006, a new government was elected under President Boni Yayi, 
who expressed concern about the lack of capacity in the agricultural sector and 
the desire to rapidly strengthen the sector. The Ministry of Agriculture devel-
oped a strategic plan for the revival of the agricultural sector, the Plan Stratégique
<<<PAGE=3>>>
154 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
pour la Relance du Secteur Agricole (PSRSA) 2006–2015. The ministry developed 
the plan internally and in only one month.
The PSRSA was a great improvement compared to former policy docu -
ments. However, it was rejected by producer unions and DPs, because of their 
exclusion from its formulation. After intense and lengthy discussions, a more 
inclusive revision process was initiated. The second version of the PSRSA was 
the subject of a government seminar on 12 June  2008. The recommendations 
of this seminar were followed up by a group of technical staff from the Ministry 
of Planning and from the Ministry of Agriculture. The validation of the ‘new’ 
PSRSA took place on 30 July  2008 after a stakeholder validation workshop. 
DPs expressed reservations about the content (Mongbo and Aguemon, 2015, 
p. 8),  which were endorsed by PNOPPA, which criticised the ministry staff 
for ‘treating other actors in the agricultural sector as their subjects’ (Ibid., p. 8).
LDPDR: Letter of Declaration of Rural Development Policy; DPDR: Rural 
Development Policy Declaration; SDDAR: Master Plan of the Agricultural 
and Rural Development Sector; PSO: Strategic Operational Plan; PSRSA: 
Strategic Plan for the Revival of the Agricultural Sector; PSDSA: Strategic 
Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector
2017
2006-2009
PSDSA - 2017
• Based on PSRSA mid-term and 
ﬁnal evaluations
• Participatory and inclusive 
process
• Workshops and meetings 
conducted
• Policy-oriented evidence 
generation and use
PSRSA 2006; PSRSA 2008; 
PSRSA 2009; PSRSA 2011
• PSRSA 2006 version written in 
a month
• Producers rejected 2008 and 
2009 revised versions and 
requested inclusion
• Institutional change with 
greater producer implication
2000-2001
2000
Alongside with the DPDR, 
operational documents were 
developed
• SDDAR 2000
• PSO 2001
DPDR - 2000
• After 10 years of economic 
liberalism
• Change in context
• Slight amendment to the 
LDPDR
1991
LDPDR - 1991
• Based on previous studies and 
national assizes
• Signed in Washington, DC. 
May 1991
Figure 9.1 The journey of the agricultural sector policy
Source: Author generated.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 155
For some public servants, revising the PSRSA questioned the skills of the 
technical group that drafted it. However, the dependence of the agricultural 
sector on DPs for funding and the DPs’ financial support to the revision process 
(Ibid.) led to the relaunch of the PSRSA review process in April 2009. Several 
workshops were held which were inclusive and participatory and led to a criti-
cal reduction of the influence of the ministry. PNOPPA’s role in the workshops 
was significant, through the quality of its proposals and the contribution of its 
representatives within the extended workgroup and the technical subcommittees 
(Ibid., p. 13).
Despite this move to wider inclusion, a ministerial decree in February 2010 
established a steering committee to work on the finalisation of the policy 
without any prior consultation and with only a single representative of non-
state actors on one subcommittee (Mongbo and Aguemon, 2015, p. 10). After 
consulting with representatives of civil society, PNOPPA made a counter- 
proposal recognising the increasing importance given to producer organisations 
in the agricultural policy of ECOWAS. As a result, non-government players 
took on more prominent roles and the technical subcommittee was chaired by 
a senior technical official from the Ministry of Agriculture rather than a politi-
cian (Mongbo and Aguemon, 2015)
The 2009 evaluation happens in parallel
Meanwhile, BEPP was starting the new evaluation system and an evaluation 
of policies in the agricultural sector was scheduled for 2008 as one of the first 
evaluations of the new system. The aim of the evaluation was to carry out 
a diagnosis and propose approaches for the revival of the sector. The evalua -
tion was managed by a steering committee which validated the methodologi -
cal framework and ensured that the assessment was conducted independently. 
Members of the steering committee were drawn from the President’s Office 
and from the ministries of planning, finance and agriculture, and included pro-
fessionals from the Benin M&E Association.
The evaluation was conducted by an independent service provider and was 
of good quality. Evaluation professionals, other ministry agents, the President’s 
Office and DPs contributed extensively to discussions based on the solid evi -
dence provided by the evaluators. This brought a range of stakeholders into 
the learning from the evaluation. A three-day stakeholder validation workshop 
involving a wide range of stakeholders was held in December 2009, during 
which the final evaluation report was endorsed.
Meanwhile, over 2008–2009, institutional reshuffling was taking place within 
the agricultural sector. The evaluation report came out in December 2009, at a 
time when changes in the institutional framework made it easier for producers 
to be involved in policy-making processes and utilisation of evaluation results.
The results and recommendations of the evaluation (Table 9.1), many of 
which were focused on the PSRSA, brought forward evidence needed at the 
right moment, and the recommendations helped design effective policies for 
the sector that are still in force to date.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
156 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
Thus, after the 2009 evaluation and as part of the revision of the PSRSA, 
the institutional framework for policy orientation and monitoring included the 
following guiding principles for governing the agriculture sector:
• Participation of all actors;
• Clear division of roles and responsibilities among key stakeholders;
• Public-private partnerships for agricultural development;
• Refocusing and strengthening of the state in its r egulatory functions;
• Empowerment of all actors according to their mandates;
• Accountability 
(MAEP , 2017a, p. 3).
The adoption of these principles strengthened stakeholder participation in agricul-
tural policy development, making broad ownership and implementation more likely.
The revisions to the PSRSA
The revision of the PSRSA not only introduced non-government actors into 
policy making for the first time, but also initiated a process of improving data 
production and use. Evidence that came out of the 2009 evaluation became a 
significant input in developing subsequent sector policies (MPD, 2016
, p. 6). 
This raised the profile of evaluation as a method for evidence generation and 
stimulated the demand for evidence. Thus, with the PSRSA, the demand for 
evidence became less for compliance, at the request of DPs or the ministry, and 
more use-oriented based on the actual needs of producers in the field.
The final version of the PSRSA (2011–2016) was adopted in September 2011 
(MAEP , 2011). Mid-term and final evaluations of the PSRSA were carried out 
internally by MAEP in 2014 and 2016, reflecting that the ministry was commit-
ted to the process (MAEP , 2016). The evaluations were strongly supported by 
DPs, served as a baseline for the development of the PSDSA (Strategic Plan for 
the Development of the Agriculture Sector) and a solid foundation for writing 
the current PSDSA 2017–2025 and the PNIASAN, the National Plan for Agri-
cultural Investment, Food Security and Nutrition, for 2017–2021.
The strategic plan for the development of the agricultural sector – PSDSA 20172
In 2016 a new head of state was elected. Given that the head of state wanted 
to stamp his vision on the sector, the agricultural sector was asked to develop a 
new strategic plan for the development of the agricultural sector (PSDSA). The 
PNOPPA chairman noted how the ministry officials had been influenced by 
the PSRSA: ‘As soon as this new vision was announced, ministry officials would 
take a recycled version of the old documents out of their laboratories and put 
it into effect. It’s no longer the case now’. The establishment of an inclusive 
institutional framework had created an environment where the development of 
public policy is no longer just the responsibility of the ministry. As noted by a 
respondent from Belgian Cooperation, ‘the empowerment of producer organi-
sations had a huge impact. Whether it is the National Chamber of Agriculture,
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 157
PASCiB or PNOPPA, these organisations have become indispensable and even 
take the lead on several issues’.
The PSDSA 2017 had the advantage of being developed using evidence from 
the independent 2009 evaluation and internal 2014 and 2016 evaluations of the 
PSRSA by the ministry. According to the director of planning, the incorpora-
tion of evidence into PSDSA development has systematised the approach and 
strengthened relevance and stakeholder ownership. The first PSRSA of 2006 
was produced in only one month. It took 18 months to finalise the PSDSA 
2017 through a much more effective and inclusive process. However, the pre-
dominant role of non-state actors holds the potential for greater ownership and 
more effective implementation.
Why evaluations were required and the role  
that evidence generation played
From evidence generation to utilisation
The evaluation of the agricultural sector, which was completed in 2009, was 
good quality and very credible. At first MAEP staff rejected the evaluation 
results because of sensitivity that the evaluation was too critical. Then, the Min-
istry of Planning and Development took over the management of the evalua -
tion and chairing of the steering committee. The final validation occurred after 
a laborious process. The report remains one of the best evaluations to date and 
has been referred to extensively.
Table
 9.1 shows the recommendations of the evaluation report (2009), and 
the degree to which the recommendations have been implemented.
The results of the 2009 evaluation were shared at a three-day stakeholder vali-
dation workshop, which enabled stakeholders to engage with the findings. Benin’s 
NES did not specify a formal process to take forward the recommendations, such 
as an improvement plan. However, because stakeholders had participated in the 
validation workshop they internalised the findings and were able to use these 
when the opportunity emerged. Note that there is now a follow-up mechanism 
to see where recommendations have been implemented and by whom.
T owards mid-2010, agricultural sector stakeholders had the urgent task to 
complete the revision of the PSRSA. The most available and reliable evidence 
at that moment was the freshly validated results of the 2009 sector evaluation. 
Meetings were held where the methodology for development of the PSRSA 
was reviewed in light of the evaluation results and recommendations. These 
meetings included formal meetings, workshops and thematic group work, lob-
bying, and advocacy by different categories of actors involved in the agricultural 
sector. A roadmap was defined and agreed, and a list of themes on which differ-
ent groups should work. Leaders were designated for each theme on the basis 
of their skills rather than their position in the public administration (Mongbo 
and Aguemon, 2015, p. 10). Thus, non-state actors including producer unions, 
CSOs and chambers of commerce fully entered public policy-making processes 
in the agricultural sector, with the support of DPs.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
158 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
T able 9.1 Recommendations from the 2009 ev aluation and what has been implemented
Recommendations Subsequent policies and implementation
1. MAEP develops a new The existing PSRSA policy was revised and 
elopment
agriculture sector policy adopted by government in October 2011. At 
in line with Benin’s new the end of the 2011–15 PSRSA, the mid-term 
development orientation and final evaluations were used for drafting the 
ic vision of dev
PSDSA 2017–2025 and its operational plan. 
They were both adopted by the government in 
November 2017.
2. Government prepares and • The draft law is being finalised, pushed by 
Parliament adopts a law producer unions and civil society actors and 
Sector strateg
on agriculture adapted to supported by DPs.
the vision of the emerging • Parliament required an ex-ante evaluation prior 
economy and Benin’s to the introduction of the law.
strategic development • Approval of the law is a conditionality for 
approach key EU funding. The adoption of the law is 
expected to be completed by September 2019. 
The EU will monitor progress.
3. Government considers See recommendation 2.
ramming
the 2006 version of the In addition to the drafting of the new agricultural 
entions
PSRSA as an interim sector policy, other documents were produced, 
strategic plan pending including: the promotion of 13 agricultural 
g o drafting of a new sectors; the establishment of an efficient financing 
ic pr
v of Inter
agricultural sector policy system for the agricultural sector; implementation 
Strateg
and adoption of a law on of the institutional and organisational reform 
agriculture of the ministry; the establishment of the Benin 
Agency for the Promotion of Agricultural Value 
Chains (ABePROFA).
entions in 
4. Government provides Not implemented. On average, over the 2011–
sufficient funding for the 2017 period, 7% of total state expenditure 
agricultural sector (as was invested in the agriculture sector, without 
per Maputo and Malabo reaching the 10% recommended (MAEP , 
vramming and management of the inter
commitments) 2017e).
5. MAEP develops synergy This did not happen. There is still institutional 
between educational and fragmentation. (DPP MAEP , 2015).
agricultural policy reforms
6. The ministry implements Several initiatives on the implementation of 
strategies to facilitate specific inputs have been carried out without 
the sector 
access to inputs specific to leading to an appropriate mechanism for 
agriculture sectors other distribution of specific inputs.
than cotton
7. The ministry sets up a In 2013 the National Guidance and 
consultation framework for Monitoring Council (CNOS) was created 
synergistic implementation for implementation of the PSRSA, but 
of projects and only established in December 2015, one 
g programmes month prior to the end of the PSRSA. Thus, 
Operational pro
coordination and monitoring of the PSRSA at 
the strategic level was not effective during this 
period. However, the CNOS reform has been 
well implemented and today it has 12 regional 
and 77 local branches, one for each region and 
local government (commune).
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 159
Since 2011, PNOPPA has initiated a significant number of studies, the most 
important being the ones that generated the Farmer Memorandum, a con -
sensus document produced after more than 40 meetings at local, regional and 
national levels that summarised the expectations of stakeholders on the content 
and orientation of the law on the agricultural sector (PNOPPA, 2016
, p. 4). 
According to the former president of the platform, ‘transparency and evidence 
use have become systematic in their operating mode; for their own reputation, 
every decision has to be evidence-based’.
A Conseil National d’Orientation et de Suivi  (CNOS) – National Guid-
ance and Monitoring Council  – was established in February  2013 to guide 
and regulate the national agricultural sector development policy. It is a public- 
private partnership formalised through a framework agreement, specially estab-
lished to encourage the private sector to invest in the agricultural sector. It is chaired 
by the president and has 25 members, including ten ministries, the Benin Chamber 
of Agriculture, the Benin Chamber of Commerce and Industry, PNOPPA, PAS-
CiB, and the National Association of Local Governments of Benin (ANCB). It has 
structures at regional and commune level with decision-making autonomy and 
they provide reasoned opinions on all issues related to agricultural sector policies 
and strategies (Government of Benin, 2013). CNOS has been critical in develop-
ing and maintaining a culture of planning, monitoring and evaluation in the whole 
agricultural sector. Its local branches involve grassroots actors in monitoring agri-
cultural information. They produce data on areas to be planted, input requirements 
and yield per hectare, and propose corrective measures to improve production. In 
doing so, the CNOS, especially at the local level, has increased producers’ capacity, 
and their participation in the collection of basic data for evidence generation. Such 
information is the centrepiece of the collection of statistics that is treated and con-
solidated at the level of the Directorate of Agricultural Statistics.
The quality of evidence from the 2009 evaluation helped stimulate demand 
for further studies. Since 2011, PNOPPA has initiated a significant number of 
studies, ranging from A Document Review on the Maize Sector and Its Added 
Recommendations Subsequent policies and implementation
8. The ministry adopts A number of executives have been trained but 
results-based management most have retired. The capacity-building 
tools with a well- process for new managers at both central and 
functioning M&E system decentralised levels was continued with donor 
with performance and support.
impact indicators for each Currently EU funding and capacity building are 
program and project being used on the Programming, Planning, 
Budgeting and Monitoring chain for different 
stakeholders in the agriculture sector including 
non-government actors. This will assist with 
real-time production of implementation data of 
flagship projects.
Source: The recommendations are taken from the report on the evaluation of agricultural sector devel-
opment policy (December 2009) and the subsequent policies are drawn from key-informant interviews.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
160 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
Value Chains in Benin (June 2011) to A Study on the Cash Purchase of Fertiliser 
by Producers in Benin (October 2011). Those studies responded to the needs in 
the field and led to development of a policy for the maize sector, as well as for 
sectors such as cassava, rice, cashew, pineapple, aquaculture, milk, table eggs, meat 
and market gardening, and so policy making has become more evidence-based.
Unintended consequences
The 2009 evaluation was carried out at the same time as a major transformation 
of the institutional framework, with the strengthened role of PNOPPA. With 
this strengthened collaboration among stakeholders, the evidence produced by 
the 2009 evaluation was used as the basis of new policies including the intro -
duction of sector legislation and the inclusive and evidence-based development 
of the PSDSA. Moreover, from there on, evidence was used more extensively 
in decision making. Table
 9.1, summarises how far the evaluation recommen-
dations have been acted on. As can be seen, the evidence informed several 
noteworthy changes including changes to the law, development of subsequent 
studies such as on maize (which resulted in a new maize policy), establishment 
of CNOS, capacity development programmes and so forth. Thus the 2009 eval-
uation has had a significant influence on the progress of the agricultural sector.
The PSRSA review was a historic trigger that profoundly changed the status 
quo in the agricultural sector. The institutional framework in force today is based on 
a proposal by the PNOPPA which, until 2008, had never played a significant role in 
informing policy but is today leading in introducing legislation for the agricultural 
sector. This change is the most important unintended consequence arising from the 
implementation of the agricultural sector policy and related processes.
What promoted or inhibited use of the evaluation?
This section explores the way use of the evaluation results and other evidence 
was promoted, using the analytical framework from 
Chapter 2. We analyse the 
type of use that happened, what interventions promoted use, and the factors 
that helped or hindered use.
How do we understand the use that happened?
In the analytical framework we refer to instrumental, conceptual, process and 
symbolic use. In terms of instrumental use, recommendations 1 and 2 from the 
2009 evaluation (see Table
 9.1) were directly implemented and the revision of 
the PSRSA was completed as advised in 2011. The process leading to the adop-
tion of the agriculture sector orientation law is underway. Recommendations 
to become inclusive of producers were taken on board.
However, the biggest impact has been conceptual use. The evaluation report stands 
as a major landmark for the quality and quantity of the information it brought 
which helped to bring clarity to the sector. It informed subsequent discussions 
developing the PSRSA. In the introduction of the Farmer Memorandum,
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 161
almost all the background information utilised came from the evaluation 
report. The cross analysis of previous policy documents showed their limita -
tions and facilitated the use of the evaluation to inform the revision of the 
PSRSA.
In terms of negative symbolic use, the previous history was of public policies in 
the agriculture sector in Benin being developed by the ministry for compliance 
purposes, without involving stakeholders. In terms of positive symbolic use, as one 
of the first evaluations commissioned by the BEPP , the 2009 agricultural sector 
evaluation enhanced the importance of evaluations in providing evidence for 
policy making and implementation.
Process use can also be seen, that is use not from the findings but from the 
learning process which the evaluation supported, and the ownership assumed 
by producers in policy design processes. The experience of the revision of 
the PSRSA created awareness of the importance of a more inclusive and col -
laborative platform of stakeholders. That context fostered the use of evidence 
and therefore more demand for generation of user-oriented evidence. Many  
studies, especially the ones on the 13 targeted agricultural sectors, were com -
missioned by producer associations for their own use, based on the evaluation 
recommendations.
What interventions promoted use?
Table 9.2 summarises some of the interventions which we see operating in this case.
A key factor in the use of the evaluation was the quality and impartiality of 
the evidence from the 2009 evaluation that showed the value of sound evalu-
ations as promoted by the NES. 3 When the urgent task came to complete 
the revision of the PSRSA, the most readily available credible evidence at 
that moment was the freshly validated results of the 2009 evaluation, and the 
same stakeholders who had validated the results of the 2009 evaluation were 
able to use that understanding to inform the development of the subsequent 
policy.
What enabled and what hindered the use of evidence?
Factors enabling use
The establishment of a national evaluation system : The presence of BEPP (Bureau 
for Evaluation of Public Policies) resulted in an evaluation being conducted 
that might otherwise not have happened, and ensured its quality and independ-
ence. The NES has progressively become established and a theory of change is 
now a mandatory criterion for the eligibility of projects or programmes for the 
Public Investment Programme (BEPPAAG, 2017).
The commitment of non-state actors and their pressure on government: The open-
ing of the policy space to include non-state actors like PNOPPA, PASCiB and 
chambers of agriculture and commerce created a revolution in policy making 
in agriculture in Benin.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
162 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
T able 9.2 Interventions that influenced use
Intervention Effect
Elements of the emerging NES 
Focus on making the The approach in the NES was to outsource evaluations 
evaluation credible and commission a consultant using an external 
recruitment process. This resulted in a good quality, 
impartial evaluation.
Evaluation Steering The fact that the steering committee brought together key 
Committee comprising stakeholders facilitated the subsequent ownership of the 
key stakeholders results of the evaluation. The recommendations of the 
evaluation were then used as the basic material for the 
revision of the PSRSA.
Stakeholder validation A three-day workshop was held in December 2009 
workshop during which the final evaluation report was approved. 
This helped to build awareness of the importance of 
good evidence, promoted interaction and involvement of 
stakeholders and agreement on the emerging findings.
Role of MAEP M&E unit The MAEP M&E unit organised the validation workshop 
which played a key role in building interaction, awareness 
and agreement amongst stakeholders.
The report was made The report is available and accessible online. As one of the 
public first evaluation reports of the newly established NES, it 
served as a reference for users.
Other elements contributing to use 
Communication of results After the stakeholder workshop, there was an immediate 
opportunity for use in the revision of the PSRSA. The 
same stakeholders were also the ones working on the 
PSRSA revision. This helped a lot in the ownership of the 
results and their consequent use.
Steering committees for After the contention on development of the PSRSA, non-
policy development state actors played key roles in steering committees for 
policy development, promoting ownership and motivation 
from these actors to champion the new policies.
Dialogue processes Different types of meetings were held with stakeholders in 
the agricultural sector where the PSRSA development 
methodology was reviewed in light of the evaluation 
results and recommendations, a roadmap drawn up and 
themes taken forward.
Advocacy by DPs The unhappiness of DPs with the emerging content of 
the early PSRSA led to other stakeholders having the 
confidence to raise concerns, notably in relation to the 
dominant role of MAEP .
Capacity building of Strengthening of PNOPPA, in particular, gave producers 
producers by DPs the ability to play a strong role in the policy process.
Study tour to Mali A study tour to Mali generated awareness and commitment 
amongst stakeholders.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 163
Active role played by DPs: The involvement of non-state actors was sustained 
by DPs. DPs provided financial and technical assistance and capacity-building 
to ministries, civil society, producers’ unions, chambers of agriculture, NGOs 
and so forth.
Donor conditionalities: The World Bank and the EU’s conditionalities in budget 
support mean that the realisation of certain indicators triggers financial bonuses. 
In 2017, an allocation of EUR 11  million from the EU was dependent on 
achieving the indicator: ‘The Government has adopted the sector policy docu-
ments over the period 2017–2021 (PSDSA/PNIASAN)’.
The need for more relevant evidence : Many interview respondents highlighted 
the need for evidence to be relevant. The production of evidence is not a weak 
link in policy development in Benin; it is rather the relevance of the evidence. 
In this case, evidence generation has gained impetus because (1) demand for 
evidence has increased and (2) since the policies are more relevant, they need a 
more diversified base of more reliable evidence.
Establishing rules in favour of evidence generation and evaluation : It has become 
mandatory to use reliable data to inform policies and programmes. From the 
2014 fiscal year parliamentary budget discussions, the Parliament of Benin made 
it obligatory for the government to conduct ex-ante evaluations prior to the 
submission of any project or programme for which ratification is required.
4 This 
provision promotes the production of evidence and will boost future demand.
Factors inhibiting evidence use
Repeated structural reforms on paper without time to implement and learn: After every 
election, governments change and so policies change. In agriculture there have 
been ten ministers in ten years, seriously undermining institution building. 
Many ministers reinvent programmes and policies and ignore well-founded 
public policies initiated by a predecessor. Frequent reforms mean that emergent 
programmes do not have time to bear fruit. These then restart from zero.
5
Fear of the unknown and reluctance to abandon routine practices : ‘That is the way 
we do things’ expresses experience and know-how but it can also hinder 
adjustment to the current situation. The fear of losing power and control over 
interventions in the sector explains how a PSRSA steering committee was 
appointed made up almost exclusively of civil servants, despite a prior decision 
to involve producers.
Lack of communication among stakeholders: The ability to work together to drive 
a policy process assumes skills in collaboration that the sometimes-opposing 
positions of the actors do not always allow. Government actors have a tendency 
to claim official legitimacy and consider themselves superior to other actors.
Administrative red tape: Public administration at all levels is ponderous and 
slow-moving. A promising study may be abandoned because no one has cham-
pioned it. After the 2009 evaluation, there were multiple unproductive meet-
ings of high-level officials which did not result in action.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
164 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
Inadequate resources: The PSRSA needed to be revised in 2009, but it could 
not be done as there was no budget. Inadequate resources affect the ability of 
actors to plan or to set up reliable M&E mechanisms. The reverse also happens, 
that is planning is not realistic for the resources likely to be available.
Conclusions and emerging lessons
From ticking the box to actual evidence-based policy and practice
In the past, although the process of revising agricultural policies did include 
stakeholder consultations, the policy documents were written by departmen-
tal staff. The actual clients were not able to contribute their lived experience. 
Historically, the writing of policies was more concerned with fulfilling the 
requirement of producing a document than developing a well-thought-out 
and implementable policy to be taken forward systematically. Few actors, 
including ministry officials, actually read the policy documents. None of 
these documents succeeded in transforming the sector until the involvement 
of producers, CSOs and chambers of agriculture in sector decision making. 
Stakeholders claimed their right to participate. ‘It is about us the produc -
ers; you do not do us a favour by involving us!’ (President of PNOPPA, Feb 
2019.).
How did the context and intervention influence the use of evidence
What can we learn about evidence use arising from the Benin case? In the 
context of the 2009 evaluation, the policy space was dominated by government, 
with policies being revised frequently on paper, without effective diagnoses, 
and without the opportunity to really implement them.
A credible evaluation was undertaken (evidence generation) with relevant 
findings and recommendations, and having a NES helped ensure evaluation 
quality (use intervention). Most of the stakeholders that validated the evaluation 
final report were then involved in the restructuring of the sector’s institutional 
framework. They seized the opportunity of the available evidence to complete 
the revision of the PSRSA, and the PSRSA of 2011 bears a strong imprint from 
the 2009 evaluation.
The context changed after 2010 with the involvement of producers. The con-
text was now much more integrated, with government working closely with 
non-state actors, and there was much more drive from the producers to ensure 
that policies were relevant, and that appropriate strategies were implemented. In 
this context we see more examples of evidence generation, for example studies for 
the development of 13 sector value chains. A wider range of use interventions was 
applied, including involvement of all stakeholders through a series of dialogues, 
study tours, systematisation of data collecting and use for cotton campaigns, 
value chain development to increase production of food crops, enhancement
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 165
of evidence management through the establishment of a directorate for agri -
cultural statistics and so forth. We see higher levels of capability and motivation 
at individual and organisational levels. In terms of outcomes we see the policies 
agreed with stakeholders, a law on the agriculture sector, the creation of the 
CNOS, capacity development programs for ministry staff and producers with 
agreement between stakeholders on ways forward, much wider awareness of 
the results of evidence generation, and ultimately use. As a result of implement-
ing many of these recommendations, Benin is now the biggest producer of 
cotton in Africa.
Emerging lessons
The process of researching and writing this chapter has itself been a learning 
opportunity for the agricultural sector, both for the MAEP and other stake -
holders, and for the NES. It shows:
• The importance of conducting high quality evaluations. The rigour and 
quality of the evidence generated by the 2009 evaluation motivated 
stakeholders to trigger structural change in the sector’s institutional 
framework.
• The importance of timing. Having evidence available at a time of change 
motivates use. This points to the need to anticipate and develop an evi -
dence base prior to when it is actually needed, so that policy and decisions 
can be undertaken relatively quickly.
• The importance of a national evaluation system to promote use. A NES can 
ensure the involvement of stakeholders, develop systems like improvement 
plans, promote effective dialogue in the sector, and ensure that there is a 
knowledge broker in the ministry and/or in BEPP who will make sure that 
the results get used.
• The importance of involvement and commitment from key stakeholders 
including the clients of the system, which can stimulate the effective use of 
evidence. This helps build the momentum for change.
• The importance of development partners. DPs provide critical support 
to stakeholders and in taking processes forward. The technical assis -
tance and the financial resources for non-state actors are extremely 
important. There are limitations because of DPs’ project orientation, as 
projects have a limited life, and overreliance on DPs can cause a sustain -
ability challenge. Also DPs have their own agendas which have to be 
managed.
Concluding remarks
What answers will the coalition with producers bring to the sector’s questions 
related to planning, M&E, financing, human resources, access to quality inputs,
<<<PAGE=15>>>
166 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
standardisation, revitalisation of production, processing, marketing and so forth? 
The role of the MAEP has become more complex and it struggles with how 
best to operationalise the complementarity between central government and 
producers. Producer unions and CSOs are not yet sufficiently established to 
fulfil the roles potentially assigned to them.
The evaluation system in Benin is becoming more institutionalised, with 
the decision in 2019 to have an ex-ante evaluation prior to any projects, pro -
grammes or action plans being submitted for approval.
6 The decision to have 
theories of change for new programmes and policies should help implementa-
tion planning and suggests a focus on programme implementation.
T en years after the 2009 evaluation of the agricultural sector development 
policy, the sector bears the imprint of the changes that occurred. The evaluation 
recommendations are a landmark in evidence around the changes occurring 
in the sector. A noteworthy lesson is the necessity to provide an institutional 
framework which involves producers. Without this, evidence generation is 
unlikely to result in use.
Annex 9.1 Summary of the main landmarks in Benin’s agriculture sector 1990–2009
Year Main landmark
1991 The Letter of Declaration of Rural Development Policy (LDPDR)
1993 Development of the National System of Agricultural Extension
1994 Strategy Document and Action Plans for the Livestock Sub-sector
1995 Programme for the Restructuring of the Agriculture Sector
1995 Round Table on the Rural Sector (September)
2000 The Declaration of Rural Development Policy (DPDR)
2000 The Master Plan for Agricultural and Rural Development
2001 The Strategic Operational Plan
2001 Sub-sectoral and Transversal Action Plans
2001 Creation of the Network of Benin Chambers of Agriculture
2001 National Strategy Document for the Cotton Sector
2001 National Policy for the Promotion of Women in the Rural and Agricultural 
Sector
2001 Adoption and Implementation of Programme – Budget Approach
2001 Agricultural Millennium Development Goals
2004 Reform of Local Centres for Agricultural Development
2006 The Strategic Plan for the Revival of the Agricultural Sector (PSRSA)
2006 Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Document
2007 Recruitment of 2,000 trainers for Local Centres for Agricultural Development
2007 Signature of Economic Partnership Agreements with the European Union
2007 Advisory Policy for Family Farming
2007 Implementation of the System of Representation of Agricultural Professional 
Associations
2007 Adoption of the Law on Rural Land Reform in Benin
2007 Adoption of the National Strategy for Agricultural and Rural Training
2008 Revision of the Strategic Plan for the Revival of the Agricultural Sector 
(PSRSA)
Source: MPDEPP-CAG. 2009, Benin Agriculture Sector Evaluation Report, p. 28.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Evaluations to positively influence reforms 167
Notes
 1 The 2009 ev aluation report has a whole section devoted to the analysis of the different 
policies from a historical point of view (pp. 24–46).  Much of the information presented 
in the journey of the policy comes from this report.
 2 The Strategic Plan for the De velopment of the Agriculture Sector; in French, Plan Stra-
tégique de Développement du Secteur Agriculture (PSDSA), was adopted by the government in 
November 2017.
 3 Many other public policies have been evaluated since and are made available on the Presi-
dency of the Republic site (www.presidence.bj/evaluation-politiques-publiques).
 4 The decision was made after the minister in charge of the evaluation of public policies 
made his budget presentation highlighting the importance of evaluation.
 5 A typical example of this is the refor ms of regional centres responsible for agricultural 
promotion for which the research did not identify any studies or evidence that indicated 
their soundness.
 6 This came after the Minister for Evaluation of Pub lic Policies made a presentation to sup-
port his departmental budget in {arliament.
References
BEPPAAG. 2017. Guide méthodologique national d’évaluation . UNICEF . 124 pages. Bureau 
d’Evaluation des Politiques Publiques et de l’Analyse de l’Action Gouvernementale, Bénin.
Government of Benin. 2013. Request from the Government of Benin for financing of the food pro-
duction support project in Alibori, Borgou and Collines Departments (PAPVI-ABC) . Retrieved 
23 August  2019, from www.gafspfund.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/4.%20Benin_
GAFSP%20proposal%20EN.pdf.
MAEP . 2011. Plan stratégique de relance du secteur agricole (PSRSA) . 107 pages. Ministère de 
l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2015. Document actualisé de politique nationale des semences végétales  – Benin. 20 pages. 
Ministère de l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2016. Rapport d’évaluation du plan stratégique de relance du secteur agricole 2011–2015. 88 
pages. Ministère de l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2017a. Cadre institutionnel d’orientation et de suivi du secteur agricole. 24 pages. Ministère 
de l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2017b. Cadre programmatique du secteur agricole. 148 pages. Ministère de l’Agriculture, 
de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2017c. Plan Stratégique de Développement du Secteur Agricole (PSDSA) 2025 et Plan 
National d’Investissements Agricoles et de Sécurité Alimentaire et Nutritionnelle PNIASAN 
2017–2021. 131 pages. Ministère de l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2017d. Stratégie nationale de promotion des filières agricoles intégrant l’outil clusters agricoles. 
UFAI. 73 pages. Ministère de l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MAEP . 2017e. Rapport de performance du secteur agricole, Gestion 2016 . 54 pages. Ministère de 
l’Agriculture, de l’Élevage et de la Pêche, Bénin.
MDGLAAT. 2010. Recueil de lois sur la décentralisation. 107 pages. Ministère de la Décentralisa-
tion, de la Gouvernance Locale, de l’Administration et de l’Aménagement du T erritoire, 
Bénin.
MDR. 2000. Déclaration de Politique de Développement Rural . 27 pages. Ministère du Dével-
oppement Rural, Benin.
Mongbo, R. and Aguemon, D. 2015. Action publique, acteurs, ressources et pouvoir: cas de la relec-
ture du Plan Stratégique de Relance du Secteur Agricole au Bénin. Communication au Colloque 
2015 de l’APAD.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
168 Bonaventure Kouakanou et al.
MPD. 2016. Synthèse de l’étude sur l’utilisation des résultats des évaluations réalisées au cours de la 
période 2010–2013. Direction Générale de l’Évaluation. 8 pages. Ministère du Plan et du 
Développement, Bénin.
MPDEPP-CAG. 2009. Évaluation de la Politique de Développement du Secteur Agricole au Bénin. 
Rapport Final. 137 pages. Ministère du Plan, du Développement, de l’Évaluation des Poli-
tiques Publiques et du Contrôle de l’Action Gouvernementale, Bénin.
PNOPPA. 2016. Imaginons et construisons ensemble le devenir de notre agriculture: Plaquette de 
mobilisation pour la collecte de fonds pour la réalisation du Mémorandum Paysan. 6 pages. Plate-
forme Nationale des Organisations de Paysans et de Producteurs Agricoles, Bénin.