<<<PAGE=1>>>
ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/102
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
and
International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration
EXCELLENCE AND LEADERSHIP  
IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR:  
THE ROLE OF EDUCATION  
AND TRAINING
7th Global Forum on Reinventing Government
Building T rust in Government
26-29 June 2007, Vienna, Austria
United Nations
New Y ork, 2007
<<<PAGE=2>>>
DESA MISSION STATEMENT
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat is a 
vital interface between global policies in the economic, social and environment spheres and 
national action. The Department works in three main interlinked areas: (i) it compiles, gener-
ates and analyses a wide range of economic, social and environmental data and information 
on which Member States of the United Nations draw to review common problems and to 
take stock of policy options; (ii) it facilitates the negotiations of Member States in many 
intergovernmental bodies on joint courses of action to address ongoing or emerging global 
challenges; and (iii) it advises interested governments on the ways and means of translating 
policy frameworks developed in United Nations conferences and summits into programmes 
at the country level and, through technical assistance, helps build national capacities. 
NOTE
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the 
United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The designations “developed” and “developing” economies are intended for statistical con -
venience and do not necessarily imply a judgment about the stage reached by a particular 
country or area in the development process. The term “country” as used in the text of this 
publication also refers, as appropriate, to territories or areas. The term “dollar” normally 
refers to the United States dollar ($).
The views expressed are those of the individual authors and do not imply any expression 
of opinion on the part of the United Nations.
A United Nations Publication
Publication No.: ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/
Printed in Austria
2007
Copyright © United Nations, 2007
All rights reserved
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Acknowledgements
The Division for Public Administration and Development Management of the 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs has been engaged in a 
multiyear joint initiative with the International Association of Schools and Institutes 
of Administration (IASIA) on enhancing the quality of governmental leadership 
and the excellence of public administration education and training. Towards this 
end, the United Nations has sponsored, in conjunction with IASIA, meetings on 
these subjects in Rio de Janeiro, Brasil and Kampala, Uganda. The Initial versions 
of the papers included in this book were presented during these meetings and 
this publication was sponsored by the United Nations. The Institute for Public 
Management and Community Services of Florida International University provided 
assistance to the United Nations and IASIA in the preparation of this volume, 
which is one of the Government Reinvention Series published on the occasion of 
the 7th Global Forum on Reinventing Government.
Division for Public Administration and Development Management, United Nations 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, New Y ork, USA 
Web Site: www.unpan.org/dpepa.asp 
International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration, Brussels, 
Belgium 
Web Site: www.iiasiisa.be 
Editors:
Allan Rosenbaum, Director, Institute for Public Management and Community 
Services, Florida International University, Miami, Florida.
John-Mary Kauzya, Chief, Governance and Public Administration Branch, Divi -
sion for Public Administration and Development Management, United Nations, 
New Y ork, New Y ork
The Government Reinvention Series Editor:
G. Shabbir Cheema, Principal Advisor on Governance, Division for Public Ad -
ministration and Development Management, Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, United Nations.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Contents
Introduction
Allan Rosenbaum and John-Mary Kauzya  .................................................. vii
Strengthening Public Sector Capacity for Achieving  
the Millennium Development Goal s
Guido Bertucci ................................................................................................ 1
I Enhancing the Quality of Education  
and Training for the Public Secto r
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing  
the Next Generation of Public Administrators  
for a Changing World
Allan Rosenbaum .......................................................................................... 11
The Management Competencies of Senior Managers:  
A Look at Some OECD Countrie s
Mohamed Charih, Jacques Bourgault,  
Daniel Maltais and Lucie Rouillard  ............................................................ 25
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration:  
The Role of Standards of Excellenc e
Blue Wooldridge ............................................................................................ 44
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration  
T raining Plan through Knowledge Management
Shih-Hsien Chang ......................................................................................... 62
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials:  
The Role of Professional Association s
Michael Brintnall .......................................................................................... 76
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: 
New Needs and the Implementation of New Approache s
Hendri Kroukamp ......................................................................................... 86
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The 
Case of Indi a
R. K. Mishra  .................................................................................................. 96
<<<PAGE=5>>>
The United Arab Emirates Experience in Developing Standards 
of Excellence in Public Sector Education & T rainin g
Yousuf Essa bin Hassan Al Sabri  ............................................................... 108
II Enhancing Leadership Capacity Through  
Education and Training: An African Perspectiv e
A Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative  
for the African Continen t
John-Mary Kauzya ...................................................................................... 115
Analyzing the Leadership Capacity Challenge:  
Towards Potential Intervention Strategies
Patrick Fitzgerald ......................................................................................... 123
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering  
Socio-Economic and Political Development in Afric a
T ag Elsir Mahgoub Ali ................................................................................ 131
Leadership Challenges in Mainstreaming Performance 
Enhancement in the Public Servic e
John Kiyaga-Nsubuga ................................................................................. 142
Leadership for Reform and Modernization of Governanc e
Ousmane Batoko ......................................................................................... 149
III Concluding Comments
Public Sector Leadership Capacity Building  
Through Education and T raining
T urgay Ergun ............................................................................................... 157
<<<PAGE=6>>>

<<<PAGE=7>>>
vii
Introduction
Allan Rosenbaum and John-Mary Kauzya *
The volume that follows deals with two separate but very closely related issues that, 
when taken together, will have a profound impact on the quality of governance 
of the world’s nations during the next several decades. These two topics are how 
one best achieves true excellence in public administration education and training 
and how one prepares both the current and the next generation of governmental 
leadership to most effectively deal with the complex problems which the world’s 
nations face. Clearly, these are issues that are highly interrelated. While it’s true 
that no doubt some leaders are, in fact, born, not made, it is equally true that 
the quality of leadership found in any government can be significantly enhanced 
by effective education and training. Such efforts will focus not only on leader -
ship techniques, but also will provide governmental leaders – both political and 
administrative – with a broader understanding of the critical issues with which all 
governments are increasingly having to deal.
The question of how one best achieves excellence in public administration 
education and training is certainly not a new one. Most assuredly, it has been a 
concern of those involved in the preparing of public administrators ever since public 
administration education emerged as a distinct academic discipline, now nearly a 
century ago. Nevertheless, it is an issue that is being addressed with increasing 
frequency both by individuals and institutions in the field, and by the growing 
number of international associations in the field – and especially those associa -
tions that have schools and institutes of public administration as their principal 
constituencies.
Public Administration in a Complex Environment
While the questions of how to improve governmental leadership and how to 
achieve excellence in public administration education are perennial ones, this is 
a particularly appropriate time to reconsider them for at least two reasons. First, 
and most important, is the reality that the tasks faced by public administrators in 
today’s world are becoming ever more complex. Every day, public administrators 
are being challenged to solve problems that range from the technologically highly 
complex (addressing issues like global warming and the protection of the environ -
ment) to such highly ideologically charged issues as promoting a society’s economic 
wellbeing and addressing its problems of crime and delinquency. Indeed, what are 
perhaps the two most pressing crises currently facing democratic governments – the 
world’s growing inequality and the resultant inability to more effectively address 
* Allan Rosenbaum is Director of the School of Urban and Public Affairs and the Institute for Public 
Management and Community Service and Professor of Public Administration at Florida Interna -
tional University, Miami, Florida, U.S.A. and John-Mary Kauzya is Chief of the Governance and 
Public Administration Branch, Division for Public Administration and Development Management, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations
<<<PAGE=8>>>
viii 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
issues of widespread poverty and the threat of terrorism – will require the most 
skilled of public administrators. They will also require new and creative leadership 
on the part of both government officials and public administrators.
As the United Nations has recently noted, the wealthiest 20 per cent of the 
world’s population receives 80 per cent of the world’s annual income. Approximately 
half the world’s population, nearly three billion people, live in a state of poverty 
on an income of less than $2.00 a day. T wo billion people lack clean water. Eight 
hundred million people are seriously affected by hunger. Five hundred thousand 
mothers die each year in childbirth. Clearly one of the great challenges of the 
next decade is going to be how the governments of countries around the world 
address these critical problems. This is going to require the development of highly 
skilled government administrators who have received the most excellent possible 
education and training.
Likewise, the issue of terrorism is providing the public sector with new, dif -
ferent and perplexing challenges. Once again, this is not a new concern. The 
United Kingdom has experienced the reality of terrorism over the course of the 
past three decades – in many instances due to the ongoing conflict in Northern 
Ireland, but by no means limited to that very complex situation. Likewise, France, 
Italy, Japan, the Philippines, and Indonesia, among other countries have known 
their share of terrorist tragedy over the course of the past decades. However, the 
events occurring on September 11 th, 2001 in the United States and, since then, in 
Madrid, London, and many other places, reflect the fact that terrorism, sparked 
by a variety of conflicts, has reached a whole new level of severity.
This new reality has placed even greater pressure on governments to put in 
place effective public programs to combat such threats. In so doing, this has called 
attention to the need for more effective public administration and the ability of 
public administrators to meet new and more complex challenges. Indeed, it is not 
by chance that in the face of the 9/11 tragedy, and despite 20 years of emphasis 
on lessening the role of the national government, the first response of the United 
States government was to move the responsibility for airport safety from the private 
sector (the airlines) to a newly created national government agency. Obviously, this 
was yet another step that increased the demand for the most competent of public 
administrators and, in turn, raised the stakes for excellence in public administration 
education and training even higher.
The UN/IASIA Initiative
A second reason to again turn to the twin issues of achieving greater excellence 
in public administration education and training and enhancing governmental lead -
ership is that interest in these subjects has become very wide-spread and moved 
well beyond the academic community. It is now about three years ago, that the 
United Nations Division for Public Administration and Development Management 
(UN/DPADM) approached the then President of the International Association of 
Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA), Allan Rosenbaum, to engage in
<<<PAGE=9>>>
ix
Introduction
discussions about the issue of achieving greater excellence in public administration 
education and training and strengthening governmental leadership.
These discussions led to the creation of the joint UN/IASIA initiative on 
enhancing the excellence of public administration education and training and 
strengthening the capacity of both current and future generations of senior gov -
ernmental leadership. This joint initiative, as is described in essays that follow by 
the Director of the UN’s Division of Public Administration and Development 
Management, Mr. Guido Bertucci, and by the Chief of the Division’s Governance 
and Public Administration branch, Mr. John-Mary Kauzya, has led to numerous 
activities jointly sponsored by the two organizations.
There were two reasons why UN/DPADM approached IASIA to discuss these 
matters. First, it had received inquiries from public administration education and 
training programs in many parts of the world about whether it might initiate a 
process for accrediting such programs as a means of enhancing excellence. Second, 
it had received a number of inquiries from governments around the world regarding 
the issue of enhancing senior governmental leadership and it felt that, for upper 
level officials, the broader perspective of a worldwide academic organization could 
be of especial value.
The issue of accrediting programs of public administration education also has 
been an important factor in stimulating the growing interest in the issue of achiev-
ing greater excellence in public administration education. In the United States, the 
National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA) 
has been, for almost three decades, very successfully involved in the accreditation 
of Masters degree programs in public administration. In addition, over the past 
half dozen years, it also has received numerous requests from institutions outside 
the United States that it consider accrediting them.
Indeed, the issue of accreditation was not a new one for IASIA when it was 
approached on this matter by UN/DPADM. By that time, IASIA, in response 
to requests from institutions around the world, had been discussing whether to 
undertake accrediting activities for at least a decade. Furthering interest in this 
issue was the emergence of a Netherlands-based organization which accredits 
programs of public administration education throughout Europe. While, as of this 
point, it has only accredited a few European institutions, the emergence of this 
organization (and its need to develop accreditation standards applicable to the 
many different types of public administration educational programs found on the 
European continent) further stimulated the discussion about excellence in public 
administration education and training.
As a result of this growing concern about the quality of public administration 
more generally, and the increasing ferment surrounding the area of accreditation 
of public administration academic programs, UN/DPADM and IASIA, within the 
framework of the joint UN/IASIA initiative, have created a Taskforce on Standards 
of Excellence in Public Administration Education and T raining. As part of the work
<<<PAGE=10>>>
x 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
of this taskforce, several papers have been and are being commissioned around 
the issue of achieving excellence in public administration education and training. 
The taskforce itself will interact with both individual programs and associations 
of public administration educators around the world as part of the process of de -
veloping standards of excellence for public administration education and training, 
which will then be published by the UN.
The intention of this joint effort is to develop objective standards regarding 
the nature of excellence in public administration education and training. The hope 
is that such standards will enable individual institutions to assess themselves and, 
in so doing, determine both the resources that are necessary to achieve excellence 
in their public administration education and training programs and develop their 
own strategies for the achievement of that end. The papers found in the first half 
of this book, which were presented at a joint UN/IASIA conference in Rio de 
Janeiro, reflect that goal.
The second part of the joint UN/IASIA initiative, the enhancement of the 
leadership capacity of current and future generations of senior government officials 
has also been pursued vigorously with the result being, among other things, the 
holding of conferences for top governmental leadership in both Africa and Central 
Europe, with additional activities currently being planned. The papers found in 
the second half of this book were presented at a conference on this subject, held 
in Kampala, Uganda. It is our hope that both these papers, and the ones from the 
Rio conference that are also included here, will serve to stimulate much discussion 
on matters related to enhancing the quality of public administration education and 
training and strengthening the capacity of governmental leadership.
As with all books of this type, they are the product of the efforts of a number 
of individuals in addition to those who have written papers for it. Bianor Caval -
canti, the Director of the Brazilian School of Public Administration of Fundacao 
Getulio V argas, hosted the Rio meeting and played a major role in its successful 
organization. John Kiyaga-Nsubuga, the Director of the Uganda Management In -
stitute, played the same role for the Kampala meeting. From the United Nations, 
Guido Bertucci played a major role in facilitating both events and Y olande Jemai 
was especially helpful in guiding the development of the Rio meeting.
The projects that led to this book began when Allan Rosenbaum was serving as 
President of the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Adminis -
tration. Subsequently, the presidency of that organization was assumed by T urgay 
Ergun, the Director of the Public Administration Institute for T urkey and the 
Middle East, who has continued to enthusiastically support this effort. Finally , Allan 
Rosenbaum would like to especially thank Rebecca Fernandez for her considerable 
efforts in the typing and re-typing of the manuscripts that follow and, of course, 
his wife, Judy, for her ongoing support of his efforts to produce this book.
<<<PAGE=11>>>
1
Strengthening Public Sector Capacity for Achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals
Guido Bertucci *
Eradicating poverty is one of the greatest challenges our world faces today. Despite 
the best intentions of the United Nations and its Member States, over the last few 
decades, the reduction of poverty has not been as significant as one would wish. 
There is virtually no country without a single pocket of poverty. Unfortunately 
however, there are many countries in which poverty is less the exception and 
more the common plight of a large number of citizens. In particular, developing 
countries face a number of challenges.
The Millennium Development Goals: At the United Nations Millennium Sum-
mit in the year 2000, heads of Government and State gathered together and resolved 
to commit their energy and efforts to achieving a number of broad goals. These 
are contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, and they include:
• Upholding human rights, and fostering democracy and good governance;
• Ensuring peace, security and disarmament;
• Promoting development and poverty eradication;
• Fostering environmental protection;
• Protecting the vulnerable; and
• Meeting the special needs of Africa.
As highlighted in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, the promotion 
of democracy and good governance, including an efficient and effective public 
administration, is among the best ways to ensure that the values of freedom, 
equality, solidarity, environmental protection, and shared responsibility are re -
spected. Democracy and good governance are goals in themselves because of the 
values on which they rest. At the same time, they are also the most critical means 
to achieve the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which set very 
precise objectives, targets and indicators to achieve the broader goal set out in 
the Millennium Declaration related to development and poverty eradication. In 
fact, although many studies have not been able to show that democracy per se 
will lead to greater economic growth, there is evidence that democracy ensures 
greater redistribution of resources. As Amartya Sen has pointed out, one of the 
consequences of democracy is that it generates political incentives for decision 
makers to respond positively to the needs and demands of society. The more 
active democracy is, the greater and more effective will be the pressure of these 
incentives on the decision makers.
The Role of Public Administration : Having in place a democratic system, 
however, is not sufficient. Government institutions need to be based on clear and 
* Director, Division for Public Administration and Development Management, Department of Eco -
nomic and Social Affairs, United Nations, New Y ork, New Y ork, USA
<<<PAGE=12>>>
2 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
widely accepted rules; to have committed leaders and qualified people to undertake 
appropriate reforms in the economic and social spheres; to be able to mobilize 
resources and manage expenditure; and to operate in the most cost-effective way 
possible by making use of new information technologies.
Reforming and innovating public administration systems is thus essential to 
ensure that “the Millennium Development Goals, including poverty eradication, 
become national goals and serve to increase the coherence and consistency of na -
tional policies and programmes”. It is important to underscore that, at the global 
level, monitoring the goals’ progress is entrusted to the Statistical Division of the 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and an annual report is prepared for 
the Secretary-General. As of September 2002, 12 countries had prepared a Millen -
nium Development Goal report, and 40 others were in the process of doing so.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which are derived from the Mil-
lennium Declaration and are to be met by 2015, include achieving the following:
1) Halve the proportion of extreme poverty and hunger
2) Achieve universal primary education
3) Promote gender equality and empower women
4) Reduce child mortality
5) Improve maternal health
6) Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, etc.
7) Ensure environmental sustainability
8) Develop global partnerships for resource mobilization
What are the demands imposed on public administration by the tasks related 
to implementing the Millennium Development Goals? It has been pointed out 
that governments of developing countries have overwhelming responsibilities and 
chronic resource constraints, not only vis-à-vis their citizens, but also vis-à-vis 
the international community. As clearly stated in paragraph 2 of the Millennium 
Declaration, heads of states recognize that, “in addition to our separate respon -
sibilities to our individual societies, we have a collective responsibility to uphold 
the principles of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level. As leaders 
we have a duty therefore to all the world’s people, especially the most vulnerable 
and, in particular, the children of the world, to whom the future belongs”.
In general terms, mainstreaming the goal of poverty reduction within the 
Millennium Development Goals will require public administration to be more 
engaging and receptive; more skilled and visionary; more open and transparent; 
more facilitating and guiding; and more just. The overall imperatives of MDGs and 
the implications for public administration are thus multiple. First, it must be said 
that the MDGs are a complex package of goals and targets requiring a great deal 
of harmonization, re-organization and re-orientation in the public sector. Second, 
in terms of goals and targets, a clear focus on social development is at the basis 
of both the United Nations Millennium Declaration and the road map towards 
the implementation of the MDGs, stressing the need for a social or “pro-poor”
<<<PAGE=13>>>
3
Strengthening Public Sector Capacity for Achieving the Millennium …
orientation to all aspects of development management. Third, there is an increased 
need to gather data, conduct analyses, to promote policy advice and to establish 
results-oriented monitoring systems.
Fourth, new options, strategies and tools are needed on the one hand, to gener-
ate more resources internally and on the other, to use existing resources in a more 
efficient way. In particular, new means, options and technologies are needed to (1) 
harness better the resources at the national level, e.g. through improved taxation; 
(2) to maximize returns on invested resources; and (3) to engage people into the 
monitoring process to ensure quality in service delivery – through the “score-card” 
system. Furthermore, continuous dialoguing at the international level for enhanced 
resource mobilization, debt relief, improved financial deals and measures to attract 
foreign direct investments (FDIs) will also be necessary.
Fifth, in order to achieve the MDGs, governments should promote a value 
or culture shift from sector-oriented planning to socially-oriented goal-based 
planning; and from over-emphasis of macro-economic stabilization to pro-poor 
policies. For this purpose, it is necessary to promote the internal re-alignment of 
institutions to ensure connectivity in order for public officials to work as a whole, 
and not in a fragmented way. Moreover, it is of great importance to foster more 
engaging governance arrangements to allow civil society organizations, the private 
sector and the community to participate more fully in the policy processes of the 
government.
Last, but not least, it is necessary to build the capacity of the public sector staff 
in analytical and policy advising work; create an incentive structure that can attract 
the best talents to the public sector; and protect civil service from politicization and 
political interferences. These are among the most important imperatives in order 
for countries to meet the MDGs. As the United Nations Committee of Experts 
on Public Administration noted in its first and second reports, strengthening, 
good governance is about capacity-building through institutions and people 1. The 
knowledge, skills, networks and attitudes of people in the public sector are at the 
heart of the performance of States, for it is through people and by people that 
services are planned and delivered, critical innovations conceived and realized, and 
needed reforms carried out.
The Role of Public Sector Human Resources : Governments all over the 
world need to face the challenge of having in place adequate public sector human 
resources in order to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate policies and strategies 
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, including poverty eradication 
policies. At the national level, the quality of public sector human resources is 
crucial in enabling the state to provide leadership in defining a home-grown gov -
ernance framework and national appropriation of the Millennium Development 
Goals. The state needs to provide leadership in this process through law-making, 
1 Report of the First Session of the Committee ( E/2002/84) and Report of the Second Session of 
the Committee (E/2003/44)
<<<PAGE=14>>>
4 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
regulatory and security-related functions, as it is the ultimate guarantor of life, 
liberty and property.
Developing strong leadership and adequate human resources in the public sector 
is a crucial task in order for any country to prosper and undertake programmes 
that are aimed at reducing poverty. In fact, the quality of government leadership 
has a great impact on the quality of governance, which in turn is often closely 
related to the level of development of a region. Finally, an effective public sector 
is essential in creating an enabling environment for private sector development 
and economic competitiveness.
Strengthening public sector human resources capacities is, however, not an easy 
task and many are the difficulties that need to be overcome. Although all countries 
around the world are facing a number of challenges in modernizing their public 
sector, developing countries are facing even greater difficulties due to a number 
of factors, which include:
• the changing role of the state due to national and international factors;
• the erosion of public sector human resource capacity; and
• the constraints in recruiting highly qualified personnel.
The reform of the public sector in developing countries has been greatly affected 
by constraints in recruiting high-quality personnel. The main factors to which this 
phenomenon may be attributed are: a loss of pride within and credibility outside the 
public service; brain drain to the private sector and to more economically advanced 
countries due to better salaries and career opportunities; and a gradual decay of 
national governance structures in stagnating countries. Human resources reform 
in the public sector has also been particularly difficult as the core competencies 
needed in the public sector have evolved and changed in a number of ways as a 
result of the changes taking place at the national and international levels, requiring 
new skills and behaviours among public officials at all levels.
Given this extremely complex situation, what the public sector needs more 
than ever is its fair share of the best talent in any given country to respond ef -
fectively to evolving traditional functions of the state, as well as the challenges of 
globalization and other social changes. Moreover, it is important to underline that 
improving human capacity in the public sector also requires sound public institu -
tions and good governance. In other words, strengthening public sector capacity 
requires a holistic approach, which should begin by rebuilding trust in the public 
sector and promoting high-quality leadership.
There are key measures that need to be taken in order to promote adequate 
capacities among public servants, including:
•	 reinforcing human resources planning and management systems and units;
•	 reinforcing core public service values, such as:
•	 low tolerance for corruption and crime;
•	 stress on meritocracy; and
•	 growing sensitivity towards and respect for citizens’ needs;
<<<PAGE=15>>>
5
Strengthening Public Sector Capacity for Achieving the Millennium …
• fostering a political culture that places emphasis on the respect for institutions 
and norms over personal interest;
• promoting professionalism and competence in the public service;
• creating a culture of learning;
• introducing incentive structures, such as:
•	 fair remuneration systems; and
•	 systems of reward for industry, loyalty, accomplishment and merit;
•	 increasing recognition of the value of cross-cultural and international links as 
means towards the improvement of the professional image and performance 
of the public service;
• tapping the best talent from underrepresented groups, including women; and
• promoting the knowledge and use of ICT tools.
The Role of Education: Taking into account the present political environment 
in an increasing globalizing world, new areas of public sector competency also need 
to be strengthened, in particular diversity management; knowledge management; 
horizontal management; resource and information management; partnership-build-
ing and negotiation skills; communication and ICT skills. Given the diversity 
of administrative cultures and based on a variety of societal environments, each 
country has to be open-minded and look at all the potential solutions to its own 
problems. The key element is to develop a sense of direction for the public service 
of a given country which takes into account its history, its environment and its 
position in the global world in a realistic manner.
These realities create greater needs for effective public administration educa -
tion and training. Such education and training is critical to both the immediate 
and the long-term well being of the world’s people since the quality of public 
administration education and training has a very significant relationship to the 
quality of governance. In those regions where public administration education 
and training is the most advanced, the quality of governance is normally the most 
highly developed. The quality of governance, in turn, is often highly related to the 
level of development of a region. Most assuredly there is no country in any region 
of the world which can be absolutely satisfied with the quality of its governance. 
Nevertheless, it is very clear that in those countries where governance is strongest 
and most transparent, economic development is greatest and poverty is neither as 
widespread nor as oppressive.
While it is widely recognized that education and training is an important pre -
condition for effective public administration and governance, more often than not, 
its impact is a long-term one rather than immediate. The reason for this is obvious. 
In most cases, the recipients of education and training initiatives are frequently the 
next generation of governmental leadership – students at university preparing for 
careers in government or, beginning career as civil servants. However, the current 
situation is such that many countries – especially countries that are making the 
transition to democratic governance, or to a market economy, or both – cannot 
wait to improve the quality of public service in the next generation.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
6 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
The reality is that there is a great need to improve the quality of education 
and training for today’s governmental employees and leaders, as well as for to -
morrow’s. In response to this critical need, the Division for Public Administration 
and Development Management of the United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs and the International Association of Schools and Institutes of 
Administration initiated a four-year effort to improve the quality of education and 
training in public administration worldwide, but with particular emphasis on Africa, 
Asia, Central and Eastern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. The joint 
UN/IAISIA initiative is designed to prepare the next generation of government 
leaders and to assist top level-government leadership to adapt most effectively to 
the many complicated problems that are facing contemporary governments in a 
globalizing world.
The joint UN/DESA/DPADM and IASIA initiative is a two track one. The 
first important, and often overlooked, element of this effort will be to focus upon 
the education and training needs of the current generation of governmental lead -
ership – particularly in those areas of the world which are undergoing significant 
governmental or economic transition. The second part of this initiative will involve 
focusing on the next generation of public servants and the improvement of their 
education and training opportunities.
A number of activities have been undertaken as part of the initiative and many 
others are being planned. Meetings have been held in T urin, Italy; Bratislava, Slovakia; 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; and New Y ork City, which have focused on the development 
of a strategy for the improvement of public administration education and training. 
At the Expert Group Meeting on “New Challenges for Senior Leadership Enhance-
ment for Improved public Management in a Globalizing World, which took place 
in T urin, Italy, the participants made efforts to define governmental leadership, to 
categorize the UN/IAISIA initiative in terms of target groups and to review key 
issues facing governmental leadership.
The seminar on “Improving the Quality of Public Administration Education and 
T raining: New Needs, New Approaches”, co-sponsored by IAISIA, the Brazilian 
School of Public Administration, Fundacao Getuluio V argas, and UN/DESA/
DPADM and held in Rio de Janeiro, resulted in the development of a set of ideas 
and techniques that are appropriate for the education and training for the next 
generation of governmental leadership. It focused on both education and training 
activities and, most importantly, on the ways to make them relevant to newly de -
veloping civil servants. Within the framework of the joint UN/IAISIA initiative, 
a publication on leadership capacity enhancement in a globalizing world has been 
published. The next step will involve the development of globally applicable stan -
dards of quality and excellence in public administration teaching and training.
Key Challenges Facing Senior Public Sector Leadership : The UN/IASIA 
initiative is premised on the belief that public administration education and training 
programs must be conceived and implemented with the aim of making current and 
future public sector leaders capable of effectively addressing the key issues facing
<<<PAGE=17>>>
7
Strengthening Public Sector Capacity for Achieving the Millennium …
the world today and that its planning and implementation must be interdisciplinary, 
international and inter-sectoral (involving public and non-profit organizations).
The following issues were singled out at the T urin Expert Group meeting as 
some of the critical ones facing current and future leaders in the world:
(i) Understanding globalization: Globalization needs to be understood in its 
nature, its impact, in the way it can be harnessed to limit its negative impact, 
and how benefits can derive from its positive effects on development. This is 
especially relevant for countries of the South, which have difficulty to influ -
ence globalization.
(ii) Developing strategic approaches to poverty alleviation: Leaders have to 
develop cross-sectoral approach to solving problems to reduce poverty, such 
as concentrating on developing civic engagement and on improving service 
delivery – especially in the areas of water, health, HIV/AIDS, education, and 
the environment.
(iii)	 Developing	conflict	prevention	and	resolution	strategies: Countries emerg-
ing from conflict need to develop special strategies to ensure that the seeds 
of conflict are not planted again.
(iv) Building legitimacy of state institutions: Creating legitimacy and trust is 
critical. This can be done by establishing strong participation mechanisms and 
by defining in a transparent manner the roles and relationships of different 
spheres of government. It includes also the development of an administra -
tive culture based on the rule of law and a system, which ensures security to 
attract investment and encourage property ownership.
(v) Learning to lead in a world of increasing interdependency: Taking into ac-
count the present political environment in an increasingly globalizing world, 
new areas of leadership competency need to be strengthened, in particular: 
diversity management, knowledge management, horizontal management, 
resource and information management, partnerships and negotiation skills, 
communication and ICT skills.
(vi) Learning to lead large-scale transformations: Current and future leaders 
need to learn how to work with stakeholders in the society in order to bal -
ance and manage long term and short term objectives at the time of change; 
and to empower employees to take initiative and achieve results.
(vii) Learning to lead with contradictions and paradox: The world is changing 
so rapidly that many contradictions emerge continuously. It is incumbent 
on leaders and all employees to be able to deal with more ambiguity. These 
require being able to manage change while ensuring stability and security.
Whether it is called training, competency enhancement, skill development or 
by any other name, leadership training needs to be undertaken with a clear un -
derstanding of the ultimate purpose it is pursuing, as well as the impact of culture 
on leadership.
The basic guideline regarding strategies, approaches, techniques and method -
ologies for leadership capacity development is that in each situation, the needs it
<<<PAGE=18>>>
8 
Excellence and Leadership in the Public Sector: The Role of Education and…
imposes, as well as the composition and nature of the targeted audience, should 
dictate the approaches, techniques, thematic content and training methods to be 
adopted. In designing, planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating education 
and training, and leadership development programmes – whether they be in the 
immediate, short term, medium term or long term – one must adopt a participative 
approach involving the beneficiaries and the target groups of such programmes.
Conclusion
 In the process of public sector leadership capacity development, both colleges and 
universities, and management development institutes, have critical roles to play. 
They constitute the infrastructure in their respective countries for management 
development; they have human resources capable of doing management research and 
training, and providing technical advisory and consultancy services. Governments 
must count on them for taking new initiatives. From training needs assessments, 
human resource policy design, personnel development, program formulation, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation, these institutions should play a leading 
role. It is understood that some of them, perhaps most of them, will need to have 
their capacities reinforced, but this does not in any way minimize the role they 
must play. In addition, they have networks at national and regional levels through 
which they can pool expertise, facilitate exchange of successful practices and share 
innovative practices. For this they should play a leading role in the public sector 
leadership capacity enhancement initiative.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Part I
Enhancing the Quality of 
Education and Training for the 
Public Sector
<<<PAGE=20>>>

<<<PAGE=21>>>
11
Excellence in Public Administration Education:  
Preparing the Next Generation of Public Administrators  
for a Changing World
Allan Rosenbaum *
The concluding years of the 20 th century witnessed dramatic change in the po -
litical, economic and social systems of many countries. In most instances, these 
system transformations resulted in the emergence of both more democratic and 
more responsive governance. In some instances, these changes occurred with great 
rapidity; in other cases, the changes are still very much in process. Stimulating, 
underlying and shaping many of these changes have been two major develop -
ments – globalization and decentralization.
Complicating and threatening this process of democratic evolution has been 
the emergence of rapidly growing problems of resource and income inequality in 
many countries. These developments, along with the process of democratization 
itself, place many new demands on public administrators, and especially upon 
those who educate them. This essay will examine both the implications of these 
developments for public administration education and training, as well as review 
some of the ways in which these developments have encouraged new approaches 
to the achievement of excellence in public administration education and training.
As many recent events suggest, the process of democratic transformation and 
development is still very much underway and has yet to be consolidated in many 
places. This is not surprising for at least two reasons. First, democratic governance, 
and especially the transition to democratic governance, is always a difficult and, 
frequently, a very fragile process. Second, democratic governance is inevitably a 
“work-in-progress”. All democratic countries must build and strengthen their 
institutional structures. Moreover, from time to time, even the most committed 
countries will regress in their progress towards more democratic governance.
Nevertheless, from the growing independence of legislative bodies, to the in -
creasing mobilization of neighborhood organizations, to the intensifying citizen 
demands for openness and accountability, progress is being made in making gov -
ernments all around the world more responsive to the popular will 1. This, in turn, 
places significant new pressures and expectations upon civil servants. Increasingly, 
they find themselves having to respond to many more demands from a growing 
number of constituencies, often seeking conflicting goals. These demands routinely 
* Allan Rosenbaum is Professor of Public Administration and Director, School of Public and Urban 
Affairs and the Institute for Public Management and Community Service at Florida International 
University
1 As data compiled by both the United Nations and the World Bank has indicated, the number of 
democratic governments throughout the world has nearly doubled over the last quarter century. See 
for example Allan Rosenbaum and Arne Svensson, Responding to Citizens Needs: Local Governance 
and Democratic Development New Y ork: United Nations, 2002.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
12 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
challenge the professionalism, capability and, in some cases, even the ethical stan -
dards of both elected government officials and civil servants. This, in turn, presents 
profound new challenges to those who are involved in the education of the next 
generation of public administrators, as well as those responsible for the continu -
ing education of those currently in the field. However, before turning to some of 
the implications of these developments for public administration education, it is 
useful to examine them a bit further.
Globalization and Democratic Development: Certainly, a key factor in both 
encouraging and shaping the recent processes of democratic development has been 
the phenomenon characterized as globalization. In actuality, globalization is the 
result, and a composite, of many developments, including major innovations in 
communication and information technology; greatly expanded, and new approaches 
to, international trade, commerce and finance; and the increasingly rapid dissemina-
tion of cultural phenomena from one country to another. Of special importance 
in this regard have been developments in communications and the sharing of 
information.2 These have made it increasingly difficult to sustain dictatorial forms 
of governance and, in so doing, have helped to encourage the spread of democratic 
institutions throughout the world. 3
In fact, many aspects of what has come to be characterized as globalization, 
while sometimes having negative consequences, do generate significantly increased 
expectations by, and new opportunities for many people throughout the world. 
In so doing, they encourage both collective and individual demands for greater 
economic security and personal freedom. Consequently, it is not surprising that, 
when taken together, these phenomena raise many significant issues for government 
administrators – both in terms of creating new problems with which they must 
deal and profoundly impacting the manner in which they approach and manage 
almost all of the traditional activities of governments.
Of particular relevance to public administrators is a key factor that has en -
couraged globalization – the rapid development of information technology. This 
has had at least two significant consequences for governmental officials. First, it 
makes information which, in the past, may have been very limited in its distribu -
tion, much more readily available to citizens and public managers alike. Second, 
in so doing, it helps to flatten the organizational, and operational, structures of 
most public organizations.
When one combines the demands of effectively analyzing ever greater informa-
tion, with the realization that the problems with which governments now must 
2 See for example Elaine Ciulla Kamarck and Joseph S. Nye, Jr., eds, Democracy.com?: Governance 
in a Networked World: Hollis, NH; Hollis Publishing, 1999.
3 Nevertheless, as recent news stories have suggested, governments in both developed and transitional 
parts of the world have been able to intervene with technology companies in ways to slow down, 
if not totally stop, the spread of democracy. See for example Whasun Jho, “Challenges for e-gov -
ernance: protests from the civil society on the protection of privacy in e-government in Korea”: 
International Review of Administrative Sciences , vol. 71, no. 1, March 2005.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
13
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
routinely deal have grown greatly in number, are becoming ever more complex and 
frequently lack a clear cut solution, one can better understand the new realities 
facing not only public managers, but those who are responsible for their education 
and training as well. Whether it is a highly technical problem, such as estimating 
the causes of global warming, or one that is a bit more susceptible to ideological 
interpretation, such as the impact of rates of taxation upon economic productiv -
ity, contemporary policy problems are increasingly difficult to analyze, let alone 
solve. Thus, public administration educators are faced with the task of providing 
education and training that enables one to deal simultaneously with complexity 
and ambiguity – in an environment of ever great uncertainty. 4
Moreover, the unfortunate reality, and perhaps the central truth of a globalizing 
world, is that there are rarely simple solutions (and sometimes not even compli -
cated ones) to the most complex problems. In part, this is because efforts to solve 
many of today’s multifaceted public problems often must rely upon the taking 
of coordinated collaborative action in many places and jurisdictions, the utiliza -
tion of new and complex technologies and the changing of traditional values. The 
result is increasing pressure upon governments to solve what often appear to be, 
and sometimes really are, unsolvable problems. Needless to say, these challenges 
serve to add even more complexity, not to mention difficulty, for those involved 
in the processes of preparing the next generation of public administrators to deal 
with them.
A Growing Threat: Emerging Inequality: Further complicating the tasks facing 
government administrators having to deal with the processes of globalization is 
the growing gap between the rich and the poor in both developed, industrialized 
countries and the less economically well-developed, transitional countries. As was 
noted in the UN’s World Public Sector Report; Globalization and the State, 2001 ; 
“Eradicating poverty and ensuring sustainable development should form the raison 
d’être of public administration. Half the world, nearly 3 billion people, lives on less 
than US $2 a day while the richest 20 per cent of the global population receive 
more than 80 percent of the global income.” The UN further notes that two bil -
lion people lack clean water. Eight hundred million people are seriously affected by 
hunger and five hundred thousand mothers die each year in child birth – principally 
due to a lack of adequate medical care. 5
This growing inequality, which has been well documented in the United States, 
China and several western European countries as well, can conceivably serve at 
one and the same time to both encourage and discourage the development of 
social, economic and governmental turmoil. On the one hand, growing economic 
discomfort can often lead to the emergence and growth of class-based political 
4 Allan Rosenbaum “New Challenges for Senior Leadership Enhancement for Improved Public Man-
agement” in Leadership and Social T ransformation in the Public Sector – Moving from Challenges 
to Solutions, New Y ork: United Nations, 2003. pp. 103 – 113.
5 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2001. World Public Sector Report: 
Globalization and the State . New Y ork, NY , United Nations.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
14 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
organizations and movements designed to represent the interests of the poor which 
in turn, place new and special demands upon governments. On the other hand, as 
the poor get poorer, it lessens their capacity to participate, if not necessarily their 
interest in participating, in the processes of governance and, thus, makes them 
more susceptible to anti-democratic political manipulation.
Decentralization and the Public Sector:  Equally profound in its impact upon 
public administrators (as well as the education of them) is the rapidly growing 
movement for the decentralization of previously highly centralized governments 
and national ministries and the simultaneous efforts to broaden and strengthen 
local governance capacity. From Bolivia, where the “Popular Participation Law” has 
encouraged the movement of the rural poor into the nation’s political mainstream 
through the building and/or strengthening of local institutions; to the Peoples 
Republic of China, where the granting of greater degrees of local autonomy has 
produced major economic development (including in Shanghai, the largest amount 
of new construction activity in a single urban area in human history); one witnesses 
the emergence of new needs, and demands, to strengthen sub-national govern -
ment.6 Complicating this, however, is the fact that, while there is new leadership 
and creativity at the sub-national level, many of those involved are relatively inex -
perienced and, as a consequence, a high level of professionalism is not always the 
norm for many of the world’s rapidly developing sub-national governments. This 
obviously has profound consequences for those involved in public administration 
education and training.
Decentralization, when real, serves to open up new civic space and, in so 
doing, provide the opportunity for new political elites to emerge; while, at the 
same time, fragmenting, at least to a minimal degree (and sometimes to a very 
substantial degree), highly concentrated and centralized political power. T ypically, 
this is so in terms of both the vertical decentralization of power from national, 
to regional, to local governments, and with regard to what one might characterize 
as the horizontal decentralization of power from centralized executive branches 
to independent bureaucratic organizations, legislative bodies and judicial authori -
ties. Thus, decentralization is connected in very significant ways to the movement 
to democracy throughout the world. 7 It also, however, puts many new demands 
upon public administrators as it raises the expectations of local citizens for new, 
expanded and more responsive service delivery.
How one prepares new public administrators, and equips current ones, to deal 
with this new reality of decentralized governance has both political and economic 
consequences. In fact, decentralization is critical to economic development – as is 
evidenced by the clear correlation between the strength of local government and the 
relative level of a country’s economic developments. This can be seen by examin -
ing the differing proportion of governmental expenditure and employment found 
at the sub-national level across various regions of the world. In North America 
6 Allan Rosenbaum and Arne Svensson, Local Governance, New Y ork; United Nations, 1997.
7 ibid
<<<PAGE=25>>>
15
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
and Europe, an average of 50% of all governmental expenditure and 57% of all 
governmental employment occurs at the sub-national level. By comparison, in 
Asia – the scene of rapid economic development over the past decade – the figures 
for expenditure and employment by sub-national government are 30% and 37%, 
respectively. In Africa – the least economically developed region of the world – the 
percentages of governmental expenditure and employment at the sub-national level 
are only 10% and 6%. Latin America falls somewhere in between Africa and Asia 
with 19% of governmental expenditure and 21% of governmental employment at 
the sub-national level. 8
The reasons for the correlation between level of economic development by 
region and governmental activity at the sub-national level are obvious. Economic 
development does not spring magically from the environment. It depends on 
several factors such as local initiative, adaptability and capacity; the existence in a 
community of the basic infrastructure necessary to facilitate business, commercial 
or industrial activity; a supportive legal framework; and the ability to mobilize 
necessary resources and respond rapidly to an ever-changing environment.  These 
requirements are most easily met when local authorities have the capability to 
cooperate with private entrepreneurs – be they local or national – to initiate new 
economic development.9
Decentralized government inevitably requires new modes of behavior on the 
part of public managers. It requires greater independence and entrepreneurialism 
on their part, while also providing the opportunity for a closer balance between the 
service needs of individual communities and the actual distribution of goods and 
services within that community. All of these developments require a new and more 
responsive form of governance. This requires a new type of public administrator 
and that, in turn, requires that those who will be educating the public administra -
tors of the future bring fresh, new approaches to that task. Public administration 
education and training must equip both new and current civil servants with the skills 
necessary to build new institutions and redefine existing ones. It must give them 
the ability to assess new and different realities in an ever-changing environment.
Approaches to Achieving Excellence in Public Administration Education 
and Training
Performance Assessment: Over the course of the past decade, the area of perfor -
mance measurement has been the subject of much attention in the field of public 
administration. The growing concern of governments all across the world towards 
a “results orientation”, combined with demands for greater accountability and re -
sponsiveness have placed new demands upon public administrators to demonstrate 
the value and effectiveness of the services that they provide. These demands have 
8 ibid
9 Allan Rosenbaum “Frontiers of Development: Local Governments in Latin America Play an Impor-
tant Role in Promoting Economic Growth and Democracy” in Hemisphere, V ol. 8, No. 2, Miami, 
Florida (March 1998) pages 18-22
<<<PAGE=26>>>
16 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
focused on the ability to quickly and effectively assess whether the programs that 
public agencies, or their contractors, are delivering are, in fact, meeting the needs 
of their clientele in the most effective possible manner. Increasingly, governments 
are developing systems of performance measurement in which significant indica -
tors of program performance or consequence are used to assess success, both in 
terms of the effectiveness of the services delivered and, in comparison, to other 
agencies and governments.
Performance assessment has been widely used in education programs generally, 
as a means of facilitating evaluation and accountability. Recently, it has begun to 
find its way into public administration education in the United States as discus -
sions have begun about the possibility of the development of a national test in 
the field of public administration education. Similar discussions have taken place 
in other countries. Also, as accreditation systems have emerged in different parts 
of the world, there has been a growing interest in the development of compara -
tive assessment data.
This general development has given rise to a number of new techniques, which 
are increasingly being used in order to facilitate programmatic assessment. These 
include the development of institutional effectiveness matrices, programmatic 
rubrics and, most recently, academic learning compacts. In each instance, these 
approaches are based on the development of specific student learning objectives 
and involve the assessment of whether, in fact, the students’ performance reflects 
their achievement. The implementation of such systems requires the careful speci -
fication of both desired student outcomes and the criteria for assessing whether 
those outcomes have been achieved. This, of course, requires the development 
of course and/or program objectives that are measurable and/or observable, and 
clearly specified for both faculty and students. It is then necessary to collect data 
on whether these objectives have been achieved, and of course, optimally feed that 
data back into course and program development.
In addition to these formal efforts at program assessment, various other in -
novations are under way in different academic programs to attempt to encourage 
increased academic excellence. These include the introduction of “capstone courses” 
that are designed to provide an overview of a student’s total academic program. The 
requirements in such courses are often structured in such a fashion as to emulate 
the kind of activities in which a professional public administrator would engage. 
Thus, rather than doing a regular course paper, a student might prepare a report 
addressing an actual public policy problem.
While many of these innovations are institutionally based, there have also been 
some efforts to initiate externally based program assessment activities designed at 
enhancing excellence. Efforts have been made, especially in Europe, to apply these 
ISO 2000 process to public administration education and training. In the United 
States, proposals have been made to establishing nationwide prizes to reward out -
standing programs. Finally, in the United States, and increasingly in Europe and
<<<PAGE=27>>>
17
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
in other parts of the world as well, growing attention is being given to specialized 
accreditation in the field of public administration.
Accreditation: Certainly , one of the most frequently used approaches to seeking 
to improve the quality of education and training in public administration is through 
developing standards for improving the quality of public administration education 
generally, and promoting excellence in particular. The ministries of education of a 
number of countries in Africa, Asia, Europe and the Middle East have established 
standards for all academic programs, including those in public administration. 10 
However, in many cases those standards are not very demanding, and, in some 
instances, more progressive institutions within a country have found in applying 
them that they are quite counterproductive in that they encourage highly traditional 
curricula and discourage programmatic innovation.
A somewhat different approach to encouraging excellence in public administra-
tion education emerged in the United States, (as well as in Europe a few years ago). 
This involves a peer institution defined and driven process of self-assessment and 
accreditation. In the US, some four decades ago, the country’s major schools of 
public administration came together to create the National Association of Schools 
of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA), which not only advocates for 
excellence in public administration education generally, but has also established a 
peer review accreditation process designed to achieve that goal. When established 
in 1977, this process of voluntary peer review was based upon the application of 
certain specific criteria for curricula in public administration education programs. 
Thus, a high quality program was expected, for example, to have certain specific 
courses, such as financial management, human resource management, etc. as part 
of its curriculum.
More recently, NASPAA ’s approach has changed to one that is characterized by 
the organization as “mission driven” (an approach that has likewise been adopted 
by the European accrediting association). 11 Such an arrangement is designed to 
allow for a good deal more variation in the curriculum of individual programs. 
This new approach requires that each program define its specific mission and then 
justify its particular curriculum in terms of its relevance and appropriateness to 
the effective achievement of its mission. Thus, the process allows for considerable 
variation in curriculum between programs which may have very different goals or 
purposes. For example, the curriculum of a program focused on training public 
administrators for local government positions may be quite different than the 
curriculum of a program which focuses on training policy analysts to work in the 
national government. What is critical, however, is that the curriculum is appropriate 
to meet the objectives of the program.
10 Theo V an der Krogt “Quality Standards in Public Administration Education and T raining: Issues, 
Models, and Contemporary Evaluation Policies”, unpublished paper prepared for the UN/IASIA 
Taskforce on Standards of Excellence in Public Administration Education and T raining, 2005.
11 ibid
<<<PAGE=28>>>
18 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
This “mission driven” approach requires the assessment of an institution’s per-
formance on a number of different criteria, including: the nature of the program’s 
mission; program jurisdiction in terms of autonomy of governance and budget; 
the nature and relevance of the curriculum; the professional competence of the 
faculty; the adequacy of standards and procedures for the admission of students; 
the provision of high quality student services; and the quality of the facilities avail-
able to the program (library, class room facilities, computers, etc.).
Currently, there are about 500 four year or more higher education institutions 
that offer some sort of program in public administration in the United States. 
NASPAA has a membership of approximately 250 institutions throughout the 
country which offer graduate and/or undergraduate degrees in public affairs and 
administration. Of those 250 institutions, 139 of them have applied for and been 
successful in receiving accreditation by NASPAA.
The process through which the accredited institutions have passed involves the 
institution initially undertaking a self study, which includes the collection of large 
amounts of data on its students, faculty, alumni and community relationships. A 
typical self study document may run to as much as 200 pages. Upon completion, 
the document is submitted to NASPAA ’s Commission on Peer Review and Ac -
creditation (COPRA), which does an initial review of it and then appoints a three 
person (typically two academics and one government practitioner) site visitation 
team that visits the institution seeking accreditation for a period of two to three 
days.
Following the site visit team’s report is then made available to COPRA which 
can then deny accreditation or accredit the program for up to seven years. In 
making its decision regarding accreditation, COPRA reviews both the self-study 
document, as well as the institution’s response to questions that COPRA may 
have put to it following the review of the self-study document and, of course, 
the report of the site visit team (which the institution being reviewed has had a 
chance to examine and comment upon). Following accreditation, annual reports 
have to be made by the program to COPRA for the purposes for assessing any 
significant changes that may occur.
It seems evident that NASPAA ’s peer review accreditation process has played 
a significant role in improving the quality of public administration education and 
training in the United States, and insuring generally high standards of education in 
the field. However, it is also clear that the application of the peer review process 
does not in and of itself guarantee true excellence in public administration educa -
tion. Moreover, while it is agreed that a program that successfully navigates the 
NASPAA accreditation process will be a good one, there is almost no agreement 
on how that process can be strengthened to ensure that it truly produces excel -
lence. Thus, there continues to be ongoing debate and experimentation among US 
public administration education programs as to what is the best way to achieve 
real excellence in public administration education.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
19
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
The issue of accreditation as a means of strengthening academic programs in 
public administration is one that has been attracting significant attention in other 
parts of the world. In Latin America and Asia, various academic associations have 
been considering the development of accreditation programs as potential vehicles to 
strengthen public administration education in those regions. Europe has gone the 
furthest in this direction with the establishment of the European Association for 
Public Administration Accreditation. It has established its own quality standards for 
public administration education and has developed an accreditation process quite 
similar to the one utilized by NASPAA. At this point, around a dozen European 
institutions have undertaken the accreditation process.
Focusing on “Competencies”: Some institutions within the United States, and 
other parts of the world, are experimenting with other approaches to guide their 
efforts to build excellence in their programs. Currently, one of the most frequently 
discussed approaches in the U.S., and one that is not incompatible with NASPAA ’s 
“mission driven” focus, is the redesigning of the public administration curriculum 
to emphasize core public sector “competencies”. The underlying rationale for a 
competency-based approach to public administration education and training is the 
assumption that there are certain fundamental or core competencies that a success-
ful public administrator must possess and that educational excellence requires that 
the curriculum of a public administration program be built around the provision 
of these competencies.
While a number of American and European institutions have been concerned 
with the development of such competencies, only a handful actually have begun 
to organize their entire curriculum around them. One of the institutions that has 
gone the furthest in this regard is Indiana University’s School of Public and Envi -
ronmental Affairs, which has developed a set of 14 core knowledge competencies 
which fall into five major areas. These five major areas and the competencies upon 
which they are based, are:
1. globalization, which involves an understanding of the economic, political, so -
cial and ecological dimensions of globalization and of the shifting of national 
responsibilities towards both international and locally based institutions, as well 
as the private sector.
2. governance which involves an understanding of the institutions of governance, 
the legal framework in which they operate, and the interaction of governmental 
institutions with each other, as well as the private, and the non-profit sectors.
3. strategic analysis and action which involves an understanding of the financial, 
political, and economic environments in which government operates, the ability 
to manage complexity and change, and a knowledge of the technical and quantita-
tive skills necessary to assess policy formulation evaluation and management.
4. organizational management, which involves an understanding of individual and 
organizational behavior, as well as such matters as the organization’s relation -
ships to client groups, the managing of diversity, the ability to work as a team, 
and the development of effective leadership capacity.
<<<PAGE=30>>>
20 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
5. professionalization, which focuses upon ones relationship to the public, the 
role that values play in governance, and the development of appropriate ethical 
practices and professional excellence.
Certainly the growing movement towards greater concern about the competen-
cies required for effective public administration represents a further step in the 
process of building excellence in public administration education and training. 
Nevertheless, in the end, it is most likely to be a necessary, but not a sufficient, 
condition for the achievement of real excellence in public administration educa -
tion and training. While the utilization of such competencies and, for that matter, 
processes of peer review accreditation as well, are important; in truth, they are still 
not at the heart of the process of achieving excellence in public administration 
education and training.
Building a Community of Excellence: Although there is no real empiri -
cal evidence as regards what does or does not produce true excellence in public 
administration education and training, it is possible through experience and sys -
tematic observation to get at least a reasonable sense of what may be the most 
important characteristics of truly excellent programs in public administration 
education. In that regard, if there is one single factor that seems to characterize 
the best programs, it is the existence of a vibrant and a challenging intellectual 
community – one where there is a true, free clash of ideas and a commitment to 
their fullest examination.
Such a community is one that is constantly debating the critical issues of the 
public sector and the relevant processes of administration and policy formation 
and evaluation, as well as the efficacy of the various approaches to problem solv -
ing implicit in public administration education and training. Such communities 
represent the most progressive of academic environments. Unfortunately, the 
reality is that such communities are much fewer than one would hope and might 
normally assume. If that is so, it, of course, raises the question of what is required 
to build such a community.
In fact, there are at least six qualities that one can identify as being a prerequisite 
of such communities. The first such condition involves an absolute commitment 
to the conduct of the highest quality research and scholarship on the part of all 
members of the community. It is not uncommon to hear reference to the truly 
dedicated and highly effective teacher whose total preoccupation is his or her stu -
dents, but who doesn’t actively engage in research. The reality is that such people 
are few and far between and in truth only exist as very, very rare exceptions. In 
almost every case, the good teacher is first and foremost a good researcher who 
is totally committed to advancing the intellectual environment and knowledge of 
his or her discipline. Such individuals are an absolute prerequisite for a community 
of excellence in any area of higher education.
The second critical element of a vibrant and challenging intellectual community 
is the full empowerment of all its members. Whether one is a beginning faculty
<<<PAGE=31>>>
21
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
member or a well established senior scholar, ones ideas and status as a full and 
equal participant is an absolute necessity since one never can predict from who 
or where path breaking ideas will come. Consequently, such empowerment is 
absolutely essential to the maintenance of an environment in which the free and 
open clash of ideas can both occur and be sustained.
A third key element of the community environment that will produce excel -
lence in public administration education is a commitment to diversity – both of 
ideas and of the participants in the community. Inclusiveness is much more im -
portant than exclusiveness. Indeed, as past practice has shown, uniformity and/or 
a monolithic approach to the educational enterprise is almost certain to ensure an 
over reliance upon tradition and a lack of openness to new and important intel -
lectual developments.
A fourth characteristic of a vibrant and challenging community of excellence 
involves a commitment to the values of human progress and individual advance -
ment. Public administration, in and of itself, represents a key means by which 
society attempts to both sustain and improve the quality of the human condition. 
A commitment to such an effort, indeed in its simplest form, the making of the 
world a better place, is central to any real efforts to achieve excellence in public 
administration education. This is especially so in a world that must confront issues 
of poverty, inequality and the building of responsive and participatory democratic 
institutions.
A fifth necessary but not sufficient characteristic of a community of excellence 
is the availability of adequate resources. The development of excellence in public 
administration education, or any other academic field, requires a considerable 
commitment of time and energy on the part of those who are members of the 
intellectual community responsible for a program’s growth. Without question, 
the ability to commit that time is very heavily influenced by the ability of those 
involved to earn a level of income that will sustain them and the members of their 
immediate family in an acceptable middle-class lifestyle. In addition, other resources 
are required to facilitate research and intellectual exchange.
Finally, any real community of excellence is in certain ways a highly competi -
tive community. Individuals within such a community, while they may cooperate 
on many things – including research, teaching and training activities – do compete 
with one another in terms of the prevalence of both key ideas and new approaches 
to intellectual exploration. In the end, one approach, or set of ideas, may not nec -
essarily be better or more relevant than another set. However, the reality is that 
the commitment to advocate on behalf of ones approach is absolutely essential to 
the achievement of excellence.
Likewise, competition between communities of excellence is an essential stimu-
lant to the continuation of their commitment to excellence. The U.S. experience 
in higher education is highly illustrative in this regard. While there are many areas 
of public services in which the country falls remarkably short of meeting the high-
<<<PAGE=32>>>
22 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
est standards given its wealth, higher education is not one of them. By almost all 
standards (Nobel Laureates, research productivity, numbers of foreign students, 
etc.) higher education in the U.S. routinely ranks among the best, if not the best, 
in the world. While many factors, including the availability of adequate financial 
resources, have contributed to that, without question the ongoing competition 
among institutions, and departments within institutions, has been absolutely central 
to the development.
On the Need for Education, Not Just Learning: As noted earlier, the com -
plexity of the problems which public administrators face in the contemporary 
world requires that, especially in their formative years, they have experiences 
which prepare them to deal effectively with highly complex issues involving very 
complicated problems of social and economic development. In terms of current 
approaches to the education of public administrators, there is no doubt that in 
many places in most parts of the world they learn a great deal in their academic 
programs. Indeed, at present, most newly minted public administration education 
graduates have learned much about many different things. They have studied how 
organizations function (at least in the abstract); they learn about the budgetary 
processes of government; and also about personnel management and the legal 
framework within which public administrators must function. In some cases, they 
have been taught about leadership and ethics and how to carry out complex policy 
analysis techniques.
The key question for public administration educators, however, is that while 
current students of public administration may learn much during their academic 
experience, do they leave their programs as educated individuals, ready to become 
dedicated and competent public servants in a world that is changing with extraor -
dinary rapidity? The reality is that, in many cases, we may be paying less attention 
to the “education” of our next generation of public administrators than we are to 
their “learning”. To clarify this point, it is useful to draw a distinction between 
“learning” and “education”.
Learning is, for all intents and purposes, a highly individualized activity. The 
typical student learns, in most cases, because they want to do so and they do 
this in what essentially is a highly individualized way. Usually, what they learn is 
directly applicable to perceived job requirements. While they may take classes, 
often with many other students, their experience of learning in these classes is, in 
almost all instances, a highly personal one. The typical student reads, listens and 
absorbs information. Their efforts are almost always driven by their realization 
that learning a body of information represents a significant step in their prepara -
tion for a professional career, and their work is motivated by that goal. In public 
administration, students do, as we have noted above, learn a variety of different 
things, including some subjects that are quite complex and sophisticated. Thus, 
the student is provided with and, usually, acquires many of the skills needed to 
succeed in his or her career. However, in today’s world, skills are not enough.
<<<PAGE=33>>>
23
Excellence in Public Administration Education: Preparing the Next Generation … 
What is required is the analytic ability that comes not simply from learning, but 
rather as a product of education.
Education, and the educating of the student, is a rather different matter than sim-
ply learning skills. The educated individual not only possesses knowledge of particular 
administrative skills and techniques, and subject matter expertise, but is also someone 
who understands the need to, and has some capacity to, recognize the many subtle-
ties of the social, political and environmental context within which his or her skills 
must be applied. The educated person has the insight to appreciate the nuances of the 
situation in which he or she is functioning. Such an individual has an understanding 
of why things function as they do; why institutions work as they do; and even more 
importantly , how to improve those processes and institutions with which they must 
work. Most significantly , the educated individual understands how the institutions and 
processes within which he or she must function interact with the values of the group 
or groups with which they must deal, and with the society as a whole.
In truth, as one examines how students are prepared for governmental service, 
all to often, it appears that a much greater degree of attention is given to the 
processes of student learning, rather than to the educating of the student. Too 
often public administration education is really more like the learning that is, quite 
appropriately, at the heart of much training activity. It is skill focused and often 
pays little or no attention to preparing the student to adapt to a world in which 
required skills are rapidly changing. That this is so, is in many ways not surprising. 
Learning, in the end, is highly individually based, while education requires a vibrant 
community setting – indeed, a community of excellence. It is community based, 
because it relies not so much on the individual’s own ability to learn, but rather 
on the individual’s ability to interact with others in order to better understand the 
subtleties of complex issues and problems and the nature of their interaction with 
a changing world. Thus, to promote education in its broadest sense, it is necessary 
to build a community in which education is not only valued and encouraged but, 
most importantly, is experienced by those who are a part of that community.
It is for this reason that effective education requires the successful development 
of real educational communities of excellence. Unfortunately, the creation of such 
communities requires time, commitment, creativity and considerable investment 
of human and financial resources. Moreover, in a very subtle way, the processes 
of change going on in many parts of the world have tended to undermine the 
development of such educational communities. Rather, they have tended to em -
phasize, sometimes in not so subtle ways, learning at the expense of education. 
This is because in far too many places, one of the unintended consequences of the 
triumph of democratic capitalism during the course of the past two decades has 
been to place a much greater emphasis upon the development of the individual at 
the expense of the community. When combined with the understandable desire 
of those in transitional societies to acquire the skills of those in more developed 
ones, we have seen the emergence of great emphasis upon learning, often at the 
expense of real education.
<<<PAGE=34>>>
24 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Consequently, the issue of how we train civil servants, and the need to facili -
tate not only their learning, but their education as well, is one that is becoming 
ever more critical to the future of good governance. Moreover, as public issues 
have become more complex over the course of the past two decades, increasingly, 
public administrators have found themselves in situations where they must, as the 
saying goes, “speak truth to power”. This is not an easy thing to do, and certainly 
in many countries, there have been many unfortunate consequences as a result of 
the inability of public administrators to engage in such action. However, clearly 
the future of democratic governance depends upon the ability to develop such 
public administrators. Indeed, this is one of the great challenges facing those who 
are committed to public administration education and training. Without question, 
this requires the building of educational communities that are committed to excel-
lence in public administration education and training. It requires a special kind of 
institution building; it requires the creation of learning environments in which the 
education that comes only from real understanding can take place. It also requires 
the creation of academic programs in which the ideas of democracy, and free give-
and-take, underlie the academic community. Building such communities is not an 
easy task, but it is a worthy one.
Conclusion
The world of the 21 st century will inevitably be a world of rapid change and much 
complexity. The last fifteen years of the 20 th century was certainly that, and there 
is no reason to think that the degree of change, and the complexity of problems 
that governments will have to address in the 21 st century, will be anything less. 
Indeed, the likelihood is that change will come more rapidly and that the problems 
will be more complex. In part, this is because the dominant trends of the 20 th cen-
tury – globalization, decentralization, democratization and rising inequality – show 
no signs of decreasing in their prevalence and consequence. These developments 
obviously place major burdens on the public administrators of the future, and 
especially on those who will bear the responsibility of educating them.
In the course of addressing the question of achieving excellence in public 
administration education, it has been useful to at least briefly review certain in -
stitutionalized systemic efforts designed to encourage the building of excellent 
public administration educational programs. However, in the end, excellence in 
public administration is truly a function of the commitment of individuals within 
a community to work towards such a goal. Like all important human endeavors 
(such as the building of a democratic society), the achieving of excellence in 
public administration education will inevitably be a work in progress. In fact, it is 
doubtful that one can ever achieve complete excellence in public administration 
education or any other human endeavor for that matter. However, the continued 
striving for it is undoubtedly the most likely way of achieving the highest quality 
of public administration education.
<<<PAGE=35>>>
25
The Management Competencies of Senior Managers:  
A Look at Some OECD Countries
Mohamed Charih, Jacques Bourgault,  
Daniel Maltais and Lucie Rouillard *
Since the beginning of the 1980s, public administrations have experimented and 
undergone reforms to varying degrees (Peters and Savoie, 1998; Pollitt and Bou -
kaert, 2000; Barzelay, 2001). This reform movement, inspired by the new public 
management, has led to new challenges as regards governance: separation of policy 
and operations, introduction of quasi-market mechanisms in the public sector, the 
questioning of financial and human-resource management procedures, the contrac-
tualization of public services, etc. (Charih and Daniels, 1997; Aucoin, 1995; Peters 
and Savoie, 1998). All these changes combined with the new demographic profile, 
globalization, the rapid development of new information technologies, the impor -
tance of knowledge-based employees and the citizens’ expectations with regard to 
better services are creating a different work environment for public managers, in 
general, and for senior managers, in particular.
In this context, human resources are considered as the ultimate leverage for 
public administrations that want to get the most out of the situation. But how to go 
about doing this? In his report, Silguy (2003), whose mandate was to put forward 
a reform of the École Nationale d’Administration de France (ENA), summarizes 
in these terms the relationship between the issues the public administration will 
face and the competencies required to do so:
 “Proposing a reform of ENA implies the identification of the administrative 
competencies needed by the country in the next twenty-five years…These are 
linked to demographic evolution, internal (the role of the State and the public 
powers) and external (European and global context) transformations already 
underway in the last few decades: decentralization, redefinition of the scope of 
government action, the transfer from authoritarian relationship to contractual 
partnership, the increasing importance of arbitration and regulation, the build -
ing of Europe, globalization…In this context, the qualities expected of public 
administrators evolve. Beyond their traditional abilities (sense of what is in the 
general interest, integrity , power to analyze and synthesize, long-term vision…), 
the immediate search for new skills is essential (imagination, management of 
change, human-resource management, multilateral negotiations, risk manage -
ment…)” (Silguy Report, 2003, p. 3)
Before Silguy, several authors and organizations insisted on the importance of 
management competencies as a factor in future success. Management competen -
cies, a combination of knowledge, know-how and personal skills and attitudes, 
* Mohamed Charih is a professor and Director of Studies at the École Nationale d’Administration 
Publique (ENAP), Canada; Jacques Bourgault is a professor at Université du Québec à Montréal 
and an associate professor at ENAP; Daniel Maltais and Lucie Rouillard are professors at ENAP
<<<PAGE=36>>>
26 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
are used to recruit persons having the necessary requirements for the position, to 
develop a career and succession plan, and to evaluate the performances of an em -
ployee (Bourgault, Charih et al. 2003; Aventur François, 1998; Office of Personnel 
Management, 1998; Horton, 2000; Aucoin, 2003). However, an extensive review 
of the literature dealing with the competencies of senior managers in the public 
sector was able to uncover only a few articles dealing with this subject, and even 
those often focused on one country and provided no comparative study involving 
different countries.
This article seeks to deal with this gap by examining the challenges that five 
OECD countries must face in the future and the competencies sought after to 
meet them. In so doing, the researchers basically tried to respond to three ques -
tions: What are the issues facing each of the countries under study in the next 
five to ten years? What are the new competencies considered to be fundamental 
by each country for the future? How do the competency profiles differ from 
each other?
In order to get a better grasp of the issues and new competencies for the future, 
research was conducted within the administrations of five countries: the United 
States, the United Kingdom, Australia, France and Canada. The reason for choos -
ing these countries is because they are all members of OECD, because they have 
all recently undergone major reforms, and because their level of development is 
relatively comparable.
This research is fundamentally inductive, based on a variety of methods: in -
terviews (58 individuals), discussion panels and documents, a longitudinal data 
bank on the strategic issues of Canadian public administrations, and a conference 
on senior managers’ management competencies for the future organized within 
the framework of the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Ad -
ministration.
The United States
The research in the United States was conducted after the 9/11 terrorist attack. 
This context probably influenced the future issues pointed out by the American 
managers. The fact nonetheless remains that the respondents identified six major 
issues that seem to preoccupy the American public administration: national secu -
rity and the rediscovery of the virtues of the State, the increasing influence of the 
media and interest groups, the retirement of a large number of senior managers, 
the resorting to new information technologies, the complexity of the management 
environment and the difficulty in retaining younger employees.
According to the people met, since the events of September 11, 2001, ques -
tions of national security have become a major issue for the United States. This 
event also resulted in a positive view of the State and the importance of its role 
in society, notably with regard to national security. Moreover, 9/11 raised many 
questions about the compromise between freedom and security that constitutes 
an issue for several public policies.
<<<PAGE=37>>>
27
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
American managers find that the impact of interest groups on the development 
and management of public policies will increase since the influence that was once 
felt, mainly at the highest levels, has now reached the lowest levels, like small 
projects. Does this phenomenon really benefit democracy? How can general and 
individual interests be reconciled?
The media seem to examine more and more closely the government’s actions 
and programs. They exercise a great deal of influence on the political and admin -
istrative agenda. In addition, the number of American media will continue, on the 
one hand, to increase thanks to new information technologies, and, on the other 
hand, to become more and more concentrated. The way of treating the news is 
also changing. In addition to examining the government’s actions, the media have 
gone from news to analysis and then to opposition. In this context, senior manag -
ers will have to know how to come to terms and deal with them.
With regard to public-service demographics, it is estimated that more than 
50% of senior managers will be eligible for retirement over the next five years 
within the American federal administration and it will be very difficult to ensure 
adequate replacements (GAO, 2003). Presently , senior managers are mainly recruited 
from among personnel already in place, and the quality of the people coming up 
through the ranks would appear to be rather mediocre because the public service 
did not succeed in recruiting and retaining the most talented candidates during 
the 1980s and 1990s. It seems that the public service is less attractive to young 
Americans than in the past and that it has not been able to adapt itself to meet 
the expectations of new generations with regard to work, whether it be in relation 
to salary or other aspects of work such as the variety of challenges. Not only will 
the public service be younger, but it will also be more diversified with regard to 
age, race and professions.
Another issue consists in ensuring the hiring and retaining of talented new 
employees. Part of the solution lies in the systems set up to manage personnel in 
the whole of the public service. These include better information about careers 
and job openings, advantageous working conditions, competitive salaries, greater 
career flexibility, the possibility of lateral entry, etc. In addition to the government’s 
efforts, public managers will have to be able to attract and keep the best elements 
by establishing, for example, a personalized relationship with potential recruits, by 
allowing young recruits to show off their skills, by providing for mentoring activities, 
by allowing flexibility in work schedules and in the use of vacation time, etc.
The use of information technologies is an important issue. In the United States, 
government-on-line occupies an important place in the government agenda. Follow-
ing the example of other OECD countries, the federal government is looking to 
facilitate on-line access and transactions. In this area, partnership projects involving 
the public and private sectors are often relied upon, and the management of such 
projects must be mastered. In addition, e-commerce raises various issues, in par -
ticular, national and on-line security. Certainly, the Internet poses the challenge of 
managing an ever-increasing volume of information that may become excessive.
<<<PAGE=38>>>
28 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Finally, one of the great challenges to meet is management in a more complex, 
uncertain and risky environment. Senior managers are faced with urgent, varied and, 
in certain cases, contradictory requests and are under much pressure while they 
must demonstrate that they are able to obtain results that correspond to a high 
level of performance. Senior managers have to be capable of increasing employees’ 
contribution while, at the same time, offering the latter a workplace where they 
can feel fulfilled without wearing themselves out.
In the opinion of the American respondents, the competencies needed to be 
developed to face these challenges are:
1. adaptability, to face new challenges, to offer appropriate responses to new situ-
ations, to have useable skills for both the private and public sectors;
2. the capacity to negotiate, whether it concerns the agency’s performance con -
tracts, contracts with the private sector, or relations with interest groups and 
the media;
3. the correct assessment of managers’ performance, such as the ability to retain 
talented recruits, manage change, obtain good results, etc.;
4. leadership, including relations with the community, employees and peers, and 
the ability to work in teams, etc.;
5. the management of knowledge, such as the ability to manage information, to 
use the abilities of those who have the expertise and the intelligence skills with 
a view to assuring security;
6. personnel management, including the ability to identify candidates needed by 
the public service;
7. the ability to handle the complexity of the management environment.
The United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the public administration’s new focus fits in with the 
reforms undertaken upon Margaret Thatcher’s arrival to power, in particular, 
Operation Next Step that consisted of transforming the units responsible for sup -
plying services to citizens into executive agencies, the ministries being responsible 
for the elaboration of policies, as well as with earlier initiatives that put emphasis 
especially on the service to citizens (Metcalfe, 1993; Campbell and Wilson, 1995; 
Pollitt and Boukaert, 2000).
The White Paper on the modernisation of government (1999) and the Wilson 
Report (1999) set out the issues for the future in the United Kingdom. In the 
White Paper, the Blair Government announced a new series of reforms that basi -
cally emphasize the improvement of services to citizens. These reforms concern 
accessibility to services 24 hours a day, seven days a week, when such a request 
is expressed, the ability of the citizen to deal with the government on-line, the 
elimination of useless regulations, the setting up of testing laboratories permit -
ting the experimentation of new ways to offer public services, the creation of new 
incentives for State employees, including financial incentives, and a better delivery
<<<PAGE=39>>>
29
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
of public services by integrating more persons from the outside into the public 
service, and by encouraging the quicker advancement of younger employees.
Through these reforms, the government wants to ensure that public policies 
include concrete, strategic commitments, that the services are centred on the needs 
of the citizens, that the citizens quickly use the new technologies, that these ser -
vices are of high quality, and that they are produced at a competitive price. The 
government also wants to promote, rather than degrade, the public service.
Sir Richard Wilson (1999), the person responsible for the public service, iden -
tified five major issues in his report: 1) the strengthening of the leadership that 
must be visionary and embody the values of the modern public service; 2) better 
planning at all levels of the public service; 3) better performance management; 4) 
a big improvement in diversity in the public service; and 5) a public service that 
is more open to people and their ideas.
The implementation of the reform raises a certain number of difficulties or 
challenges. First, the emphasis put on the delivery of services means that, from now 
on, it will concern just as much the senior public service that has precise targets 
to reach. This brings into question the division that was established between the 
development of policies and their implementation. Is the senior public service, 
motivated by substantial bonuses, going to neglect the policy development while 
appropriating the responsibility for the completion of projects and exercising 
greater control over the agencies? A second challenge concerns the mobility be -
tween ministries and agencies that is encouraged and the arrival of people from the 
private sector into the public service. If this contributes to a questioning of how 
certain things are done, this mobility leads to problems at the operational level. 
Finally, it is noted that, even if the hiring of managers to manage the agencies on 
a contractual basis has proven to be successful, this system creates the problem 
of keeping these people in the public service.
The issues relating to the modernization of the British Government have led 
to defining the necessary competencies as well as the behaviour to be encouraged 
or discouraged. The list of the competencies to be developed, according to the 
Cabinet Office, is as follows:
1. to propose a goal and a direction (by creating and communicating a vision for 
the future);
2. to have a personal impact (by preaching through example);
3. to think strategically (by taking advantage of ideas and opportunities to ac -
complish objectives);
4. to get the best out of people (by motivating them and by ensuring their de -
velopment in order to achieve high performance);
5. to learn and improve (by capitalizing on experience and new ideas to improve 
results);
6. to put the emphasis on the delivery of services (by producing results and by 
using public funds in order to create value).
<<<PAGE=40>>>
30 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Australia
According to the respondents, a large number of future issues will follow from 
the reforms undertaken in the 1980s. In fact, the Australian public administration 
has experienced several important changes, in particular: the revision of the role 
of the Federal State, the redefining of the ministries’ mandates and the elimina -
tion of several organizations, the creation of agencies with a Chief Executive 
Officer at their head, the withdrawal of the government from the direct delivery 
of public services, the presentation of public-policy advice based on the principle 
of contestability, the adoption of a more business-like management approach, and 
the emphasis put on budget and results-based management.
The main issues identified by the persons interviewed are: the continuation 
of the redefining of the role of government, the competition for policy advice, 
market testing, new information technologies,  the aging of senior public servants, 
the recruitment and retaining of younger employees, the questioning of loyalty 
toward the organization, and the exposure to the global context.
What is the role of government? The debate on this question is not over. Ac -
cording to the managers met, the government’s role must not be static; it must 
adapt to the times. The public now believes that the private sector has improved 
to a greater extent than the public sector, and, if the government wants to win 
back the public’s confidence, the role of the Federal State must be repositioned 
according to present and future issues. But the pursuit of the redefining of the 
role of the State in Australia is often thwarted by the federal government’s politi -
cal mandate that is only three years. The Australian government is trying to deal 
with this serious shortcoming by prolonging the mandate to govern from three 
to five years.
On the heels of its reforms, the Australian government has greatly reduced the 
pre-eminent position of public servants concerning policy advice by opening up this 
field to competition from consultants, not-for-profit organizations and the private 
sector. In the opinion of Australian observers, the Australian federal government 
is seeking, through this change, to open the way to other sources of advice and 
to reduce the power of public servants in this area. However, Australian public 
servants are trying to maintain their influence in the area of policy advice. The 
public servants have reacted by developing new strategies aimed at maintaining their 
privileged status with regard to public policies. Among the strategies in question 
is the anticipation of the requests of the ministry’s or organization’s clients.
This has had several consequences for the public service. Public servants are faced 
with competition at two levels: the development of policies and their implementa -
tion. In this way, they pay more attention to this task in order to remain credible 
in the eyes of the ministry and the government. In this context, the ministries 
and organizations must deal with competitive sources of policy advice, and these 
sources often have more resources at their disposal.
<<<PAGE=41>>>
31
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
In the opinion of the Australian respondents, the introduction of market forces 
into the Australian public administration was a major change emanating from the 
reforms of the 1980s. The ministries are no longer in a monopolistic position; they 
are in competition with the private sector and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs). As a result, public servants must adapt to the competition and develop a 
management style similar to that of their counterparts in the private sector. More 
specifically, this means that public organizations must become as competitive as 
the private sector, rapidly handle clients’ requests and respond to them, attentively 
manage the resources that are available to them, while at the same time, obtaining 
significant value added for the clients. Winning a contract by being more competi-
tive than the private sector has become a standard of the measure of the quality 
of management in the Australian public service.
The advent of new information technologies is seen by Australian senior man -
agers as one of the important issues for the coming years. At this time and over 
the course of the next four years, the Australian federal government is trying to 
put the majority of its services on line. In addition to democratizing the access to 
information, the new technologies are going to change the relations with elected 
officials, citizens and the public administration. Although the persons met consider 
that the information technologies are very promising, these same technologies 
worry Australians who value discretion and the protection of privacy. Australian 
managers also think that the new information technologies are going to change 
the style of management of their institutions by eliminating the dividing line 
separating organizations and even the boundaries between countries. Australians 
also wonder about the competence of the public servants who will be called upon 
to manage in the context of new information technologies and about the impact 
of the latter on human resources and their management.
According to the managers met, the Australian public service is also faced 
with the aging of its senior public servants. About 50 % will retire in the next 
ten years. This situation will cause a loss of experienced managers. Australian 
managers see this problem as a very serious issue that requires urgent measures. 
Within this context, Australia has already begun to prepare for the replacement 
of senior managers.
As in a good number of western countries, the Australian federal public service 
is preoccupied with replacing its aging personnel. However, recruiting and retain -
ing young workers also seems to be a challenge. Y oung people are better educated 
and more demanding and accord more importance to the quality of life. Moreover, 
the government is in competition with the private sector for the best candidates. 
To deal with these issues, Australian public managers think that it is necessary to 
change the internal environment and the management style in order to keep new 
recruits, to identify the new factors that motivate today’s generation and to offer 
them an interesting and stimulating job.
Drastic cuts in the public service following the vast reforms had provoked a 
questioning of loyalty toward the government as employer. In the opinion of the
<<<PAGE=42>>>
32 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
managers questioned: “The concept of loyalty has changed today and people make 
little distinction between the public service and the private sector. The person first 
considers his own interests and the advantages he can obtain from his job.”
Australia is a country isolated by its geography; this seems to have given Aus -
tralian public servants an extreme sense of self-sufficiency. However, several events, 
such as the Aboriginal people resorting to international organizations in order to 
be recognized in the Constitution, the flood of immigrants and the 9/11 terrorist 
attack have led Australians to realize the consequences of international issues on 
their country. This being so, Australian senior managers today are trying to catch 
up by using study trips, exchanges and training programs.
According to the Australian managers, the competencies to be developed are 
as follows:
1. policy advice and policy development: to remain the principal policy adviser, 
to know the machinery of policy development and management, to be on the 
look-out for the expression of needs, to appreciate the impact of policies on 
the people involved and the consequences on the ministry;
2. management approach: to master the public-management context and ap -
proaches, to be familiar with management in the private sector, to be interested 
in results-based management, to know how to manage in a context of partner -
ships and networks, to know how to manage contracts;
3. adapted leadership: to have a global vision of the government and the ministry, 
to develop a relevant, motivating and realistic ministerial agenda, to appreciate 
organizational risk, to anticipate the replacement of workers and to manage 
mobility, to be an active member in the networks affecting the public service;
4. interpersonal relationships: to know how to manage human relations, to know 
colleagues and subordinates, to know how to get the best out of employees, 
to know how to face conflicts and to resolve them quickly;
5. external relations: to appreciate Australia’s place in the world, to be familiar with 
international issues and their impact on the government and the ministry.
France
In France, the managers foresee that the public administration will face the fol -
lowing nine important issues in the coming years: the consequences of European 
integration, the shift toward the customer-based approach, results-based manage -
ment, the public service being open to prosecution, the advent of new information 
technologies, demographics, organizational culture and human-resource manage -
ment and, finally, serving an increasingly pluralistic population, in both ethnic and 
cultural terms.
Brussels makes more and more policies. The national administrations must work 
in the preparation and application of the collective decisions. With European inte -
gration, there is increasing cooperation among the countries; the future of policy 
development is increasingly vast and complex. France is open to the influence 
of public servants from other countries of the European Community. European
<<<PAGE=43>>>
33
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
integration will be a factor of change for administering policy development: there 
are common laws, exchanges of practices and comparisons.
The interviewees consider that September 11 demonstrated the importance of 
the role of the State. In their opinion, it is necessary to be wary of the simplistic 
solutions of the new public management. The limitations of this approach were 
seen in the United Kingdom with regard to water and trains and in the United 
States concerning airports. The role of the State will remain important, but the 
ways of exercising that role will evolve. If the activity of the State changes, the 
role of its leaders will also change.
The law pertaining to budget reform creates an approach based on performance 
and results. As it concerns an organization act, it touches upon all administrations 
and all sectors, including human-resource management. It was the subject of a 
large political consensus in the two chambers of the French parliament and among 
all the political parties. The budget reform lowers constraints because it creates 
tangible means to support programs and to raise the level of accountability. There 
will be more results-based management with performance indicators. Controls 
carried out after the fact will be more present. Administrations will be made more 
accountable for their own internal control work, and this will lead to changes in 
work methods within the corps d’inspection. In France, it is said that everything is 
too controlled and badly controlled, and these controls waste money and energy; 
it will be necessary to do a better job identifying what is sought, and the work of 
the numerous controllers must be better coordinated. The interviewees believe that 
the leaders will have to accept that their performance be judged by staff, users and 
parliamentarians: they will no longer be able to cut themselves off from the rest 
of the world. Moreover, there is now more parliamentary review and the targets 
of this review are increasingly becoming more specific.
As far as administrative organization is concerned, rather significant changes 
have been noticed; these include the appearance of an increasing number of rela -
tively autonomous, statutory agencies, as well as the modification of the role of 
prefects who have become organizers more than executive directors.
The profile of the French population has radically changed over the last thirty 
years. It is expected that the State reflect this profile in its workforce and that 
the senior public service become more inter-community. That will require new 
approaches to manage diversity and to encourage tolerance and a deep understand-
ing of minorities. The managers who were interviewed indicate that the massive 
retirement of managers, about 40% in the next ten years, will open the way to a 
younger public service and an important renewal of this service. This situation is 
seen as a golden opportunity to bring about profound changes in the management 
culture and in staff profile.
The new information technologies destroy the uniquely hierarchical positioning of 
senior managers for information is instantly accessible to the entire organization and 
the employees can evaluate their superiors using this information. Requests are directly
<<<PAGE=44>>>
34 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
forwarded to all sorts of political and administrative sites and there is a danger of en-
croachment, errors and confusion if speed wins over analysis. That creates additional 
pressure to work together in a network and to change work methods. Everyone’s 
expectations are higher. This faster process results in non-performance being seen 
immediately . T echnological development is changing hierarchical relationships, mentali-
ties and people’s expectations; more networking and teleconferencing take place. It is 
estimated that the breakthrough is still recent and that there is catching up to do as 
seen in the following comment: “Most of my deputy directors do not use computers. 
And still very few senior public servants can surf the W eb or the Internet!”
Senior managers are personally responsible from a legal standpoint (for ex -
ample, the “contaminated blood” affair). It is a way of balancing the power of the 
public authority; however, this trend threatens to make managers more cautious 
and to put a damper on their willingness to take risks. According to the leaders 
interviewed, the public service seems to have lost its sense of fundamental, com -
mon values: from a moral perspective, a rise in individualism is being witnessed. 
The organizational culture is a rather holistic way of thinking with a very specific 
internal structuring; it is not a simple sticking together of ways of thinking and 
acting. According to the respondents, the organizational culture has not changed 
everywhere. The grands corps say that they agree to develop a managerial approach, 
but, in reality, they believe themselves to be above that and believe that this ap -
proach is for others! This culture was based more on the law than on management 
and more on tasks to accomplish than on the results to achieve.
Up until very recently, the culture of the senior public service did not place 
emphasis on the obligation to undergo professional training during one’s career, 
but this situation would seem to be changing. There are now several departmental 
and interdepartmental training institutions, and internal competition with regard 
to training has even been observed within the public service.
According to the managers met, there is no real integrated human-resource 
management policy . Personnel policies are simply quantitative employment policies. 
Performance- and competency-evaluation policies are simply pro forma; they are 
not routinely used and the evaluation form does not refer to them. Up to now, 
the human-resource management approach has not been widely accepted or put 
into practice in the French administrations.
France does not have an officially endorsed competency profile. There are, 
however, a number of points on which many of the interviewees agree with regard 
to the competencies needed for the future. These competencies are as follows:
1. adaptability , including the ability to react quickly and efficiently , to be proactive, 
to question established truths, to gather varied experience, and to demonstrate 
a flexible attitude;
2. the ability to negotiate as a program manager and in relations with users;
3. the assessment of performance, including the ability to set operational objec -
tives;
<<<PAGE=45>>>
35
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
4. leadership including charisma, audacity, determination, pragmatism, a sense of 
moral values, entrepreneurship, a critical perspective, openness to change, and 
a strong sense of identity;
5. management of knowledge;
6. human-resource management, including frankness, openness, lucidity, good 
judgement, interpersonal skills, and courage;
7. management of networks, that is, knowing how to run them, to work in teams, 
to anticipate issues, and to share information;
8. the ability to innovate, including open-mindedness, creativity, strategic vision, 
and risk-taking;
9. continuous learning;
10. the ability to manage projects, to organize, to follow up results, and to correct 
the course of action when needed;
11. communication, including the ability to be frank and honest, to share diag -
nostics and to persuade.
Canada
In 1989, the Canadian government undertook a renewal of the public service known 
as Public Service 2000. The main objectives of this initiative were the improvement 
of services to citizens and the granting of greater room to manoeuvre to federal 
managers. In 1994-95, the Canadian government undertook a reflection on the role 
of the State within the framework of Program Review. Following this exercise, the 
government withdrew from several activities, and 55,000 public servants were let 
go. Certain activities were privatized, while others were transformed into part -
nerships with Canadian provinces or the private sector, with the goal of a better 
integration of services.
The preoccupation with improvement of services led to other reviews such as 
Quality Services in 1995 and Service Improvement Initiative in 2000, whose objectives 
were to increase, by at least 10% in five years, the rate of satisfaction of Canadian 
citizens toward the principal services offered by the government. Results-based 
management was introduced, with the ministries obliged to account to Parliament 
for objectives pursued, particularly with regard to service standards and results or 
performance obtained. It is also to be noted that the Canadian population expects 
more accountability and transparency. In 1999, the federal government also pro -
ceeded with the modernization of the comptroller’s role. Modern comptrollership 
empowers and supports ministerial managers and gives them responsibilities through 
a delegation mechanism combined with a posteriori control.
The changes in public management constitute a significant trend influencing 
Canadian public administration whose effects will continue into the future. They 
pose numerous challenges for public administrators; these include the management 
of partnerships and alliances and the ability to use results-based management and 
to be accountable in the context of demands for accountability and transparency,
<<<PAGE=46>>>
36 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
and, finally, to develop a culture of service within public administration based on 
a new ethic and new values.
A second trend concerns the contribution of the new information and com -
munication technologies. In 1999, the Canadian government, through its Gov-
ernment-On-Line (GOL) initiative, set about to be known as the best-connected 
government by giving on-line access to information and government services to 
its citizens. The Canadian government’s accomplishments in the field of on-line 
administration are significant, but they must still be developed considerably more. 
Often, they challenge the silo effect in management and the traditional limits of 
organizations. The impact of the new technologies on public-sector management 
is therefore considerable, and it is necessary to learn how to manage knowledge-
based employees as well as to master horizontal management.
A third trend is related to demographics. First of all, the Canadian population 
has increasingly diversified roots, and the management of this diversity emphasiz -
ing tolerance will continue to be a preoccupation for the public service. Moreover, 
the average age of senior managers is relatively high, and this group decreased by 
almost 40% in numbers between 1991 and 1998. This represents a loss of part of 
the collective organizational memory and competencies. It is thus necessary to 
prepare for the replacement of those people in a context where the recruiting and 
retaining of the best elements represent a problem in an increasingly competitive 
market and in a context where a work environment conducive to reconciling the 
expectations of the candidates and those of the organization must be created.
Finally, a last issue rests on the ability to develop public policies. In the last few 
years, the emphasis put on three policies, the reduction of the size of the public 
service, the elimination of the deficit, and the improvement of services to citizens, 
has marginalized the traditional function of the formulation of public policy. The 
ability to elaborate and analyze these policies must be improved.
The Canadian federal government is trying to respond to these various issues 
by developing competency profiles for deputy ministers and senior managers, by 
evaluating the present competencies and by calling upon the Canadian Centre for 
Management Development to develop training programs. The competency profile 
for deputy ministers and senior managers includes the following elements:
1. intellectual competencies, including cognitive capacity, creativity and the ability 
to shape the future (vision);
2. management competencies, including action management comprising the 
formulation of strategies, the understanding of the organization including 
the workings of the government apparatus as well as one’s own organization, 
teamwork and the management of partnerships in order to offer better service 
to citizens;
3. human-relation competencies, including interpersonal relationships and com -
munication skills;
<<<PAGE=47>>>
37
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
4. personal qualities, including vitality and resistance to stress, ethical and moral 
values, a personality that includes perseverance and self-control, flexible behav-
iour, that is, the ability to adjust one’s behaviour to each particular context, 
and, finally, self-confidence.
Comparing the Issues
Before comparing the issues and the competency profiles (see Tables I and II), it 
is important to underline the fact these elements have to do with the interviewees’ 
perception of the issues that affect their public administration and the competen -
cies required in the next five to ten years. Secondly, it must be taken into account 
that certain countries are further advanced than others in the field of change and 
reform and in terms of experience with competency-based management. Thirdly, 
all the competencies mentioned are not necessarily new.
T able I
The Management Issues of the Future
I
S
S
U
E
S
THE UNITED 
STATES
THE UNITED 
KINGDOM AUSTRALIA FRANCE CANADA
National security 
and the 
rediscovering of 
virtues of the 
State
Increased presence 
of interest groups
Increase in media 
influence
Massive departure 
of managers (in 
the next 5 years)
Difficulty in 
retaining young 
people
Wide use of 
information 
technologies
Complexity of the 
management 
environment
Improvement of 
public services
Reinforcement of 
leadership
Better planning
Better performance 
management
Improvement in 
the representation 
of diversity
A public service 
more open to 
citizens
Continuation of the 
debate on the role 
of the State
Competition for 
policy advice
Competition with 
the private sector 
(results)
New information 
technologies
Departure of 50 % 
of the managers in 
the next 10 years
Recruitment and 
retention
Questioning of 
loyalty
Opening to the 
world
European 
integration
Shift toward the 
customer-based 
approach
Results-based 
management
The increasingly 
litigious nature of 
the public service
New information 
technologies
Departure of 40 % 
of the managers in 
the next 10 years
Representative 
nature of the 
public service
Organizational 
culture
Human-resource 
management
The quality of 
services to citizens
Government-on-
line
Results-based 
management
Aging of senior 
managers
Preparation of the 
replacement 
personnel
Ability to develop 
policies
Ethical challenges
By comparing the issues, it was observed that the improvement in the delivery of 
services to the citizens will continue to be a preoccupation for three countries: the 
United Kingdom, Canada and France. It seems that the quality of the delivery of 
services to the citizens is a persistent issue and will continue to be so. In the United 
Kingdom and Canada, the best delivery of services began in the 1980s and was followed 
by the charter of citizens and standards of quality (Seidle, 1995; Office of the Auditor 
General of Canada, 2001; Government of Canada, 2000). On the other hand, France 
has just made the shift to customer service. According to Bechtel, the former director 
of the French ENA, the French senior public servants resisted the move toward the
<<<PAGE=48>>>
38 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
new public management because they did not see its validity . France has therefore not 
imitated English-speaking countries with regard to reforms.
Interviewees in four countries perceive results-based management as an issue: 
Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and France. In the United Kingdom and 
Australia, where the delivery of public services has been handed over to agen -
cies in the former and privatized in the latter, the central administration tries to 
better serve the citizens, on the one hand, and to hold a multitude of agencies, 
private organizations and not-for-profit organizations accountable, on the other. 
As for Canada, a results-based management having to cover federal ministries and 
organizations and intergovernmental initiatives (Government of Canada, 2000) 
is mentioned. Once again, results-based management is a management approach 
that is in the process of being set up in France. The difficulties in recruiting and 
retaining the young are an issue shared by all the countries under study, with the 
exception of France. It is necessary to point out that the French senior manag -
ers undergo a very demanding selection process and generally form a part of an 
administrative group ( corps) like that of the French ENA.
Comparing the Competency Profiles
When the competency profiles are compared (see T able II), it can be observed that there 
are not always close links between the issues and the competencies sought. It is highly 
possible that, in the respondents’ minds, certain issues require political skills or that the 
identified challenges can be met by bringing competencies to the forefront.
T able II
Future Competencies of Senior Managers
C
O
M
P
E
T
E
N
C
I
E
S
THE UNITED 
STATES
THE UNITED 
KINGDOM AUSTRALIA FRANCE CANADA
Adaptability
Ability to negotiate
Evaluation and 
performance of 
managers
Leadership / 
management of 
knowledge
Personnel 
management
Management of 
networks and 
partnerships
Propose a goal and 
a direction / the 
future
Have a personal 
impact (example)
Think strategically
Get the best out of 
people
Learn and improve
Emphasize the 
delivery of services
Be the principal 
policy adviser
Master public and 
private 
management
Be centred on 
results
Know how to 
manage contracts 
and networks
Adapted leadership 
/global vision
Interpersonal 
relationships
External relations
Adaptability
Ability to negotiate
Evaluation of 
performance
Charismatic 
leadership
Management of 
knowledge
Human-resource 
management
Management of 
networks
Innovation and 
continuous learning
Ability to manage 
projects
Communication
Intellectual 
competencies: 
cognitive ability, 
creativity and the 
ability to shape 
the future (vision)
Management 
competencies: 
taking action, 
organizational 
understanding, 
teamwork, and the 
management of 
partnerships
Human-relation 
competencies: 
interpersonal 
relationships and 
communication 
skills
Personal qualities: 
vitality, ethical 
values, personality 
(perseverance and 
self-control), 
flexibility, and self-
confidence
<<<PAGE=49>>>
39
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
In order to compare the focus of competencies, four variables have been re -
tained: governance, management techniques, administrative leadership, and policy 
leadership. It is understood that governance refers to a competency profile that 
emphasizes the global management of government and its workings, the relation -
ships with the external players like partnerships and alliances, and centralization/
decentralization. Management techniques refer to approaches inspired by what is 
called the new public management and best management practices (Pollitt, 1995). 
Administrative leadership concerns the position of senior managers in the man -
agement of public affairs. Finally, policy leadership refers to the role that senior 
managers would like to play in the field of policy analysis and advice. Leadership, 
whether administrative or policy-oriented, is at the centre of public-management 
competencies. It is often the most sought-after competency by both public and 
private organizations (Hackett, M. and P . Spurgeon, 1998; Dunon, 2002).
T able III
Focus of Competency Profiles
COUNTRY GOVERNANCE MANAGEMENT 
TECHNIQUES
ADMINISTRATIVE 
LEADERSHIP
POLICY 
LEADERSHIP
THE UNITED STATES X X
THE UNITED KINGDOM X
AUSTRALIA X X
FRANCE X X
CANADA X X
No competency profile is based purely on governance. Thus, competencies 
like knowing how to share the power to administer and to govern, being open to 
the participation of citizens, being able to manage decentralization and devolution 
are absent. That can be explained in at least three ways. First, it is possible that 
the respondents consider that it has to do with collective, rather than individual, 
competencies. Second, they might think that competencies relating to governance 
are a matter for the political domain. Finally, seeing that the five countries (the 
United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, France and Canada) have already 
undertaken reforms in the field of governance, the respondents do not see gover -
nance competencies as essential in the future.
All the profiles put an emphasis on management techniques that are similar to 
those of the private sector. With the exception of France, the other four countries 
have witnessed fundamental reforms touching upon the role of government, struc-
tures, the processes of human-resource and budget management (Aucoin, 1995; 
Halligan, 1997; Ferlie et al., 1996); France stands alone in this area. The other 
countries have already gone through the process of questioning the appropriate 
models of governance, and it seems that they intend to concentrate on best man -
agement practices in the future. Although France has seen several reforms over the 
last decade, such as a reflection on the role of the State, decentralization and closer 
ties between the public administration and citizens (Postif, 1997), it has remained
<<<PAGE=50>>>
40 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
resistant to the prescriptions of the new public management. In four countries, the 
United Kingdom, the United States, France and Canada, the competency profile 
also emphasizes the administrative leadership of their senior managers. This is 
no trivial observation, and it is compatible with the teachings of the new public 
management in that public servants play a more active role in the management of 
public affairs by becoming entrepreneurs who innovate and take risks. That does 
not mean that the senior managers of the countries in question do not participate 
in the development of public policies. At least, they do not publicly admit that 
policy leadership is a crucial competency.
Australia is a separate case. Its competency profile is focused on both manage -
ment techniques and policy leadership. As has already been seen, in Australia’s case, 
the reforms liberalizing the process of influencing government policy within the 
framework of privatization of public services forced senior managers to develop 
approaches to maintain a pre-eminent position in the field of policy analysis and 
advice.
Conclusion
The initial objectives of this article consisted in identifying and comparing the 
issues that the public administrations of the five countries of the OECD must 
face in the next five to ten years, the management competencies required of senior 
managers to face these issues, and the focus of the competency profile. In order 
to do this, the following countries were selected: the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, France, and Canada.  In order to find the issues of the future 
and to identify the competency profile of each country, different research methods 
were used: interviews (58 persons), study trips to each of the selected countries, 
discussion panels, documents, and a bank of longitudinal data on the strategic is -
sues of Canadian public administrations.
Although the issues in each country are affected by the national culture, history, 
geography, the political system, and the administrative culture, it appears that the 
five countries under study share several of the future issues, including the improve-
ment of the delivery of public services, the adoption of results-based management, 
resorting to the massive use of information and communication technologies, the 
retirement of 40% to 50% of senior managers in the next five to ten years, and the 
difficulty in recruiting and retaining young people. With regard to the last issue, 
France does not seem to have a problem thanks to its grands corps approach. The 
graduates from the French ENA, for example, generally occupy senior positions 
right at the beginning of their career and benefit from several advantages in terms 
of salary, challenges to meet and work environment.
As for the comparison of the focus of competency profiles, two trends were 
found: “management techniques” (or best practices) and administrative leadership. 
They are the competency profiles of the United States, the United Kingdom, France 
and Canada. All in all, it seems that the competency profiles of the countries in
<<<PAGE=51>>>
41
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
question are influenced by the new public management: creativity, quality of ser -
vices, partnerships, results-based management, entrepreneurship, etc.
Only the Australian competency profile encompasses management techniques 
and policy leadership. Policy leadership has become important since the Australian 
government has opened up the field of policy analysis and advice to competition 
from the private sector, associations and NGOs. In this context, Australian senior 
managers would like to remain the government’s main policy advisers.
Finally, none of the profiles of the countries studied has a governance focus. 
This could be explained by the fact that the debate on the role of the State, the 
repositioning of the missions of ministries and organizations, administrative restruc-
turing, decentralization and devolution occurred at the beginning of the 1980s in 
England, Australia and the United States. Canada followed suit during the 1990s; 
two of the revision criteria dealt with governance and subsidiarity. Because of this, 
the managers are looking for management tools for the future to better manage 
the organizations and the changes that resulted from the earlier reforms.
References
Aventur, François (1998) Les pratiques internationales en matière de compétences , 
CNPF.
Aucoin, Peter (1995), The New Public Management: Canada in comparative perspec-
tive, Montréal: Institut de recherche en politiques publiques.
Aucoin, E. (2003) “The Competencies Required of Senior Managers in the Public 
Service” International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration, 
Miami, Florida.
Barzelay, M. (2001) The New Public Management , University of California Press.
Bourgault, J. M. Charih, D. Maltais and L. Rouillard (2003), les rôles et les compé -
tences des gestionnaires supérieurs du gouvernement du Québec pour l’avenir, Centre 
d’expertise en gestion des ressources humaines, Secrétariat du Conseil du T résor.
Brown, T .J. (2001) From Competencies to Competence: Workforce planning in Georgia 
State Government, Sterling Institute.
Cabinet Office (2002). Improving Programme and Project Delivery, Connect, Issue 
no 6, Autumn.
Charih, M. and A. Daniels (1997), Directors, Nouveau management public et ad -
ministration publique au Canada , Toronto: Institut d’administration publique du 
Canada and ENAP .
Campbell, Colin and Graham K. Wilson (1995) The End of Whitehall: death of a 
paradigm? Cambridge: Blackwell.
Courpasson, D., and Y .F. Livian (1991). “Le développement récent de la notion de 
compétences, glissement sémantique ou idéologie,” Revue de gestion des ressources 
humaines, no 71, octobre.
<<<PAGE=52>>>
42 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Dunon, Don (2002) Rethinking Leadership for the Public Sector, Australian Journal 
of Public Administration, vol. 61, no 3.
Ferlie, Ewan, L. Ashburner and A. Pettigrew (1996) The New Public Management 
in Action, Oxford University Press.
GAO (2003) Human Capital: A Guide for Assessing Strategic T raining and Develop-
ment Efforts in the Federal Government .
Gouvernement Du Canada (2000), Une gestion axée sur les résultats , Conseil du 
T résor du Canada.
Hackett, M. and P . Spurgeon (1998) Developing Leaders in the Future, Health 
Manpower Management, vol. 24, no 5.
Halligan, J. (1997) “New Public Sector Models: Reform in Australia and New 
Zealand” in: Lane, J. E . Public Sector Reform , Sage Publications.
Horton, S. (2000) “Introduction-The Competency Movement: Its Origins and 
Impact on the Public Sector” International Journal of Public Sector Management , 
vol.13, no 4, pp. 306-318.
Metcalfe, Les (1993) “Conviction Politics and Dynamic Conservatism: Mrs. 
Thatcher’s managerial revolution,” International Political Science Review , vol. 14: 
pp. 351-371.
Nye, Joseph S., Philip D. Zelikow and David C. King (1997) Why People Don’t 
T rust Government, Harvard University Press.
OECD (2000). Compétence pour le monde de demain , PISA.
Peters, B. Guy and Donald J. Savoie (1998) T aking Stock: Assessing Public Sector 
Reforms, McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Pollitt, C. and G. Bouckaert (2000) Public Management Reform: A Comparative 
Analysis, Oxford University Press.
Pollitt, Christopher (1995) Management T echniques for the Public Sector, Canadian 
Centre for Management Development.
Postif, Thierry (1997) “Public Sector Reform in France” in: Lane, J. E. Public Sec-
tor Reform, Sage Publications.
Savoie, Donald (1994) Thatcher, Reagan, Mulroney: In search of a New Bureaucracy, 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Seidle, F. Leslie (1995) Rethinking the delivery of public services to citizens, Montréal: 
Institut de recherche en politiques publiques.
Silguy, Yves-Thibault de (2003) Moderniser l’État: le cas de l’Ena ,, Ministère de la 
fonction publique, de la réforme de l’État et de l’aménagement de territoire.
US Government (1998) Guide to Senior Executive Service Qualifications , Office 
of Personnel Management.
<<<PAGE=53>>>
43
… Competencies of Senior Managers: A Look at Some OECD Countries
Verificateur General Du Canada (2001) La réforme de la gestion de la fonction 
publique : progrès, échecs et défis , Ministre des travaux publics et services gouver -
nementaux.
Wilson, R. (1999) Report to the Prime Minister from Sir Richard Wilson, Head 
of the Home Civil Service.
<<<PAGE=54>>>
44 
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration:  
The Role of Standards of Excellence
Blue Wooldridge *
Today’s turbulent public sector environment increasingly requires managers to 
adopt innovative approaches to solve emerging problems (Berman & West, 1998). 
Agencies are asking how to bring about dramatic process improvements, organi -
zational culture shifts, and agency overhauls in response to increasingly complex 
environments (V an W art, 1994). Certainly , Schools and Institutes of Administrations 
(SIAs) are not immune from these forces for change and higher expectations.
It has been suggested that what the public really cares about is high quality 
performance by their public organizations (Altshuler, 1999). The public in demand-
ing more and higher quality services at a time when most governments face tighter 
budgets (Altshuler, 1999; Popovich, 1998; Shafritz & Russell, 1999). At the same 
time, there are many other forces urging public organizations to enhance the qual-
ity of their performance. For example, the privatization movement has raised the 
performance stakes in the public sector (Wooldridge, Amagoh & Menefee, 2002). 
Workers have also forced organizations to change. Today’s workers are searching 
for job satisfaction in five areas: salary, accomplishments and rewards, learning and 
challenge, career advancement and enjoyment (Price & Chen, 1995).
To assist SIAs in responding to these forces, it is necessary to review the various 
definitions of high performing organizations (HPOs) and describe the attributes 
of these HPOs identified through organizational research. This will lead to the 
offering of Standards of Excellence which are suggested by the attributes of HPOs 
that could be used for assessing and improving SIAs.
High Performing Organizations: Definitions and Attributes
Almost every scholar and researcher in the study of HPOs has created their own 
definitions of this phenomenon. Each of these perspectives add to the under -
standing of the purpose and characteristics of such organizations. Senge (1990) 
describes HPOs as groups of people who are continually enhancing their capacity 
to create the results they want. This statement has two parts to it: first, one must 
know what one wants to create, so one must continually reflect on their sense of 
purpose/vision and, second, one must continually develop the capability to move 
in that direction.
A HPO has also been defined as a group of employees who produce desired 
goods or services at higher quality, with the same or fewer resources than others. 
Their productivity and quality improve continuously, from day to day, week to 
week, and year to year. “…leading to the achievement of their mission,” (Popovich, 
* Associate Professor, Public Administration, The L. Douglas Wilder School of Government and 
Public Affairs, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
<<<PAGE=55>>>
45
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
1998, p. 11). HPOs focus on effectiveness rather than efficiency. Their leaders 
believe that the people in the organization are its greatest assets and the key to its 
success (White, 1998). Others have suggested that a high performance organization 
is one that has a sustained track record of success in the pursuit of its mission. 
These organizations achieve competitive advantage by providing superior customer 
service through their people.
While there are many approaches to defining HPOs, research has suggested that 
HPOs share common attributes. The components listed in the literature have a 
common theme: 1) enhancing effectiveness by focusing on employee skills/motiva-
tion; and, 2) organization communication/technology (Gardner, A., Churchill, L., 
Souza, P ., & Willmarth, M., 2001). Timothy Hoerr (1999) provides a succinct and 
comprehensive mechanism for evaluating an HPO with his seven (7) fundamental 
foundations: Principle-Centeredness, Purpose, People Focus, Customer Focus, 
Process Excellence, Learning and Leadership.
Another attempt to identify the attributes of HPOs was made by Popovich 
(1998). He identified HPOs as characterized by the following qualities: 1) are clear 
on their mission; 2) define outcomes and focus on results; 3) empower employ -
ees; 4) motivate and inspire people to succeed; 5) are flexible and adjust nimbly 
to new conditions; 6) are competitive in terms of performance; 7) restructure 
work processes to meet customer needs; and 8) maintain communications with 
stakeholders.
In reviewing several studies, one can conclude that high performance organiza-
tions: 1) have a commitment to a clearly defined statement of vision and mission; 
2) focus on quality services for the customer or client; 3) practice continuous 
improvement and prevention versus inspection and rework; 4) manage by data; 
5) empower employees; 6) accomplish organization work through teams; 7) train 
and develop employees; 8) have motivated and committed employees; 9) depend 
on management and leadership that create shared values and commitment; 10) use 
technology appropriately; 11) value diversity; 12) respond effectively to changes in 
the environment; 13) create trust; 14) communicate effectively; and 15) practice 
strategic planning (Wooldridge 2003a).
As Hoerr concludes, “While the specific values of high-performing companies 
may vary somewhat, there is remarkable similarity among entities that consistently 
demonstrate superior results” (1999, p.1). While every attribute of HPOs may not 
have implications for Standards of Excellence for SIAs, many do. These include:
Commitment to a Clearly Described Vision and Mission: This attribute defines 
vision as that to which we aspire to become, and mission as that which we do. 
“Vision is not just important—it is crucial to any organization achieving consistent 
and sustainable superior performance” (Quigley, 1994, p. xxiii). But for the vision 
to be effective, it must grow out of the needs of the entire organization and be 
owned, understood and widely shared by all the important stakeholders (Bennis 
and Nanus, 1985). Nanus (1992) suggests that a good vision: is future oriented;
<<<PAGE=56>>>
46 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
is utopian; appropriate for the organization’s culture; sets standards of excellence 
and reflects high ideals; clarifies purpose and gives direction; inspires enthusiasm 
and encourages commitment; reflects the uniqueness of the organization; and is 
ambitious, but not overly so.
A value may be defined as “an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct 
or end-state of existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite or 
converse mode of conduct or end-state of existence” (Steers and Black, 1994, p. 
44). A value is that “which is explicitly or implicitly desirable to an individual or 
group and which influences the selection from available modes, means and ends of 
action” (Adler, 2002, p. 18). V alue statements can especially make an impact when 
the value represents changes in behavior required for the organization to achieve 
its vision and deliver its mission (Zairi, 2002).
Goal setting theory (Locke and Latham, 1990) suggests characteristics of an 
organizational mission statement that enhances performance. It is possible to iden-
tify six relatively distinct task-goal attributes that facilitate task performance in a 
goal-setting environment: 1) goal specificity; 2) goal difficulty; 3) participation in 
goal-setting; 4) feedback on goal effort; 5) peer competition for goal attainment; 
and 6) goal acceptance. (Steers, 1984, p. 171.). Podsakoff, MacKenzie and Ahearne, 
(1997) point out that the performance enhancing impact of goal acceptance is 
magnified by strong group cohesion.
Such an attribute would, in an educational setting, call for a Standard requiring a 
vigorous strategic planning process – which includes the participation of all key stake -
holder such as representatives of relevant governmental ministries, actual and potential 
employers, faculty and staff, alumni, and current students/participants.
Focus on Quality Services for the Client: One definition of quality is meeting 
the expectations of those we serve, exactly, the first time, and every time (Federal 
Quality Institute). A vigorous, visible commitment to quality is the first priority 
in an HPO environment (Deming, 1986; Crosby, 1979; Juran & Gryna, 1988). 
HPOs focus on their clients by providing quality goods and services. They are 
better organized to meet the needs of those they serve so that they are either 
more innovative in anticipating customer needs, more reliable in meeting their 
expectations, better able to deliver their product or service more cheaply, or some 
combination of the above (Hoerr, 1999; Hunt, 1992).
In an educational setting a Standard would, at least, require, well-constructed courses 
that are up dated frequently to be compatible with the changing needs of professionals 
and with the demands of advance study. It would require clearly identified student-
oriented behavioral learning objectives (Wooldridge, 2000), clearly stated assignments, 
and courses that are offered at times and places that are convenient to the clients.
Continuous Improvement and Prevention: The attitude that, “If it ain’t 
broke don’t fix it” has no place in a high performance setting. Everyone must be 
unremitting in the search for a better way of doing things (Crosby, 1979, Hunt, 
1992). Attention is paid to the series of actions taken in providing a service in
<<<PAGE=57>>>
47
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
order to identify those actions that cause the production of goods or services that 
cause “non quality.” This greatly reduces or eliminates the need for inspection and 
rework (Deming, 1986).
Manage by Data: In HPOs, all decisions are based on data, not intuition 
(Deming, 1986; Cornesky, McCool, Byrnes, & Weber, 1991). HPOs practice 
management by data, continuous improvement and competitive benchmarking. 
According to Lawler, et. al, (1995), HPOs use data for planning daily operations 
and performance improvement. HPOs gather data on:
 Customers or clients and their preferences
 Products and services performance history
 Internal operations
 Process and performance measures
 Actual vs planned outcomes, outputs, efficiencies
 Costs and fiscal responsibility
High performing organizations also utilize data on:
 Overall operating results
 Unit operating results
 New technologies that might affect them
 Organizational plans and goals
 Competitors’ relative position
 Critical types of data that are of special value to HPOs results from undertak -
ing:
a) Performance Measurement and Results Orientation: Such analysis requires the use 
of appropriate performance measures. Performance measures can be defined as 
any method of objectively determining how well services are being performed 
(Epstein, 1984). Performance measures can measure the output produced by 
the organization or the outcomes created in the community which results from 
organizational output. The data provided by performance measures helps the 
organization evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of government activity 
and evaluate whether the program meets its strategic goals and objectives. Per -
formance measurement increases the accountability of the organization since 
performance measures shows the organization’s stakeholders the efficiency and 
effectiveness of its operations. HPOs integrate their many data types into the 
planning process.
b) Competitive Benchmarking: The purpose of competitive benchmarking is to strive 
to be better than the best competitor. High performing government entities 
compare the results of their performance measurement to other entities – both 
those entities they are in competition with, and dissimilar organizations that 
do not pose any direct competition. Good benchmarking involves five steps:
1. Decide what aspect of performance should be benchmarked.
2. Select the competitors who are the best in this aspect of performance, and 
who will be benchmarked.
<<<PAGE=58>>>
48 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
3. Decide which performance measures should be used to compare performance 
between the two organizations.
4. Determine the other organization’s strengths (based on their performance 
on established performance measures) and assess these strengths against 
one’s own performance.
5. Develop a plan to apply the other organization’s strength to one’s own 
organization.
By using competitive benchmarking, the comparison of performance allows SIAs 
to determine whether the organization is excelling in its performance or whether 
steps need to be made to correct poor performance. In addition, the benchmark -
ing process allows organizations to adapt their performance to incorporate the 
strengths of other organizations.
Schools and Institutes of Administration must have performance data, especially 
student outcome data, data from the evaluation of programs, and perceptions of how 
their stakeholders view them. They must identify other academic programs who might 
be performing better, find out what they are doing, and then do it better. This must 
be a continuous process.
Empowerment of Employees: High performance results require the par -
ticipation of employees at every level in the organization (Crosby, 1979; Juran 
& Gryna, 1988). Employee involvement goes beyond what is usually meant by 
“employee participation.” The role of those who perform the processes expands 
from doer, to trouble shooter, problem solver and planner--all roles essential to 
quality improvement (Bowen & Lawler, 1995; Crosby, 1979; Deming, 1986; Juran 
& Gryna, 1988).
Empowerment involves pushing problem-solving and decision making to the lowest 
appropriate level in an organization. The process gives employees a greater sense of 
ownership, and calls on them to work in new , more flexible ways (Carnevale & Stone, 
1995). Bowen and Lawler in “The Empowerment of Service W orkers: What, Why , 
How , and When” (1995) explain that a decision to empower employees assumes that 
1) most employees can make good decisions if they are properly socialized, trained, 
and informed; 2) employees can be internally motivated to perform effectively; 3) 
that employees are capable of self-control and self-direction; and 4) that employees 
can produce good ideas for operating the organization. They cite four key features 
that must be pushed down in the organization to create empowered employees:
• Information about organizational performance (e.g., operating results and 
competitor performance);
• Rewards based on organizational performance (e.g., profit sharing and stock 
ownership);
• Knowledge that enables employees to understand and contribute to organiza -
tional performance (e.g., problem solving skills); and
• Power to make decisions that influence work procedures and organizational 
direction (e.g., through quality circles and self-managing teams).
<<<PAGE=59>>>
49
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
The degree of empowerment can range from contributing ideas, to deciding 
how work is done, to participating in work-unit management decisions.
Work Through T eams: T eamwork is how processes and systems are improved 
in an HPO environment. It requires commitment and cooperation. In response 
to changing environmental and/or economic conditions, organizations recently 
have embraced new structural forms designed to reduce costs, while simultane -
ously maximizing flexibility and responsiveness to customer demands. To a much 
greater extent than more traditional hierarchical and centralized organizations, the 
resulting flatter, more decentralized organizational forms tend to be built around 
groups and depend on rich synchronous communication provided by teams and 
task forces. In addition, groups have become important vehicles for identifying 
high-quality solutions to emerging organizational problems (Jehn, Northcraft, & 
Neale, 1999).
A high performance team may be characterized as follows (Blinn, 1996):
• It has a common focus, including a clear mission, vision, goals, action plans, 
and success measures.
• It has clearly defined roles and responsibilities for team members.
• Members have clearly defined expectations of one another.
• It utilizes all its resources, both within the team and externally.
• Members value their diversity and deal with differences in a healthy and pro -
ductive way.
• Members are able to effectively give, receive, and solicit feedback.
• The team manages meetings efficiently and effectively.
• It achieves results.
Training and Employee Development: There are many different definitions 
of training and development. Dessler (1997) defines training as “the process of 
teaching new employees the basic skills they need to perform their jobs” (p. 248). 
Schuler and Huber suggest that “Employee training and development is any attempt 
to improve current or future employee performance by increasing an employee’s 
ability to perform” (p. 512). Mondy and Noe (1987, p. 256) refers to training and 
development as “planned continuous effort by management to improve employee 
competency levels and organizational performance.” DeNisi and Griffin (2001) 
divide training from development by defining training as “a planned attempt by 
an organization to facilitate employee learning of job-related knowledge, skills, and 
behaviors,” whereas development, “on the other hand, usually refers to teaching 
managers and professionals the skills needed for both present and future jobs” 
(p. 266).
The following definition is one that has proven useful: “training is an organized 
learning experience designed to enhance the ability of current or future employees 
to achieve the desired levels of performance in specific jobs necessary in order for 
their organization to achieve its strategic mission” (Wooldridge, 2003b).
<<<PAGE=60>>>
50 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
A Standard of Excellence flowing from this attribute would require SIAs to describe 
their faculty/staff development policies and practices, and justify them in light of the 
mission and curriculum.
Motivated and Committed Employees: Employee motivation and commit -
ment to the organization is influenced by the organization’s implementation of 
rewards and recognition that are valued by the intended recipients (Lawler, 2000, 
Vroom, 1964). Steers and Black (1994), suggest that one managerial implication 
of the research guided by motivation theory is the need to:
 Match rewards to employee desires. Different employees often want different 
rewards or outcomes from their jobs. Although some employees may place a 
high value on receiving additional income, others may prefer time off either for 
vacation or for receiving additional training for a future promotion. Managers 
can improve motivational levels by offering a variety of rewards for employees 
(p. 184).
Management and Leadership: Management must provide a vision, listen, promote 
team-work, be committed to quality and customer needs, avid but patient for long-
term ends, and orchestrators and enablers of improvement. Burns (1976) is credited 
with first introducing the models of transactional and transformational leadership. 
T ransactional leadership, which derives power from hierarchy and position, differs 
from transformational leadership – which creates power from understanding and 
trust. It is suggested that good leadership lies in effectively combining the two 
approaches. Leadership is critical to the achievement of high performance. It is 
also essential in helping others aspire to and attain high levels of performance for 
themselves and the organization.
Use of T echnology Appropriately: T echnology refers to anything that in -
volves either the mechanical or intellectual processes by which an organization 
transforms input (raw materials) into output (a finished product) in the pursuit 
of organizational goals (Steers and Black, p. 382). We know that the “appropriate” 
use of “appropriate” technology can enhance the learning experience (Wooldridge, 
1995). Jackson and Schuler (2003) point out, “…technology makes it possible to 
combine many formats and deliver them as an integrated learning system that 
combines, for example, computer-based quizzes, video, inter-active simulations, 
and so on,” (p. 372).
Perhaps a Standard might require that an SIA identify what technologies would 
be most effective in delivering its instruction and what technologies are actually being 
used, and justify its response.
Value Diversity: Diversity of faculty, and staff is important for high perform -
ing SIA for at least three reasons. First, several studies (Chatman, et al., 1993; 
W atson, Kumar, and Michaelsen, 1993) have shown that, when diversity is man -
aged properly, diverse work teams are more effective, efficient, and produce higher 
quality solutions than their homogeneous counterparts. T sui, Egan and O’Reilly 
(1992) do an excellent job of reviewing the available literature on this issue. They
<<<PAGE=61>>>
51
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
point out that there is evidence that diverse work groups are beneficial for tasks 
requiring creativity and judgement (Jackson, 1991), but there is also evidence that 
homogeneous groups are more likely to be socially integrated and experience higher 
satisfaction and lower turnover (O’Reilly, Caldwell, & Barnett, 1989).
How does an organization create a situation where the functional consequences 
of workforce diversity are manifested instead of the dysfunctional? One suggestion 
is to look at the organizational culture. Chatman, et. al., (1993) concluded that in 
organizations that were characterized by the collective dimension of Hofstede’s 
Individualistic-Collective Dimension of Culture (Hofstede, 1980), heterogeneous 
work groups performed better in terms of creativity, having beneficial conflict, 
degree of interaction and participation and timeliness of task completion. In 
“Individualistic” organizations, however, heterogeneous groups did not perform 
as well as homogeneous work groups. Hernandez (1992) reports that one charac -
teristic of organizations that maximize the potential of their diverse workforce is 
the presence of effective “V aluing Diversity” programs.
Secondly, the concept of “ representative bureaucracy”  (Dolan, 2002; Dolan 
2000; Riccucci and Saidel, 1997; Kranz, 1976; Meier, and Nigro, 1976; Krislov, 
(1974); Kingsley, 1944) holds that the demographic composition of the staff of 
an organization should mirror the demographic composition of the general public. 
In this way, the preferences of a heterogeneous population will be represented in 
organizational decision making (Riccucci and Saidel, 1997). That is, a female faculty 
member with dependent children is more likely to hold values and be sensitive to 
the experiences of a female student with the same responsibilities.
Finally, high performing SIA ’s need a diversified faculty and staff because of the 
need for vicarious self-efficacy. Bandura (1977) speculates on what are the sources 
of information for the development of self-efficacy (the belief that one has the 
capacity for producing a desired result or effect). Self-efficacy is an important 
element in individual performance, since the belief that one has the capacity for 
producing a desired result is vital for motivation (see Vroom’s Expectancy-V alancy 
Theory of Motivation, 1964), and performance is, in part, a function of motivation 
(Steers & Black, 1994).
Bandura (1971) believes that the most important source of information concern-
ing self-efficacy is personal performance and accomplishment because it is based on 
personal mastery experiences. Successes raise mastery expectations. However, people 
do not rely on experienced mastery as the sole source of information concerning 
their level of self-efficacy. Many expectations are derived from vicarious experience. 
Seeing others perform activities successfully can generate expectations in observers 
that they too will improve if they intensify and persist in the efforts.
If people of widely differing characteristics can succeed, than observers have 
a reasonable basis for increasing their own sense of self-efficacy. “Central to this 
theory is the concept of vicarious learning. Vicarious learning is learning that 
takes place through the imitation of other [ role models]. That is, we observe and
<<<PAGE=62>>>
52 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
analyze what another person does and the resulting consequences. As a result, we 
learn without having to experience the phenomenon firsthand” (Steers and Black, 
1994, p. 105). Vicarious self-efficacy calls for organizational diversity in order to 
promote the development of all groups of individuals. If a specific SIA has a diverse 
student/population, it is especially important that it tries to mirror that diversity 
in its staff and faculty. According to Bandura (1971) less influential sources of 
information for increasing expectations of self-efficacy are verbal persuasion and 
emotional arousal.
Integrating these insights into hiring practices is important since many Schools 
and Institutes of Administration operate in an environment of increasing diversity 
of residents and of workers. Such diversity includes race/ethnicity, gender, age, 
family status, sexual orientation, religious beliefs, learning styles, work-related 
values, organizational roles, levels of literacy, levels of physical and psychological 
ability, and diversity in compensation (Wooldridge, 1996).
These situations suggest the need for Schools and Institutes of Administration to 
develop curricula that would enhance their participants’ Cultural/Diversity Competence 
and Social Equity Skills. Skills in the area of Cultural Competence are reflected:
 in the process by which individuals and systems respond respectfully and ef -
fectively to people of all cultures, languages, classes, races, ethnic backgrounds, 
religions, and other diversity factors in a manner that recognizes, affirms, and 
values the worth of individuals, families, and communities and protects and 
preserves the dignity of each” (National Association of Social Workers “Stan -
dards for Cultural Competence in Social Work Practice, 2001).
Another definition describes this concept as: “the attribute of a(n)…. orga -
nization that describes the set of congruent behaviors, attitudes, skills, policies 
and procedures that enable its caregivers to work effectively and efficiently in 
cross/multicultural situations at all of its organizational levels” (Siegel, Haugland 
and Chambers, 2002).
Social Equity has been defined and described as: “the fair, just and equitable 
management of all institutions serving the public directly or by contract, and the 
fair and equitable distribution of public services, and implementation of public 
policy, and the commitment to promote fairness, justice, and equity in the for -
mation of public policy” (National Academy of Public Administration, Standing 
Panel on Social Equity).
And “Social Equity is fairness in the delivery of public services; it is egalitarian-
ism in action – the principle that each citizen, regardless of economic resources or 
personal traits, deserves and has a right to be given equal treatment by the political 
system,”(Shafritz and Russell, 2003, p. 395).
Several US accrediting associations have developed standards regarding “Cul-
tural/Diversity and Social Justice Competencies” for schools and institutions 
preparing professionals in their fields. For example the Committee on Accredita -
tion, of the American Psychological Association (APA) requires that programs
<<<PAGE=63>>>
53
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
should always engage in actions that indicate respect for and understanding of 
cultural and individual diversity. Throughout its documents, the phrase “cultural 
and individual diversity” refers to diversity with regard to personal and demo -
graphic characteristics. These include, but are not limited to, age, color, disabilities, 
ethnicity, gender, language, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation, and 
social economic status. Respect for and understanding of cultural and individual 
diversity is reflected in the program’s policies for the recruitment, retention, and 
development of faculty and students, and in its curriculum and field placements. 
The program has nondiscriminatory policies and operating conditions, and it avoids 
any actions that would restrict program access or completion on grounds that are 
irrelevant to success in graduate training or the profession.
Under Domain D: Cultural and Individual Differences and Diversity, the APA 
requires that:
 The program has and implements a thoughtful and coherent plan to provide 
students with relevant knowledge and experiences about the role of cultural and 
individual diversity in psychological phenomena as they relate to the science 
and practice of professional psychology. The avenues of which these goals are 
achieved are to be developed by the program.
These goals are reflected in the Council on Social Work Education accreditation 
standards. For example,Under Educational Policy: 1. Purposes of the Social Work 
Profession 1.2 Achievement of Purposes:
 Prepare social workers to practice without discrimination with respect, and 
with knowledge and skills related to clients’ age, class, color, culture, disability, 
ethnicity, family structure, gender, marital status, national origin, race, religion, 
sex, and sexual orientation. Preparing social workers to alleviate poverty, op -
pression, and other forms of social injustice.
Perhaps a Standard of Excellence in this regard for Schools and Institutes of 
Administration would be similar to one recently proposed to the National Asso -
ciation of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration’s (NASPAA) Standard’s 
Committee (as modified from the Planning Accreditation Board):
 The program’s goals shall reflect the program’s intent to achieve and maintain 
diversity in its student body and faculty and to incorporate into its curricu -
lum the knowledge and skills needed to serve a diverse society. Consideration 
shall be given to a broad definition of diversity including race, ethnicity, sex, 
disability, sexual orientation, economic status, and other factors pertinent to 
the program’s mission. The program’s goals shall include the development of 
competencies that lead to the understanding of the forms and mechanisms of 
oppression and discrimination and the ability to apply strategies of advocacy 
and social change that advance social and economic justice. The program shall 
describe how these goals relate to its mission and to the mission of public af -
fairs education in general.
<<<PAGE=64>>>
54 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Respond Effectively to Changes in the Environment: HPOs seize new op -
portunities and react to change instantaneously, optimize customer satisfaction and 
organizational excellence and accommodate change (Rouse, 1994). HPOs embrace 
the concept of continuous learning, which leads to change in the relationship 
between people and their work, change in the relationship between the organiza -
tion and those it serves, and change in the relationship between the organization 
and its external environment. In a turbulent environment, sometimes the entire 
organization must change to provide higher quality and more appropriate services 
at equal or reduced costs (Popovich, 1998).
High-performing organizations are able to achieve their objectives and outpace the 
competition because they have created the right conditions for their success. In doing 
so, their initial focus is not on measuring operating results such as error rates, cycle 
time, or inventory control. Rather, it is on careful consideration of the environment in 
which they are operating and identification of the changes that will have to be created 
if they are to be successful in the future (Hodgetts & Kuratko, 1999, p. 7).
For a SIA to be able to respond effectively to changes in its environment, it 
must maintain close contact with its key stakeholders. This can be done through a 
“Strategic-Contingency Approach to T raining and Education” (W ooldridge, 2003b) 
which describes how faculty and staff of SIA ’s must know the results of the strategic 
planning efforts of their stakeholders and re-design their instruction accordingly . T o 
provide quality products to their clients requires members of SIAs to be constantly 
in touch with those in their professions. Strategies such as the establishment of 
advisory boards, consulting with governments and non-profit/NGOs organizations, 
and active participation in professional associations, would assist in establishing these 
contacts. This might call for a Standard that requires SIAs to describe and defend their 
process for keeping their curriculum responsive to the changing needs of their clients.
Create Trust: T rust is an essential ingredient, not only for improving perfor -
mance, but also for sustaining performance during turbulent times. T rust is defined 
as a positive expectation that another will not act opportunistically (Robbins, 
2001). The more trust an organization engenders among its people, the more those 
people will be committed to the mission, goals, and bottom-line results of the 
organizations. “Organizational trust is a feeling of confidence and support in an 
employer; it is the belief that an employer will be straightforward and will follow 
through on commitments” (Gilbert and Tang, 1998).
Four key characteristics essential to building trust can be identified:
• Integrity: Acting in a forthright and truthful manner. “W e mean what we say”
• Consistency: Maintaining a compatibility between words and actions. “We do 
what we say.”
• Reliability-Dependability: Keeping promises. “Y ou can count on what we do 
and say.”
• Interdependence: A sense of two parties relying on each other and accordingly 
acting in each other’s best interest. “We are all in this together.”
<<<PAGE=65>>>
55
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
The more trust an organization engenders among its people, the more those 
people will be committed to the mission, goals, and bottom-line results of the or -
ganizations. Organizational trust is established when members of the organization’s 
community perceive that policies, procedures, and rewards are fair.
T rust can be enhanced by following the research findings relevant to the three 
components of Organizational Justice . Organizational Justice can be defined as 
“People’s perceptions of fairness in organizations” (Greenberg and Baron, 2003, p. 
201), and is said to be composed of the components of distributive justice (people’s 
perception of the fairness of the distribution of resources between people); pro-
cedural justice  (which focuses on the processes used to make those resource-al -
location decisions); and interactional justice (which focuses on the quality of the 
interpersonal treatment accorded people).
This perception is especially important in dealings with faculty, staff, students, 
alumni and external clients. T rust and perception of “fairness” are enhanced through 
greater transparency and accurate communications.
Standards of Excellence might require SIAs to: Demonstrate that all hiring, staff de-
velopment, and promotion decisions are based on job relatedness and bona fide occupational 
qualifications determined through careful, and professionally implemented, job analysis 
(Jackson & Schuler, 2003). That all resource allocation decisions – including salaries, salary 
adjustments, and decisions regarding possible reductions in force – follow clearly defined and 
known criteria. That all information provided to perspective and current students/participants 
are compatible to actual instructional content and policies and procedures.
Communicate Effectively: Communications can be defined to be the transfer-
ence of meaning within and outside of an organization (Robbins, 1984). “Commu-
nication is the glue that holds organizations together” (Ivancevich and Matteson, 
1993, p. 632). Also, “effective communications can vastly improve organizational 
performance” (Wheatley, 1996, p. 8.). Communication can be the source of many 
organizational problems, and can also magnify the existing problems of the orga -
nizations. HPOs exhibit good communications capability with those both inside 
and outside of the organization (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Coyle, 1993).
Practice Strategic Planning: Strategic planning may be defined as:
1) “ A systematic process by which an organization anticipates and plans for its 
future (Gordon, 1993, p. 1).
2) “ A disciplined effort to produce fundamental decisions and actions that shape 
and guide what an organization is, what it does, and why it does it” (Bryson, 
1995, p. 5); and
3) Being “vitally concerned with the intersection of an organization with its envi -
ronment and with the creation and maintenance of a dynamic balance between 
the two, ensuring that the fullest feasible use is made of actual and potential 
organizational resources in taking advantages of environmental opportunities 
and repulsing threats” (Dodge & Eadie, 1982, p. 2).
<<<PAGE=66>>>
56 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
A Standard of Excellence, recognizing the importance of this attribute of HPOs 
might require that SIAs develop a formal strategic planning process, and periodically 
revisit and update this Strategic Plan.
Conclusion
The prior discussion suggests that Standards of Excellence can be grouped under 
the following four headings:
• INPUTS such as number and quality of instructors, library resources, computer 
facilities, etc.
• PROCESSES such as what steps were taken in deciding upon the purpose/mis-
sion of the program/institute; what stakeholders were involved; what data are 
gathered to assess the accomplishment of these purposes; and, from whom and 
how used to “guide performance.”
• OUTPUTS such as length of program, number of participants, number of 
courses offered, and,
• OUTCOMES, such as competencies gained by graduates, impact on the com-
munity, etc.
Clearly these categories of standards will be modified and expanded upon by 
further input and interaction. However, they do provide a place to begin in the 
process of developing effective standards of excellence for schools and institutes 
of public administration.
References
Adler, N. J. (2002). International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior . 
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western, a division of Thomson Learning.
Altshuler, A., (1999). “T en Lessons from Innovations” Essays on Innovations in 
American Government. Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of Govern -
ment, Innovations in American Government. Available:  
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/innovations/4themes21st.htm.
Ancona, D., G. & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). “Bridging the Boundary: External Activ-
ity and Performance in Organizational T eams.” Administraive Science Quarterly . 
V ol. 37, No. 4, pp. 634-666.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. 
Psychological Review 84, pp. 191 – 215.
Bennis, W . and Nanus, B. (1985) Leaders: The Strategies for T aking Charge . New 
Y ork, NY : Harper and Row.
Berman, E.M., & West, J.P . (1998). “Responsible Risk-Taking.” Public Administra-
tion Review. V ol. 58, N4. pp. 346-353.
Blinn, Carla. Developing High Performance T eams: Online. V ol. 20. No. 6. Online 
Inc: CT, 1996.
<<<PAGE=67>>>
57
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
Bowen, D. E., & E. E. Lawler III (1995) “Empowering Service Employees.” Sloan 
Management Review, V ol. 36, No. 4 p. 73.
Bryson, J. M. (1995). Strategic Planning for Public and Non-Profit Organizations . 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Publishers.
Burns, J. M. (1979). Leadership. New Y ork: Harper & Row.
Carnevale, A. P . and Stone, S. C. (1994). Diversity beyond the golden rule. T rain-
ing and Development , 48(10), 22-40.
Chatman, J. A., Barsade, S. M., Potzer, J. T., & Neale, M. A. (1993). “The Influence 
of T eam Diversity and Organizational Culture on Decision Making Processes and 
Outcomes.” Paper presented ad at the annual meeting of the Academy of Manage-
ment Atlanta, GA:
Cornesky, R., McCool, S., Byrnes, L. & Weber, R. (1991). Implementing T otal 
Quality Management in Higher Education . New Y ork: Magna.
Coyle, M. B. (1993). “Quality Interpersonal Communication-Managing Self-Con-
cept.” Manage. V o. 45, No. 2, pp. 9-12.
Crosby, P . B. (1979). Quality is Free: The Art of Making Quality Certain . New 
Y ork: Mentor.
Deming, W .E. (1986). Out of Crisis . Massachusetts: MIT Center for Advanced 
Engineering Study.
DeNisi, A. S., & Griffin, R. W . (2001). Human Resource Management  Houghton 
Mifflin, Co. Boston.
Dodge, W . R., Jr. & Eadie, D. (1982). “Strategic Planning: An Approach to 
Launching New Initiatives in an Era of Retrenchment.” Management Information 
Service Report, V ol. 14, No. 9. W ashington, DC: International City Management 
Association.
Dolan, J. (2002). Representative bureaucracy in the federal executive: gender and 
spending priorities. (Articles). Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory. 
V ol. 12 i3, pp. 353-76.
Dolan, J. (2000) “The Senior Executive Service: Gender, Attitudes, and Representa-
tive Bureaucracy.” Journal of Public Administration Research And  Theory. V ol. 10, 
No. 3, pp. 513-29.
Dessler, G. (1997). Human Resource Management (7th edition). Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Epstein, P . D. (1984). Using Performance Measurement in Local Government. New 
Y ork: V an Nostrand.
Gardner, A., Churchill, L., Souza, P ., & Willmarth, M. (2001). “High-Performance 
Government: Tapping into Employee Potential, Public Management, V ol. 83, I 10, 
p. 10.
<<<PAGE=68>>>
58 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Gilbert, J. A. & Tang, T. L. (1998). “ An examination of organizational trust ante -
cedents.” Public Personnel Management. V ol. 27, N. 3, pp. 321-339.
Gordon, G., L. (1993). Strategic Planning for Local Government. W ashington, DC: 
International City Management Association.
Greenberg, J., & Baron, R. A. (2003). Behavior in Organizations: Understanding 
and Managing the Human Side of Work. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hernadez, E. (1992). “The Unclear Role of Workplace Diversity on Group Level 
Creativity.” Paper present ad at the annual meeting of the Academy of Manage -
ment, Las Vegas, NV.
Hodgetts, R. M., & Kuratko, D. F. (1999). “Quality Implementation in Small Busi-
ness: Perspectives from the Baldrige Award Winners.” SAM Advanced Mangement 
Journal. V ol. 64, i1, p. 37.
Hoerr, T. C. (1999). “Strategic Planning: The Seven Foundations of High Perform-
ing Organizations (Money Talks). Agency Sales Magazine, V ol. 29 (1) pp. 27-29.
Hofstede, G. (1980, Summer). Motivational, leadership, and organization: Do 
American theories apply abroad? Organizational Dynamics. pp. 4 – 21.
Hunt, V .D. (1992). Qualtity in America: How to Implement a Competitive. Quality 
Program, Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin.
Ivancevich, J. M., & Matteson, M. T. (1996). Organizational Behavior and Manage-
ment. 4th ed. Chicago: Irwin.
Jackson, S.E., & Schuler, R. S. (2003). Managing Human Resources Through Strategic 
Partnerships. Mason, OH: South-Western.
Jackson, Susan E. (1991). “T eam composition in organizational settings: Issues 
in managing an increasingly diverse workforce.” In S. Worchel, W . Wood and J. 
Simpson (Eds.), Group process and productivity  (pp.138- 173). Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage Publishing Co.
Jehn, K., Northcraft, G., & Neale, M. (1999). “Why Differences Make a Dif -
ference: A field Study of Diversity, Conflict, and performance in Workgroups,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly , V ol. 44, p. 741.
Jehn, K. A, Chadwick, C, & Thatcher, S. M. B. (1997). “To Agree or Not to 
Agree: The Effects of V alue Congruence, Individual Demographic Dissimilarity, 
and Conflict on Workgroup Outcomes.” The International Journal of Conflict 
Management. V ol. 8, No. 4, pp. 287-304.
Johnson, G. (1995). “Empowering managers to create trust and high performance or-
ganizations.” The Public Manager: The New Bureaucrat. V ol. 24, No. 3, pp. 58-59.
Juechter, M. W ., Fisher, C., & Alford, R. (1998). “Five Conditions for High Per -
formance Cultures.” T raining and Development. V ol 52, No. 5, pp. 63-68.
Juran, J. M., & Gryna, F.M. (Eds) (1988). Quality Control Handbook. New Y ork: 
McGraw- Hill.
<<<PAGE=69>>>
59
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
Kingsley, J. D. (1944) Representative Bureaucracy.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (1995). The Leadership Challennge: How to Keep 
Getting Extraordinary Things Done in Organizations . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kranz, Harry. (1976). The Participatory Bureaucracy: Women and Minorities in a 
More Representative Public Service . Lexington, Mass.: Heath.
Krislov, Samuel (1974). Representative Bureaucracy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren -
tice-Hall.
Lawler, E., E. III. (2000). “Pay strategy: New thinking for the new millennium.” 
Compensation and Benefits Review. Jan-Feb V ol. 32 i1 pp. 7-13.
Lawler, E. E., Mohrman, S.A., & Ledford, G.E. (1995). Creating High Performance 
Organizations San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Lawler, E. E. (1977). “Reward Systems,”in Improving Life at Work, ed J.R.Hackman 
and J.L. Suttle. Santa Monica: CA: Goodyear Publishing.
Locke, E. & Latham, G. (1990). A Theory of Goal Setting and T ask Performance . 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McCain, D. V . (1999). “ Aligning T raining With Business Objectives,” HR Focus
McCune, J. C. (2000). “T raining Drain,” Management Review, January, p. 7.
Meier, Kenneth J., and Nigro, Lloyd G. 1976 “Representative Bureaucracy and 
Policy Preferences: A Study in the Attitudes of Federal Executives.” Public Ad-
ministration Review V ol. 36, No. 4, pp. 458-69.
Nanus, B. (1992) Visionary Leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
O’Reilly, C. A. III, Caldwell, D. F., & Barnett, W . P . (1989). “Work Group De -
mography, Social Integration, and T urnover.” Administrative Science Quarterly . 
V ol. 34, No. 1, pp. 21-38.
Podsakoff, P . M., MacKenzie, S. B. & Ahearne, M. (1997). “Moderating effects of 
goal acceptance on the relationship between group cohesiveness and productivity.” 
Journal of Applied Psychology . V ol. 82, No. 6, pp974-84.
Popovich, M.G., (1998). Creating High-Performance Grovernment Organizations  
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Price, M.J., & Chen. E.E., (1995). “Total Quality Management in a small, high-
technology company.” In: Cole, R.E. (ed). The Death and Life of the American 
Quality Movement. New Y ork: Oxford Univrsity Press: pp. 115-137.
Quigley, J. V . (1994) Vision: How Leaders Develop It, Share It, and Sustain It. New 
Y ork, NY : McGraw-Hill.
Riccucci, N. M., &. Saidel, J. R. (1997). “The Representativeness of State-level 
Bureaucratic Leaders: A Missing piece of the Representative Bureaucracy Puzzle.” 
Public Administration Review. V ol. 57 No. 5 pp. 423-431.
Robbins, S. P . (2001). Organizational Behavior. Prentice-Hall Publishers.
<<<PAGE=70>>>
60 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Robbins, S. P . (1984). Essentials of Organizational Behavior . Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Schuler, R. S., & Huber, V . L. (1993). Personnel and Human Resource Management. 
St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company.
Senge, P . (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Orga -
nization. New Y ork: Bantam Publishing.
Shafritz, J.M., & Russell, E.W . (2003). Introducing Public Administration . New 
Y ork: Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.
Steers, R. M., & Black, J., Steward (1994). Organizational Behavior. 5th. Ed. New 
Y ork: HarperCollins CollegePublishers.
Steers, R. M. (1984). Introduction to Organizational Behavior. Glenview, IL: Scotts 
Foresman.
T sui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly III, C. A. (1992). “Being different: Relational 
demography and organizational attachment.” Administrative Science Quarterly, V ol. 
37, No. 4, pp. 549 – 580.
V an W art, M. (1994, November-December). “The Wisdom of T eams: Creating the 
high performance organization” (book review). Public Administration Review, V ol. 
54, No. 6, pp. 577-579.
Vroom, V . (1964). Work and Motivation. New Y ork, NY : Wiley
W atson, W . E., Kumar, K., & Michaelsen, L. K. (1993). “Cultural Diversity’s Impact 
on Interaction Process and Performance: Comparing Homogeneous and Diverse 
Task Groups.” Academy of Management Journal . V ol. 36. No. 3. pp. 590-603.
White, R. (1998). “The High Performing Organization that Lexington Built,” 
Public Management, V ol. 80, No. 6, pp. 16-24.
Wooldridge, B (2003a). “ Attributes of High Performance Organizations: Lessons 
Learned from Research and Experience.” Unpublished manuscript. School of 
Government and Public Affairs, Virginia Commonwealth University. Available 
from bwooldridge@vcu.edu.
Wooldridge, B. (2003b). “Management development in a turbulent environment: 
new roles and responsibilities for schools and Institutes of Administration,” in 
State Modernization and Decentralization Implications for Public Administration 
Education and T raining: Selected Central European and Global Perspective (Ed. by 
Allan Rosenbaum and Ludmila Gajdosova) published by the International Associa-
tion of Schools and Institutes of Administration, the Network of Institutes and 
Schools of Public Administration in Central and Eastern Europe, and the United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
Wooldridge, B., Amagoh, F., & Menefee, M. (2002). “Using Theory to Inform 
Practice: Predicting the Success of Privatization Efforts Through an Understanding 
of Public Choice Theory.” Public Administration (Lithuania), V ol. 1.
<<<PAGE=71>>>
61
High Performing Schools and Institutes of Administration: The Role …
Wooldridge, B. (2001). “’Foreigner Talk’: An Important Element in Cross-Cultural 
Management Education and T raining.” International Review of Administrative Sci-
ences. V ol. 67, No. 4, pp.621-634.
Wooldridge, B. (2000). “Student Oriented Behavioral Learning Objectives: A Key 
to Improving Public Administration Instruction. SPAEForum, V ol. 11, No. 2, Fall. 
Pp. 2 & 6-11.
Wooldridge, B. (1996). “Workforce Diversity, Identity Groups and Management
Theory .” Diversity and Public Organizations: Theory, Issues, and Perspectives. Mitchell 
F. Rice, ed. Kendell Hunt Publishing Company.
Wooldridge, B. (1995). “Selecting Appropriate Instructional Strategies for T each-
ing the Public Administration Curriculum.” SPAEForum, V ol.5, No.1. October, 
pp. 2-6.
Wooldridge, B., (1994). “Changing Demographics of the Workforce: Implications 
for the Use of T echnology as a Productivity Improvement Strategy,” Public Pro-
ductivity and Management Review . V ol. XVII, No. 4., pp. 371-386.
Wooldridge, B., & Maddox, B. (1994). “Demographic Changes and Diversity in 
Personnel: Implications for Public Administrators”. (Rabin, J., et  al, Eds) Hand-
book of Public Personnel Administration & Labor Relations, 2nd edition. New Y ork: 
Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Zairi, M. (2002). Beyond TQM implementation: The new paradigm of TQM sus -
tainability. T otal Quality Management. V ol. 13, No. 8, pp. 1161-1173.
<<<PAGE=72>>>
62 
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration Training 
Plan through Knowledge Management
Shih-Hsien Chang *
Introduction
In the time-to-market quest, the competitive advantage has shifted from the prod-
uct cycle to the knowledge cycle for most organizations (Krell, 2001:41). Now 
it is the time to use knowledge management for enhancing the quality of public 
administration training plans. T raining is very important to public organizations 
for increasing the capabilities of human capital.
Knowledge management involves making a direct connection between an 
organization’s intellectual assets—both explicit (recorded) and tacit (personal 
know-how)—and its positive results. Its basic processes are to increase, to capture, 
to refine, to share and to apply knowledge.
The basic processes of knowledge management are to increase, to capture, to 
refine, to share and to apply knowledge. T o increase knowledge includes to discover, 
to research, to read and to study knowledge. To capture knowledge includes to 
write and to record knowledge. To refine knowledge includes to verify, to correct, 
to update, to augment, to clarify and to generalize knowledge. To share knowledge 
includes to present, to publish, to distribute and to discuss knowledge. To apply 
knowledge includes to plan, to decide, to design, to build and to solve problems 
(Horton, 2002).
Applying processes means how we can affect the basic process of knowledge 
management. In increasing knowledge, it adds to the knowledge of individuals. 
In capturing knowledge, it makes human knowledge easier to share. In refining 
knowledge, it improves the quality and usability of knowledge. In sharing knowl -
edge, it multiplies individual knowledge. In apply knowledge, it translates existing 
knowledge into wise decisions (Horton, 2002).
The training plan is the launch pad for the design and implementation of train -
ing programs. A training plan is a practical document which takes into account 
identified training needs and outlines training programs to meet those needs 
(Stout, 1993:41). This, in fact, represents the first key steps of the training func -
tion – identifying training needs, and formulating (ie planning and developing) 
required training.
In preparing to write training plan, it is important to outline key stages. The 
key stages of the training plan are (Stout, 1993:42):
(1) Identification of training needs.
(2) Description of the required training programs.
* Professor, Department of Administrative Management, Chinese Culture University, Taiwan
<<<PAGE=73>>>
63
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
(3) Determining the appropriate training methods to be used.
(4) Selection and training of trainers.
(5) Detailed costs and benefits of training.
If this is done, one can use knowledge management to enhance the quality 
of public administration training plans. In figure 1, the inner circle presents the 
basic processes of knowledge management, each process is used in the stages of 
training plan.
Figure 1
Knowledge Management in the T raining Plan
apply
knowledge
increase
knowledge
share
knowledge
refine
knowledge
capture
knowledge
Detailed
costs and
benefits of
training
Identification of
training needs
1
2
3
4
5
description
of traini ng
program
appropriate
training
methods
selection
and training
of trainers
I. Identification of training needs
In recent years, knowledge management (KM) has commanded much lofty thought 
and impressive posturing as an idealized prospect. Systems have been designed, 
databases created and intricate strategies concocted under the brave banner of KM. 
More often than not, however, such efforts have failed when deployed in the real 
world. Knowledge and information aren’t static commodities to be packaged and 
managed. They’re living forces that connect to the way people think, learn and 
communicate—which means organizations have to design knowledge management 
efforts not around technology, but around the way human beings actually filter, 
shape, use and add to what they already know (Brown, 2000). Then, knowledge 
management can be used for the identification of training needs, as well as for 
other stages in the processes of training plan.
<<<PAGE=74>>>
64 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
It is important to identify all the training needs within an organization as they 
will vary according to employee, job position, job responsibilities and department. 
A thorough analysis of training needs is a prerequisite for the design of any train -
ing plan, and ensures that each individual employee is sent on the appropriate 
training courses.
A training need is usually defined as a gap – the gap between the requirements 
of a particular job and the capabilities of the employee currently holding the job. 
(Mayer, 1985:127), as figure 2 shows.
Figure 2
T raining Need
 
Training need
gap
Current Capabilities of the employee
Requirements
of the
particular
job
There are two basic types of training needs: 1.Organizational, and, 2.Indi -
vidual.
1. Organizational training needs
A careful analysis throughout the organization is essential to assess the sum total 
of training needs. This is to ensure that training will improve performance of the 
organization as a whole and ensure organizational objectives are met. The gap 
between achieved results and targeted goals is the training gap.
Determining training needs for the organization involves four basic steps. This 
process is illustrated in Figure 3.
(1) To analyze whether organizational targets have been met.
(2) To determine what knowledge, skills and attitudes are contained within the 
organization.
(3) To analyze the actual performance of employees.
(4) To analyze organizational performance.
<<<PAGE=75>>>
65
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
2. Individual training needs
T raining needs analysis for individuals often begins with an assessment of the job 
description. T raining on an individual basis concerns three key areas:
(1) knowledge
(2) skills
(3) attitude
Figure 3
Organizational T raining Needs
Analyze
Organization target
Determine
employee’s knowledge
skills & attitudes
Analyze
employee’s performance
Analyze
organization performance
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Figure 4 shows the inter-relationship of knowledge, skills and attitudes and 
their effect on individual performance.
The planner should use knowledge management to check the following items 
to identify training needs for the organization and the individual. It is divided into 
general questions about training within the organization, and specific question 
about individual performance (Stout, 1993:48).
1. General
(1) What staff training records are available?
(2) Have staff training records been assessed?
(3) Who maintains employee training records?
(4) Are training records regularly updated?
(5) When was a skills inventory last done for each area or department? (i.e clerical, 
technical, skilled labor, unskilled labor, staff managers, line managers, senior 
managers, etc)
<<<PAGE=76>>>
66 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
(6) When should a skills inventory be implemented?
(7) How can one best balance organizational needs against current employee skill 
assets?
2. Individual
(1) What tasks, knowledge, skills and attitudes must be performed to do each 
job?
(2) What knowledge is required (eg. company or product knowledge)?
(3) Which skills are lacking (eg. operator, technical, computer, sales, supervisory, 
management, coaching, training skills)?
(4) What shortcoming are there in attitude (eg. angers quickly, too timid, too 
aggressive, speaks before thinking)?
Figure 4
Knowledge, Skills and Attitude 
(Stout, 1993:47)
Individual
Performance
A
S
K
A
AA
S
SS
K
KK
II. Description of the Required Training Programs
The second step in preparing the training plan is the application of knowledge 
management in the selection and design of training programs, which demands much 
preparation and planning. However, for any training program it is important to 
take account of the motivation or drive of the trainees. T ypical motivating factors 
might be (Stout, 1993:48-49):
(1) Desire for expertise or success
(2) Feelings of intimidation or inadequacy
(3) Fear of failure or rejection
(4) The need for approval, recognition, or endorsement
(5) Desire for material gain
<<<PAGE=77>>>
67
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
(6) Sheer curiosity or interest in a new challenge
(7) Standards of training rooms and facilities
(8) Quality of trainers and training programs
The planner should use knowledge management to check the following items, in four 
stages, in the planning and preparation of the training programs (Stout, 1993:49-50):
1. Stage One
(1) Draw up a summary of training needs – to establish the main areas and priori -
ties for training.
(2) Do planners have job specifications for each job position?
(3) Which individuals and which groups need training?
(4) Have planners involved line managers and staff managers at all stages of plan -
ning?
(5) How will participants be consulted and briefed about the training?
2. Stage T wo
(1) What training programs already exist?
(2) Which new training programs need to be designed?
(3) What are the aims, objectives, and program content?
(4) Which training methods are to be employed?
(5) What are the planners’ resources (amount available to spend)?
(6) What specialized training is required? (eg supervisory, assertiveness, manage -
ment, etc)
3. Stage Three
(1) Who are the trainers who will deliver the training?
(2) What will determine the content of the training programs?
(3) Who will be responsible for the design of new courses?
(4) Where will the training take place?
(5) Who is responsible for monitoring the results of training?
(6) How will the training be evaluated and assessed?
4. Stage Four
(1) Who will co-ordinate the administration for the training courses?
(2) Who is responsible for the schedule of dates and timing for the training pro -
grams?
(3) Which programs will be held on-site and off-site?
(4) What training equipment is available?
(5) What additional training equipment needs to be purchased or hired?
(6) Who is responsible for the training budget?
We can discuss using knowledge management for training programs. Accord -
ing to Dale Zwart, founder of Generation 21, “Knowledge management is the 
structured and intentional collection and distribution of information to support
<<<PAGE=78>>>
68 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
learning.”(Lamont, 1989). From its inception, Generation 21 has used a “Total 
Knowledge Management” (TKM) system to integrate training and knowledge man-
agement. TKM is based on a process of breaking down knowledge into chunks of 
information called dynamic learning objects. The learning objects are then stored 
in a relational database and are searchable when employees need an answer. Some 
clients are already using wireless capability to access reference materials and com -
mon troubleshooting information from the field (Lamont, 1989)
As to curriculum development, knowledge management plays an important 
role in training curriculum designs (Lamont, 1989). Curriculum developers work 
with subject matter experts to identify training requirements, design learning ob -
jectives, and develop courses. For example, using Generation 21’s TKM product, 
the curriculum developers are able to enter the content directly into the system; 
the process is template driven, and development does not require programmers. 
Video clips and graphics can be pulled in easily.
“It is a natural evolution in the training field to recognize the value of infor -
mation that is in the enterprise, storing it and making it available to everyone,” 
says Cox, manager of training at Cape Canaveral.. An initial phase of performance 
support has been completed which links documents that relate to safety with the 
training curriculum. That step ensures that the individual not only understands 
procedures but can also access related policies. “We are starting to identify all the 
pieces that support the work once our students are on the job,” says Cox. “Then 
we expand our performance support resources to include technical information,” 
he adds, “Our workers will have access to a comprehensive repository of materials 
to assist them in performing skilled tasks.”(Lamont, 1998)
The organization is now working on training for the next generation of Cape 
Canaveral launch vehicles, the Atlas V , to create a program that manages all of its 
resources electronically. The system will be able to verify training and certification 
of employees, track relevant documents and manuals, and monitor workload to be 
sure human resources are available for the required tasks. It will be the next step 
in the move toward integrating training with knowledge management.
In fact, automation is not required for either training or knowledge manage -
ment. However, if an enterprise has automated its processes, e-learning can be 
integrated in ways that support organizational objectives. And if training content 
and enterprise knowledge both flow from the same source, the organization can 
achieve a level of responsiveness and consistency that will give it a strong edge 
over its less well managed competitors (Lamont, 1998).
III. The Appropriate Training Methods
A training plan describes the training methods to be used in delivering training within 
the organization. The number of training methods available are many and varied, and 
certain methods may be better suited to training programs. The most appropriate 
form of training depends on the following variables (Stout, 1993:50-52):
<<<PAGE=79>>>
69
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
(1) The training objectives
(2) The skills, experience and expertise of trainers
(3) Available training facilities and materials
(4) The learning abilities of trainees
T rainers should work with the training methods which are best suited to them 
individually. An alternative is to use team-teaching, or to recruit an external train -
ing consultant if a trainer is particularly uncomfortable with a particular teaching 
method (eg role-playing).
However, a variety of methods will ensure successful and interesting training pro-
grams, and is more likely to satisfy the needs of the organization and the individual. 
A fairly comprehensive list of what is available to trainers is the following:
(1) a lecture
(2) a demonstration
(3) a participative lesson
(4) individual coaching
(5) a tutor-led group discussion
(6) role-playing
(7) critical incident
(8) training games
(9) distance learning
(10) computer-based training (CBT)
(11) interactive video
(12) self-teach training manual
(13) case study
(14) on-job instruction
(15) packaged programs
(16) programmed instruction
(17) an assignment, task or project
Among the above methods, the preferred might be computer-based training 
with knowledge management – although the debate over whether computer-based 
training is more effective than classroom training has subsided, with an apparent 
consensus that each approach has its place. So-called “lended learning” uses a 
combination of instructional techniques, depending on the situation. The Socrates 
Learning Performance System from LearningFramework (learningframework.
com) can be used to augment classroom training by providing a channel for new 
information and enabling a dialog among members of the learning community. 
The philosophy advocated by LearningFramework is that content provides the 
foundation for learning, but that optimal learning occurs only in the application of 
knowledge. The emphasis on dialog stems from the belief that it is an important 
catalyst for application (Lamont, 2002).
In June 2001, Socrates was selected by the Energetic Materials Research and 
T esting Center (EMRTC) at the New Mexico Institute for Mining and T echnology
<<<PAGE=80>>>
70 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
(USA) to deliver information to first responders such as law enforcement officers 
and firefighters. The training, sponsored by the US Department of Justice, consists 
of one week of classroom instruction, with subsequent follow-on information and 
discussions with colleagues. Over time, the dialogs become part of an up-to-date 
knowledgebase that is organized by subject area and builds on the shared insights 
of participants. Although classroom training is part of the program, Socrates 
can also deliver e-learning content and an associated online learning community 
(Lamont, 2002).
A learning management system can leverage existing content and business 
processes to streamline training administration and also ensure achievement of 
training goals such as compliance with regulatory demands. Alza, a U.S. based 
drug delivery technology company, has stringent FDA certification requirements 
for training staff on equipment and procedures. The company implemented the 
Plateau LMS from Plateau Systems more than five years ago to track qualification 
training (Lamont, 2002).
“The system houses all our training information, including course records and 
each employee’s current status with respect to training requirements,” says Cathy 
Harnett, a learning and development associate at Alza. Integrated with PeopleSoft, 
the system is populated with human resources (HR) data such as employee name, 
title and job code. The job code and training qualifications indicate the training 
required at any given time.
“Since the Plateau LMS is also integrated with documentum,” Harnett adds, “the 
system knows when a control document changes and whether the associated qualifi-
cations have also changed.” If new training is required or new forms must be filled 
out, the Plateau LMS alerts the employee and tracks completion of the task (Lamont, 
1998). In short, e-training methods are very appropriate in a training plan.
IV . Selection and Training of Trainers
T raining plans describe the tactics and methods to be used by trainers, but the 
selection of methods depends on trainer ability and expertise.
A training plan should describe each trainer’s ability to select, design and de -
liver training programs to meet organizational needs. This will be affected by the 
following key factors (Stout, 1993:61-63):
(1) The type of training methods to be used
(2) Current expertise and skills of trainers
(3) T rainers’ training needs
(4) The constraints of the training facilities
(5) The investment of time and money in trainers
T rainers are required to be competent and proficient in a number of differ -
ent areas. An analysis of trainer competencies will define what knowledge, skills 
and attitudes are required by trainers, and what are their training needs (Stout, 
1993:61-63):
<<<PAGE=81>>>
71
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
1. Knowledge competence
The trainer’s role demands competence in many areas of learning. For example, 
product knowledge, technical proficiency and computer know-how will all depend 
on the demands of the organization.
The following topics are suggested areas of competence for trainer knowl -
edge.
(1) Motivations for learning
(2) How learning can be effective
(3) Barriers to learning
(4) T raining methods
(5) Product and technical expertise
(6) Use of training aids
(7) Design of training courses
(8) Methods to evaluate and validate training
2. Skills competence
The following list suggests general skills competence levels.
(1) Analysis of jobs and tasks
(2) Evaluation of training needs
(3) Preparation and design of courses
(4) Design and use of visual aids
(5) Presenter and manager of training programs
(6) Facilitator of learning
(7) Production of course handouts
3. Attitude competence
Part of a trainer’s role is to observe and evaluate the behavior of trainees. T rainees 
can be as strongly influenced by the attitudes of the trainer as by their work envi -
ronment and corporate culture. However, the trainer’s perception of the training 
role can be biased due to the organization’s support (or lack of support) for the 
training function, and the trainer’s attitude to the following:
Organizational features
(1) The culture of the organization
(2) The style of management
(3) Leadership effectiveness
(4) Attitudes of management and colleagues to training
(5) Support given to training
Personal attitudes
(1) Personal aims and goals
(2) Individual motivation factors
(3) Personal commitment to the job and to the organization
<<<PAGE=82>>>
72 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
(4) Ability to change and adapt to situations and people
(5) Background and experience
(6) Individual trainer personality
What is most important is to constantly evaluate the effectiveness of the training 
team, and analyse feedback gained from both trainers and trainees in post-train -
ing debriefings. T rainers and training team can be evaluated through the use of 
knowledge management.
V . Detailed Costs and Benefits of Training
Any training plan should include a final section on (Stout, 1993:53-54):
(1) The financial costs of your training programs
(2) The available finances and structure of the training budget
(3) The benefits of training to the organization and its employees
1. Costs
Armstrong (1988) noted that the basic costs for training are: remuneration and 
expenses of trainers and trainees; preparation and maintenance of training pro -
grams; training materials, equipment and premises; lower performance of trainees 
until fully trained.
These costs can be broken down into seven specific cost areas to be considered 
in the training plan:
(1) Salaries, wages and expenses of trainers
(2) T rainee expenses (eg. travel costs, meals and accommodation)
(3) Costs to prepare training programs
(4) Support and upkeep of training programs
(5) Cost of training materials, equipment and premises
(6) T raining of trainers to improve their knowledge, skill and job performance
(7) Financial losses to the company due to continuing inadequate employee per -
formance.
If it is necessary to save money, e-training or online training is cheaper than 
traditional training or classroom training. For example, in salesperson training, 
Jacksonville, Fla. (U.S.A.) based PSS/World Medical is renowned for its sales 
training, especially in its PSS medical supplies business unit, which employs 700 
of the company’s roughly 1,000 salespeople. Until early last year, almost all of 
the company’s training was instructor-led or done on the job, but a review of 
how and where training dollars were spent prompted the addition of an online 
learning component. “We found that about 80 percent was being spent during the 
saleperson’s first year within the company,” says Susan Parker, Director of Career 
Development, Center for Career Development, PSS/World Medical. “Since a 25 
percent turnover is normal with straight-commission salespeople, we started ques-
tioning how we could get more value for our training dollars by spreading them 
out over the salesperson’s career.” (Ellis, 2002:34)
<<<PAGE=83>>>
73
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
The result was CCD Online, a Web site that incorporates training resources 
with other employee-related information. Parker remains selective in determining 
which curricula are suitable for online delivery. A course on blood-borne patho -
gens, for example, is well suited to e-learning. Every PSS rep is required to take 
the course to learn safety procedures to follow when calling on physician offices 
and labs. Employee orientation also is now online. In the past, the company flew 
new hires into Jacksonville every month or two for four days of training. Now, 
new salespeople receive the same information during their first day on the job by 
spending a few hours online. “That was a big decision for us given our culture. But 
by putting it online we’re able to use those training dollars later in the salesperson’s 
career,” Parker says, adding that more leadership training for seasoned salespeople 
is one way the company is spreading out those dollars (Ellis, 2002:35).
2. Benefits
The benefits of training can be plotted in terms of benefits for employees and 
benefits for the organization (Stout, 1993:54).
Individual benefits:
(1) More job satisfaction
(2) Improved job performance
(3) Better career prospects
(4) Greater salary expectations
Organization benefits:
(1) Improves work performance
(2) Increases safety at work
(3) Reinforces staff motivation
(4) More consistent customer satisfaction
Conclusion
In this paper, the training plan has been identified as a practical document which 
details the tactics used to design and implement training with the use of knowledge 
management. The training plan outlines what training programs and methods can 
be used to meet organizational and individual training needs, as it combines with 
knowledge management. But it is not so easy.
KM doesn’t convey that organization’s need to do more than just manage knowledge. 
There is a need to create environments that are conducive to knowledge management. 
Such an environment includes: (1) knowledge ecology , (2) knowledge sharing, (3) 
building a knowledge system or culture, and (4) a learning culture (Sindell, 2001:21). 
Knowledge ecology means studying the flows of knowledge and information within an 
organization, including examining the knowledge ecology , problems in “knowledgedland”, 
reengineering knowledge flow , and merging parallel flows (Horton, 2002).
The analysis of knowledge ecology includes (1) identifying people whose ac -
tions matter, (2) analyzing what roles they play, (3)analyzing what prompts and
<<<PAGE=84>>>
74 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
informs their actions, (4) analyzing how knowledge is transmitted, (5) analyzing 
who initiates the transfer, (6) analyzing how all this should really happen (Hor -
ton, 2002). If a training planner builds an appropriate knowledge ecology, then a 
good knowledge system or culture will be established and there will be a culture 
of knowledge sharing in the organization.
1. Build appropriate knowledge ecology
What follows are some suggestions to help the training planner implement knowl-
edge management seamlessly into training plan (Sindell, 2001:21):
(1) Identify goals and barriers: Identify the overall goals of the KM initiative and the 
smaller goals that build up to larger objectives. Also, identify potential change 
obstacles, which may include lack of leadership support, not communicating 
a compelling need for KM and elements within the organization’s culture.
(2) Consider KM as a competency: Individuals and organizations need to identify the 
technical and sociological aspects of KM. They can do this by first identifying 
what tools and processes are already in place and then defining the gaps that 
need to be addressed. Part of developing KM as a competency is defining the 
appropriate language or terminology to use to inspire collaboration.
(3) Create an environment that encourages knowledge sharing:  Do this with formal 
processes, such as creating a compensation structure that measures and rewards 
how much employees share and collaborate. Encourage knowledge sharing 
through informal processes by developing communities of practice in which 
the members share what they know about a specific discipline.
(4) Use existing communication structures:  Don’t reinvent the wheel. Use what’s 
already in place (email, intranet, and other online collaboration technology) to 
reinforce the KM component and the practice of cross-functional work teams. 
KM becomes a part of team meetings when you request individual project 
updates and require input from team members. Once a month, initiate casual 
learning forums and cover a different topic each month.
2. Encourage efficient knowledge management performance
Organizations that complement their training plans with equally efficient knowledge 
management in training commonly employ four key strategies: early involvement, 
a conducive organizational structure, innovative knowledge delivery and breadth 
of content (Krell, 2001:42).
(1) Early Involvement:
 The earlier one uses knowledge management for the train -
ing plan, the better.
(2) A Conducive Organizational Structure:  T raining teams and service develop -
ment teams should keep close to each other. Organizational structure plays 
an important role in the alignment of knowledge delivery with service delivery. 
T raining programs must work very closely with the service delivery teams 
because both groups are part of the same organization.
<<<PAGE=85>>>
75
Enhancing the Quality of a Public Administration T raining Plan through …
(3) Innovative Knowledge Delivery:  Organizations that successfully align service 
and knowledge cycles use a variety of delivery mechanisms—classroom train -
ing, online learning, knowledge management portals, computer-based training 
and even webcasts—to inform and educate the workforce. (Krell, 2001:43).
(4) Breadth of Content:  Regardless of planners’ favor, the present enthusiasm for 
knowledge management is rooted in computer networks. This, obviously, is 
because of the new opportunities they offer not just for storing and codifying 
information but for allowing people to communicate more easily regardless 
of where they work.
Because KM efforts depend so heavily on computer systems, they often are 
controlled, or influenced to a great degree, by computer experts, the people in 
the organization’s information-technology (IT) department (Gordon, 1999). But 
while knowledge management operates via computer systems, it isn’t about com -
puters-and it can not be if it is to be effective. It has to be about learning. More 
than that, it has to be about learning that is directly useful for the training plan, 
learning that enables better performance. At its heart, KM isn’t about technology, 
it’s about culture. And unless people with some insight into human behavior get 
involved, it isn’t going to work (Gordon, 1999).
References
Armstrong, M. (1998) A Handbook of Personnel Management Practice. 3rd ed. 
London: Kogan Page.
Brown, John Seely (2002) “The Human Side of Knowledge Management.” On -
line learning 2002 Conference and Expo (September 24, 8:00-9:00), http://www.
vnulearning.com.
Ellis, Kristine (2002) “Deal Maker or Breaker?” T raining (September), pp.34-37.
Gordon, Jack (1999) “The Whole Enchilada: Intellectual Capital and Y ou,” T rain-
ing (September).
Horton, Katherine (2002) “Using E-Learning for Knowledge Management” (M310) 
ASTD 2002 International Conference (June 3, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA).
Krell, Eric (2001) “The Knowledge Race,” T raining (July), pp.40-43.
Lamont, Judith (2001) “KM and e-learning: a growing partnership,” KMWorld 
(July), 10(7), http://www.kmworld.com.
Lamont, Judith (2002) “e-Learning and the enterprise,” KMWorld (February), 
11(2), http://www.kmworld.com.
Mayer, Robert R. (1985) Policy and Program Planning: A Development Perspec -
tive. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Sindel, Milo (2001) “KM Conversation,” T raining & Development (November), 
pp. 20-22.
Stout, Sunng (1993) Managing T raining. London: Kogan Page.
<<<PAGE=86>>>
76 
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: The Role of 
Professional Associations
Michael Brintnall *
Introduction
Senior government officials are pivotal in almost all aspects of reforming the state. 
Good ideas in the public service are unlikely to emerge unless shaped by contribu -
tions from senior officials, are unlikely to be sustained without their management 
direction, and are unlikely to advance without their leadership. Senior officials 
must master a complex technical understanding of the challenges society faces, 
be agents of change and be managers of its consequences.
The technical challenges for public administration are greater than ever. 
Globalization, rapid technological change, ever-expanding calls for democratic 
participation and a litany of many other developments all capture attention. The 
temptation in response is to focus primarily on the technical dimensions of the 
problems we face and on the new legal and management tools that are emerging 
in response: public-private enterprises, performance management models, cross-
sector partnerships and on and on. T raining and guidance for senior officials on 
these questions is important.
But the situation of senior officials has added dimensions too. Senior leaders 
in the public sector operate in a complex and multi-tiered environment balancing 
political, managerial, technical, and leadership roles. Effective strategies for public 
sector reform in turn then need to include ways to prepare and support senior 
officials in this complex and transformative role.
One important resource that can help is the independent professional associa -
tion for public administration and management. The role that such associations 
can play in supporting the work of senior government officials in public sector 
reform is often overlooked and underappreciated.
A variety of institutions do exist that help prepare and support senior officials in 
public administration. National schools such as Ecole Nacionale d’Administration 
(ENA) in France, or degree programs such as those accredited by the National 
Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA), offer 
preparatory training relevant to these conditions. T raining institutes offer mid 
and advanced career assistance in policy, ethics, and management. Think tanks 
can offer detailed policy information and intensive analyses, often in a politically 
neutral way.
But these entities, taken alone, have limitations as a resource for supporting 
professional development of senior public officials. Some are entry oriented – they 
are not a resource for mid or advanced career development or for on-going support 
* Executive Director, American Political Science Association, W ashington D.C., USA
<<<PAGE=87>>>
77
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: the Role of Professional Associations
for officials. Others may support officials throughout the life of their career, such as 
the newly formed Canada School of Public Service or the Federal Executive Institute 
in the United States, but may have formal curricula or programming that doesn’t 
fit with the scheduling or status needs of senior officials. Few can cut through the 
problems of status, position, pressures and information mentioned above. Think 
tanks offer information but don’t provide the enhanced opportunities for individual 
development often identified as a significant need for senior officials.
Professional associations provide a complement to these other institutional 
resources. They provide an independent, open, and transparent environment in 
which individual leaders can interact with peers to share information, identify and 
test ideas and gather knowledge. These assets of professional associations are often 
taken for granted, and the development, cultivation, and support of such associa -
tions are not often included in agendas for public sector reform.
The following discussion examines some of the distinctive challenges that senior 
government officials face and describes what professional associations are and ways 
they are ideally suited to respond. It ends with recommendations for steps donor 
associations and other communities can play in strengthening such professional 
associations and the role they can play.
T raining and professional development for senior officials in the public service 
can occur at three levels – for the individual, within public sector institutions and 
the workplace, and within the larger professional environment. Much of the at -
tention to advancing senior leadership focuses on the first two levels – strategies 
to improve individual skills and to reform public institutions and the capacities of 
senior leaders to direct them. Obviously this is critically important, and by suggest-
ing a different strategy I mean to complement these efforts not supplant them.
The pressures and circumstances faced by senior leaders in the public service 
have characteristics very different from those addressed by conventional training and 
professional support initiatives. Senior officials face an additional set of issues that 
inhibit their opportunities for effective training and development, and compound 
problems of confronting successfully the challenges listed above at individual and 
workplace levels. Some of these issues are related to professional status itself, some 
to aspects of their position, some to peculiar pressures they face in their work, 
and some to specialized information needs that they confront.
Particular challenges for senior officials in the public service that raise special 
challenges for training and professional development include the following:
Status: Senior officials may risk losing face when undertaking conventional 
training. The appearance of a “need” for training can undermine perceived authority 
with staff. Status considerations, if not time and workload, may inhibit participa -
tion by senior officials in conventional training regimes.
Fraternization. Closely related to status concerns are those we might call the 
problem of fraternization. Senior leadership needs both to work closely with line 
staff in public agencies and also maintain the distance necessary for authority rela -
<<<PAGE=88>>>
78 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
tionships. This is hard to arrange within the workplace itself, where much training 
and professional development is directed. Y et if senior officials receive training 
and other support completely independently from regular staff, opportunities for 
shared understanding of roles and responsibilities, and for simple information 
exchange, can be lost.
Position: Similarly there are aspects of the professional position of senior 
leadership that constrain their options to improve skills or prepare for new chal -
lenges. Senior leaders cannot usually experiment with new ideas or express doubts 
or ignorance. Their views are unavoidably taken as policy, not as speculation. They 
tend to make policy by what they say or do, and so a common learning path of 
trial and error tends to be closed, as is any path that might convey ignorance or 
indecision (such as signing up for training.) Senior officials need different, somewhat 
more protected, ways to get up to speed on new and difficult topics.
Pressures: Senior officials also operate in a political web. Even within a strict 
civil service setting, senior officials have some accountability to political leadership 
and need political goodwill to be effective. They may indeed need to play a subtle 
and discreet role of helping to steer political change without tipping that hand. 
For these reasons, training and policy analysis delivered within the workplace or 
provided jointly with regular staff sometimes must be tempered to fit political 
realities, and thus rarely can be provocative or challenging enough to give senior 
officials new tools or perspectives.
Information: Senior officials have voracious information needs – but often are 
constrained by short-term pressures that preclude lengthy investments in themselves. 
Also, within the work setting, they may have very narrow sources of information, 
and they need access to a broad range of alternative perspectives rapidly and without 
the threat of appearing to undercut the so-called “party line”
Policy expertise and knowledge: Senior officials in the public service may not 
themselves be policy experts in one area or another. Indeed, many are trained in 
policy neutral fields such as management or law. But they are called upon to make 
complex and detailed decisions about highly technical subjects, and often to initia-
tive new directions in public policy where little is at hand to work with – whether 
transportation planning, water systems, nuclear power or children’s health. Often-
times their effectiveness will depend on having information that can be obtained 
independently of those who report to them or make demands of them, so they 
can play a role in changing direction of existing policy and systems. It is a chal -
lenge of public administration to provide resources for senior officials to learn, 
independently and reliably, outside their day-to-day working environment.
Independence and Accountability: Senior officials have a difficult balancing act 
between their allegiances to political leadership, their obligations to be responsive 
to citizens, and their frequent need for independent thinking as agents of change. 
Senior officials need guideposts, and occasionally allies to balance these cross-pres-
sures. Some resources come from training. Ethical standards, established in public 
settings of high legitimacy, can help too, as can peer review and support.
<<<PAGE=89>>>
79
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: the Role of Professional Associations
Management: Finally, senior public officials usually need to be effective manag-
ers as well, to steer, and often reshape, the complex organizations that they head. 
Policy creativity is of little value if it can’t be implemented to reach citizens. Senior 
officials need support in basic techniques of management, indeed often in being 
reminded that management is part of their responsibilities. They need tools for 
interpreting and assessing successful performance of the organizations they lead, 
and guidance on how to steer to more effective levels of operations.
We can’t expect individuals to resolve these multiple expectations alone, or to 
be able to obtain the professional development they need from conventional train-
ing and professional development strategies in the workplace. Nor can we always 
expect the public sector employer for whom these officials work to provide all of 
the necessary supports – indeed some of the help that senior officials need may be 
in developing perspectives that arise from outside the public agency itself. So, to 
make senior public officials effective, we need to envelope them, and the systems 
in which they work, in a network of supporting institutions that reinforce and 
strengthen these capacities.
The Professional Association.
Professional associations are important social and political institutions that can 
offer resources in response to the unique demands faced by senior officials. As -
sociations have a long historical role underlying the growth, autonomy, integrity, 
and effectiveness of many professional communities – medicine, law, academic 
scholarship, engineering, and so forth. Their role in support of public administra -
tion is underdeveloped, and warrants more attention.
In a sort of pure form, professional associations have some combination of 
the following characteristics: self-governing membership by the professional 
community; independence from formal public authority; grounding in specialized 
knowledge; a service responsibility; and a code or tradition of ethics. In the case of 
public administration, and in the more fluid and networked days of the twenty-first 
century, these characteristics may not appear in quite the same structured ways 
as they have historically, such as in the development of law, medicine, engineer -
ing and so forth. But the principles and practices are still highly significant. The 
core elements of professional associations relevant to senior public management 
are the following:
Self-governing and independent membership: a critical and defining feature of 
professional associations is that their operations are independent of formal public 
authority and are guided by members themselves. This combination is critically 
important to their effectiveness – professional associations provide an indepen -
dent source of authority for the actions of their members other than the state or 
the private market. This authority derives from the professional qualifications of 
the members themselves. This helps meet the status needs of senior officials, and 
provides resources to counteract political pressures and assure independence and 
accountability.
<<<PAGE=90>>>
80 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Specialized knowledge:  hand in hand with the concept of independence, 
professional associations tend to be knowledge driven. Classically this knowledge 
has rested in science (e.g. in the case of medicine) or law. But consistent with this 
concept is a knowledge base drawn from diverse sources of scholarship and from 
practice grounded in experience. Such a knowledge base both constrains and lends 
legitimacy to the independence of the association, lifting it out of, for example, 
partisan concerns.
The aptness of specialized knowledge for the purposes of the association and its 
members is measured by peer judgments of the members themselves. This provides 
both independence and accountability, and in the case of public administration also 
provides judgment grounded in real experience and fitness to purpose. Peer review 
within professional associations allows participants a means for making judgments 
about qualities of policies and management approaches that is independent of 
specific organizations or contexts (or ones superiors.) It allows for a framework 
in which new ideas can be tested credibly and with accountability – at least on 
policy merits, if not political ones. This feedback can be invaluable for senior 
public administrators who may not always have reliable sources of evaluation or 
criticism within their work setting
Service responsibility and ethics:  professional associations often play a pow -
erful role in society – for instance by organizing important professionals such as 
lawyers and doctors. One might wonder why the state would permit such inde -
pendent sources of influence in key areas of public life. One explanation is that 
an implicit bargain can be struck between associations and the state – the state 
will allow such organizations significant freedom to operate independently in the 
interest of their members, if the associations will regulate the behavior of such 
officials in the public interest and will commit to focusing its work in the public 
interest and in the name of public service.
In the public administration community worldwide, some examples of associa -
tions that reach or come close to these criteria are the following: the International 
Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration, the Network of Schools 
and Institutes of Public Administration of Central and Eastern Europe, International 
Institute of Administrative Sciences, the American Society for Public Administra -
tion and the incipient InterAmerican Network for Public Affairs Education.
How Can Professional Associations Help Senior Officials?
Some of the special circumstances that constrain opportunities for training and pro-
fessional development of senior officials, including the limitations on conventional 
individual and workplace training, were described above. Professional associations 
can surmount many of these obstacles, greatly enriching opportunities for senior 
officials to develop professionally and gain new knowledge and skills. Some of the 
ways this can happen are the following:
Mixed Perspectives and Mobility: a characteristic of professional associations 
is that members come from a common professional background, but not from
<<<PAGE=91>>>
81
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: the Role of Professional Associations
a common work place or location. In some associations there may also be dif -
ferent career strata represented – e.g. practitioners and scholars concerned with 
similar issues. This creates an environment in which senior officials can get new 
information and feedback from others who understand the specifics of the task 
and the political climate, but are not embedded within the workplace or institu -
tions themselves, without raising status or fraternization issues. This setting also 
provides officials with opportunities to learn about service in different levels of 
government and nonprofits or agencies, permitting career mobility and consequent 
sharing of approaches and insights.
Independent Accountability and Assessment:  Not enough can be said about 
the importance of an independent voice within professional associations. It is a 
place to regain a moral compass after working in the rough and tumble political 
and administrative workplace, by engaging with peers who can speak independently 
and authoritatively, but without threat to ones allegiances to political leadership.
Professional associations can help senior level administrators in a number of 
complex ways – as a resource for training, as an environment in which new ideas 
and perspectives about policy and administration can arise. They can lead to a 
change in the climate of thinking about these issues, as a means of counterbalanc -
ing pressures in work from political or bureaucratic sources, as a tool for setting 
of evaluation standards, and as a resource for long-term change.
T raining and Information: Participation in the programs of professional associa-
tions can be a significant training experience and source of new knowledge, without 
participants facing the status issues of submitting to training. Learning comes from 
peers and from the open discussion of papers and reports of practices by others, and 
perhaps most significantly by preparing papers and contributions oneself.
Climate Changing:  Associations, with their independent basis of authority, 
can be a factor in changing expectations about what is good public administra -
tion and policy practice. They can model ways to analyze and interpret policy or 
conduct evaluations – even ways to manage. Associations have the independence 
to propose new ways, and the legitimacy to make an influential statement on 
practices in the public services.
Response to Political and Bureaucratic Pressures:  Professional associations 
can help bolster senior public officials against attacks and criticism. They provide 
a collective voice that is often easier to raise against strong forces than an indi -
vidual one.
Factor for Long-T erm Change: Associations develop codes of ethics and other 
modes of long-term planning that can have lasting effects in shaping behaviors of 
public officials. They are often also in a position to monitor development of the 
community of public administrators and take steps to strengthen its development. 
Associations, for example, have often been forums to identify important groups 
that have been excluded or underrepresented in public service, such as women or 
ethnic minorities, and to take steps to rectify these imbalances.
<<<PAGE=92>>>
82 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Collective Action:  Finally, the professional association becomes a tool for 
collective action by public administrators across levels of government, agencies, 
and even nations. The American Society for Public Administration has used this 
capacity, for instance, to lobby government officials for increased funding for 
public affairs research.
Active involvement in professional associations by senior level administrators 
can lead to professional enrichment, outreach and lobbying, training, and better 
management. Professional associations can significantly improve individual skills 
and knowledge levels, improve management talent (and awareness that management 
matters), and enrich the whole public administration community by stimulating 
more sharing of program issues and structure. Associations can enrich the pool of 
policy ideas; set and model application of high ethical and performance standards, 
and highlight good management approaches – all by providing senior level admin -
istrators with a place where they can interact with others as peers.
Strengthening the Role of Associations
It remains then to ask how the role of professional associations can be strength -
ened across the globe in support of senior level public officials. There are three 
different areas in which attention is needed. The first is steps to be taken within 
professional associations to improve their operations and increase their capacities 
to make a difference for senior leaders. The second is recognition of some of the 
liabilities under which professional associations can operate and identification of 
steps to protect against them. And the third is actions that the donor community, 
and all other parties interested in improved public administration and reform of 
the state, can take to promote the role of professional associations.
Improved Operations.
Management. Professional associations are managed organizations just like the 
public sector, and their reach, breadth, and depth are significantly influenced by 
the quality of leadership they have – from both elected member leaders and from 
professional staff managers. The role of professional staff managers in particular 
needs to be acknowledged and supported more fully.
Programming. Professional societies can also suffer from the same stagnation 
that sometimes plagues the public service – a persistent focus on the status quo 
and defense against change. For professional associations to play the role called 
for here, they too must be triggered to innovate, to stimulate diverse ways of 
thinking, and to draw in numerous different perspectives. This will take resources 
and all the usual stimuli.
Ethical Principles.  While professional associations can be the defender and 
propagator of ethical standards – in fact may be the only institutions that can do 
this – this role too is not automatic and can become moribund. The value of this 
ethical role cannot be overstated and needs to be emphasized at every turn.
<<<PAGE=93>>>
83
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: the Role of Professional Associations
Allegiance. Perhaps the greatest challenge facing professional associations is 
expressing their legitimacy to senior officials who face so many pressing demands 
on their time. More fundamentally, increasingly senior officials are no longer 
engaged in public service as a career, but as a temporary position drawn from 
other sectors, such as business or law. This weakens the incentives for allegiance 
to public service oriented professional societies, since a long-term career benefit 
from involvement is less clear.
Liabilities. Professional associations can operate with liabilities as well as benefits. 
There are weaknesses and threats to the effectiveness of senior administrative of -
ficials as well. They can threaten party allegiances. They can be forces that defend 
an old orthodoxy – themselves refusing to innovate or to advance innovative ideas. 
They can become a “guild” with greater focus on protecting interests of officials 
themselves, rather than on advancing the quality of the work. And with even greater 
impact, they can become defenders of conventional values, not just practices. Some 
argue professional societies in Germany in the 1930’s and Hungary in the 1940’s 
joined with other institutions in advancing illiberal policy and providing support 
for political persecutions.
There are protections against these threats – steps to assure open and transpar-
ent association leadership, inclusion of a diverse array of members from different 
settings and sectors, and, of course, application of the good management principles 
identified earlier as a product of such associations.
Policies to support Professional Associations
Donor agencies, and others with influential voices, can consider steps related to 
creating an expectation that it is important to be involved in the work of professional 
associations; encourage the development and recognition of ethical standards and 
more general codes of good performance conduct; allow staff time to participate 
in professional society meetings and governance; and include association develop -
ment in their budgets for programs in a region.
Leadership from those senior officials who understand the importance of 
professional associations is also needed to show the way to participation. The 
best lure to active engagement in professional association is the example set by 
influential others.
Finally, all development and training projects should include a percentage set 
aside for the support of professional associations – allocated at the discretion of 
the donor, but provided independently and without strings attached for relevant 
associations. This will provide the seed money for independent, peer driven, and 
creative training and professional development for senior officials in public service 
for generations to come.
<<<PAGE=94>>>
84 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
References
Armstrong, M. (1988) A Handbook of Personnel Management Practice . 3rd ed. 
London: Kogan Page.
Barbazette, Jean (2002) The T rainer’s Support Handbook. New Y ork: McGraw-Hall.
Brown, John Seely (2002) “The Human Side of Knowledge Management.” On -
line learning 2002 Conference & Expo (September 24, 8:00-9:00), http://www.
vnulearning.com.
Core, John W . and Dana G. Robinson (2001) “The Power of E-Performance,” 
T raining & Development (August), pp.32-41.
Davis, John (1992) How to Write a T raining Manual. Brookfield, V ermont: Gower.
Delahoussaye, Martin (2002) “The Perfect Learning: An Expert Debate on Learn -
ing Styles,” T raining (May), pp.28-36.
Ellis, Kristine (2002) “Deal Maker or Breaker?” T raining (September), pp.34-37.
Gordon, Jack (1999) “The Whole Enchilada: Intellectual Capital and Y ou,” T rain-
ing (September).
Horton, Katherine (2002) “Using E-Learning for Knowledge Management” (M310) 
ASTD 2002 International Conference (June 3, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA).
Http://lib-www.lanl.gov/edata/edata.htm
Http://scisearch.lanl.gov/lanl/
Http://www.brint.com/km
Http://www.chinesesme.com/know/
Http://www.kmworld.com/index.htm
Http://www.knowledgeinc.com
Http://www.ktic.com/topic6/13_term0.htm
Http://www.ktic.com/topic6/km.htm
Http://www.sveiby.com.au/KnowledgeManagement.htm
Krell, Eric (2001) “The Knowledge Race,” T raining (July), pp.40-43.
Lamont, Judith (2001) “KM and e-learning: a growing partnership,” KMWorld 
(July), 10(7), http://www.kmworld.com.
Lamont, Judith (2002) “e-Learning and the enterprise,” KMWorld (February), 
11(2), http://www.kmworld.com.
Mayer, Robert R. (1985) Policy and Program Planning: A Developmental Perspec -
tive. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Powell, William (2001) “T rain Today, Sell Tomorrow,” T raining & Development 
(September), pp.40-50.
<<<PAGE=95>>>
85
Providing Support for Senior Public Officials: the Role of Professional Associations
Sindel, Milo (2001) “KM Conversation,” T raining & Development (November), 
pp.20-22.
Stout, Sunng (1993) Managing T raining. London: Kogan Page.
<<<PAGE=96>>>
86 
Public Administration Education and Training in South Africa: 
New Needs and the Implementation of New Approaches
Hendri Kroukamp *
Introduction
We are living in an age of transformation heading towards the knowledge society. 
T raditional productive factors seem to provide less and less added value, whereas 
knowledge is perceived to be the main production factor of the future. The increas-
ing importance of knowledge is supported from the economic point of view by 
the high growth rates of knowledge focused organizations, for example, consulting 
institutions, software houses and training and research institutions.
In South Africa, the ability of the public service to deliver and expand basic 
services will decide whether the country becomes a stable political economy driving 
development in Africa or remains a volatile country beset by massive inadequacies 
in service delivery. The political leadership and management skills of its political 
office-bearers and the professionalism of its corps of public servants will also be 
decisive. This, in turn, will depend on the quality and appropriateness of their 
education and training 1.
Unfortunately, the conventional pattern of adult education and training does 
not meet particular objectives such as promoting opportunities for skills develop -
ment in social upliftment initiatives and assisting new entrants into employment. 
The systems and practices of education and training in respect of the government 
should therefore appropriately address the increasing demand for high-level, up-
to-date knowledge and skills. In order to achieve this, new approaches need to 
be explored.
Environment of Contemporary Public Administration
One of the characteristics of public administration is that it is aimed at the future, 
that is actions to be taken in the future. According to W .A. Robson (1967) the 
point of departure for any attempt to foresee the future of public administration is 
the fact that public administration has been, is, and always will be closely bound up 
with the shape of society. The aims, intentions, preoccupations, values, problems, 
difficulties and knowledge of a community will largely determine the purposes and 
the methods of its system of public administration.
To a large extent, all countries, whatever their stage of development, pursue 
similar aims. They are all trying to become ‘modern’ or, if they can claim to be 
* Professor, Department of Public Management, University of the Free State, Republic of South 
Africa
1 For purposes of this paper, education and training are seen as two equally weighted components 
of a holistic capacity building process.
<<<PAGE=97>>>
87
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: New Needs …
modern, to remain in that supposedly happy condition. This involves the downgrad-
ing of values, habits and institutions and the upgrading of frequent and continu -
ous changes in technology, morals, standards, habits, fashion and style. Change 
is now regarded as a goal in itself, and is, according to Wessels (2000:311) inter 
alia being brought about by the growth of the world’s population; urbanization 
(affecting the accessibility of all types of government services); industrialization 
(impacting on the worsening world environmental situation); technological devel -
opments (leading to a net loss of jobs and contributing to economic insecurity in 
the workforce); integration of national economies into global market mechanisms 
(bringing about increased insecurity, unemployment, inequality and poverty to due 
increased competition and flexibility); the spread of new epidemics such as HIV/
AIDS (necessitating the adoption of new methods of health care and delivery) and 
social instability (a result of wars in various regions in the world).
All countries therefore
• try to train, acquire and use an ever increasing proportion of scientists and 
technologists and to provide them with necessary equipment for their work;
• seek eagerly a high rate of economic growth and a higher average per capita 
income, which are broadly equated with material well-being;
• are committed to an unlimited degree of urbanization and industrialization;
• are anxious to provide the major social services, particularly education and public 
health, at as high a standard as possible for the whole nation or that part of it 
which falls below a certain level of income;
• endeavour to provide better housing to eliminate slums, squatting and to re -
develop the obsolete or worn out parts of towns;
• try to regulate urban growth in one way or another;
• hope to achieve an improved environment by means of town and country plan-
ning; and,
• are anxious to avoid mass unemployment (Kroukamp 2002:3 and compare 
Laegreid 2001:2).
The new spheres of public administration which are likely to emerge from these 
changes may be directed towards more positive and more complex objectives than 
some of those which absorb the attention of public authorities today. The bearing 
of all this on public administration is that the future concerns and interests of 
nations are likely to be very different from what they are today; and that these 
changes will have an important impact on public administration.
One certain feature of the future trend of events is that public institutions will 
continue to grow all over the world. The more highly developed countries will 
expand their existing services, particularly those concerned with education, high -
ways, housing, public health, physical, social and economic planning, and urban 
development, and will embark on new tasks such as those mentioned above. The 
low-income countries are fully aware that the ambitious plans of economic and 
social development which they have drawn up, and are pledged to carry out, can 
only be realized with an efficient system of public administration.
<<<PAGE=98>>>
88 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Whatever appropriate means chosen by the government to deliver services and 
address the abovementioned, the ability of the government to achieve its social 
objectives must therefore be strengthened. This might mean working more closely 
with the private sector which can assist to achieve lower tariffs, greater investment 
and coverage, and better quality services, thus improving the general welfare of the 
inhabitants. The predicted development will blur and perhaps eventually eliminate 
the clear-cut distinction between public administration and private administration 
or what can more accurately be called non-governmental administration.
Distinction once so serenely drawn between the private sector, in which the 
individual could do as he/she pleases, and the public sector, in which common 
choices must be made, is shrinking towards vanishing point as the private sector 
is frequently required to cooperate with the government in applying public poli -
cies which are considered desirable or necessary for the general welfare. Individual 
transactions are now known to have consequences which extend far beyond the 
parties to the transaction; and it is this which has led to the insistent demand 
that the public interest, as formulated by the government, should be and must be 
accepted as a guide by private interests. This infusion of public policy into the 
elaborate network of transactions, decisions and attitudes in the private sector is 
one of the most familiar features of the mixed and regulated economy which a 
large majority of nations have adopted (Saarelainen 2002:24).
A much more important development is that both the new tasks of government 
and the new spheres of public administration outlined will demand new visions on 
the part of political leaders. It will also demand new types of skills from public 
servants and, from both Ministers and officials, specialized knowledge of various 
kinds which they do not at present possess and may not be able to acquire. In this 
regard, training can play a meaningful role in adopting to the future.
Perspectives on Training
It can certainly be accepted that training is not a miracle cure by which all man -
agement and administrative problems can be solved. It is, however, one of the 
human resource development practices which, in an integrated manner, can be used 
to obtain meaningful change and renewal. T raining will assist the government to 
develop the professional capacities of politicians/public servants and to promote 
institutional change. In this manner, training can contribute to:
• equiping all public servants with the necessary knowledge, skills and competen-
cies to carry out their jobs effectively in pursuit of the vision and mission for 
the public service;
• enhancing the process of making the public service more representative;
• the reorientation of the values and practices which officials might have acquired 
under a previous dispensation; and
• the anticipation and facilitation of the introduction of properly conceived 
and structured institutional changes within the public service. T raining should 
thus become a key component of the institution-building process and, for
<<<PAGE=99>>>
89
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: New Needs …
this reason, cannot be developed in isolation and must be integrated within 
the overall strategic plans of public service organizations (White Paper on the 
T ransformation of the Public Service 1995:64 and compare Kuye 2001:5).
Such skills, and the competencies to be acquired to deal with these changes, 
will not only be occupational, technical and professional in nature, but should 
also relate to problem solving, innovation and leadership in order to enable public 
servants at all levels/spheres to take advantage of the opportunities for open and 
participative management, team building and decision-making. When dealing with 
the South African situation in this regard, the following issues should be taken 
into consideration:
• South Africa has a severe shortage of professional managers and technicians, 
compared with industrialized countries, as there are only 3 million skilled 
people, as opposed to the 7 million in semi/unskilled work;
• of the 4 million people who are unemployed, some 50% are young people who 
have completed more than nine years of schooling. Y outh unemployment is 
aggravated by the inadequate provision of technical and vocational education 
and training opportunities. In the Organization of Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) countries, 50% of secondary school students are 
in technical and vocational education programmes;
• many small businesses in South Africa are informal and fall outside regulatory 
and taxation arrangements. In practice, many are trapped at the low-value-add -
ing end of the production spectrum. The challenge is to assist these enterprises 
to climb the value chain and this will require skills;
• public services at national, regional and local spheres of government need the 
skills to implement the policies and programmes that have been introduced 
to improve living standards and reduce levels of poverty. Hilliard and Msaseni 
(2000:67) note that in 1991 it was estimated that 16.6 million South Africans 
lived below the poverty line; in 1993 it was 32% of the population. In 2000, 
these statistics looked even worse; 65% of South Africans were said to live 
below the poverty datum line; and
• although skills development opportunities are provided for staff, a commitment 
to training has not characterized the South African labor market (compare 
Kroukamp 1998: 90). An International Labor Organization Country Profile of 
South Africa reported that although 87% of a sample of manufacturing com -
panies claimed to provide skills development opportunities’, 70% in practice 
offered only induction and initial training. The same report suggested that 40% 
of employers provide no training at all (compare Mbere 1996:7).
In fact, unemployed people, as well as employers seeking skilled workers, seldom 
turn to training as the answer – they want their needs met immediately and they 
do not want to wait for the returns on training to materialize. Besides, from the 
employers’ point of view, if a person is trained, they could leave and get another 
job with more money from a competitor. From the point of view of individuals, 
too often they feel the market has failed them – they are de-motivated. Employers
<<<PAGE=100>>>
90 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
and workers need to be persuaded that training today is an investment in tomor -
row. Whilst the returns may not be immediate, they will be substantial and are 
worth the investment and the wait (Skilling SA 2001:3).
In order to face these challenges, particular objectives need to be achieved:
• the development of a culture of high-quality life-long learning by encouraging 
employers to accept skills development as an investment rather that a cost;
• fostering skills development in the formal economy to ensure productivity and 
employment growth;
• stimulating and supporting skills development in the small, medium and micro-
enterprise sector;
• promoting opportunities for skills development in social upliftment initiatives; 
and
• assisting new entrants into employment (Kroukamp 2002).
The crucial question for public administration professionals, however, is whether 
the conventional pattern of adult education and training provide a practical, con -
textualized form of rationality to meet the abovementioned objectives and if it 
makes learning of the necessary competencies possible. In South Africa, the answer 
to this question is unfortunately negative. The reason being that the systems and 
practices of education and training with reference to the government do not ap -
propriately address the increasing demand for high-level, up-to-date knowledge 
and skills. There are problems of mission and purpose, criteria for success and 
learning structures (Wessels 2002:2).
A paradigm shift is therefore needed in respect of the purpose of the educa -
tion and training practices where (i) learning should produce needed skills, not 
merely the provision of instruction; (ii) student discovery and construction of 
knowledge should be elicited, rather than the transfer of knowledge to students; 
(iii) powerful learning environments should be created, as opposed to the offering 
of courses and programmes; and, (iv) quality of learning should take place, rather 
than mere instruction. If this does not happen, the rapidly changing nature of the 
environment, and the rate at which knowledge can become outdated, is not taken 
into consideration (compare Barr & Tagg 1995:16 – 17).
Subsequently, the criteria for success should reflect (i) achievable or realistic 
learning and student outcomes, not inputs and resources used; (ii) the quality of 
existing students, not the quality of those entering the courses or programmes; 
(iii) the aggregation of learning growth and efficiency, not of enrolment and rev -
enue, and (iv) the quality of students, not lecturers, and the quality of learning, 
not instruction.
The characteristics of the specific teaching and learning structures should (i) be 
of a cross-disciplinary or interdepartmental nature, not independent disciplines and 
departments, (ii) comprise specified learning results, not complete study packages; 
(iii) be externally evaluated, not only internally; and (iv) constitute pre/during/
post-assessment, not only end-of-course assessments (compare Wessels 2000:314).
<<<PAGE=101>>>
91
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: New Needs …
If these issues are not addressed, institutions teach what they think is necessary 
for students to know, implying that the profession agreed on the competencies 
of the particular programme and that assessment and evaluation are open for 
inspection by the particular profession. This, however, is normally not the case 
in South Africa regarding institutions that provide the education and training of 
public servants/politicians. New approaches should therefore be adopted to rectify 
this situation.
New Approaches to Education and Training of Public Servants/Politicians
The development of new approaches goes hand in hand with innovation, which in 
turn depends on the sharing of knowledge, skills and the commitment of multiple 
groups and role-players (Scarbrough et al. 1999:56). Innovative processes thus be -
come increasingly interactive, requiring simultaneous networking across multiple 
participants (compare Gibbons 1998:4). In the field of public administration, the 
South African Management and Development Institute (SAMDI) is currently 
charged with building the capacity of public servants in the work sphere. The 
assistance of tertiary institutions, however, is necessary to equip potential public 
servants with relevant skills before they get to the work sphere.
The various efforts that were made to establish networks consisting of academ-
ics, researchers and practitioners in the field of public administration and related 
disciplines to promote the transformation of public administration in South Africa, 
for example the New Public Administration Initiative (NPAI) in 1992, the Joint 
Universities Public Management Education T rust (JUPMET), the Association of 
Southern African Schools and Departments of Public Administration and Manage-
ment (ASSADPAM), the KwaZulu Natal Regional Forum, NAPISA and PASA, 
however, did not bring to fruition the required results (compare Cloete in Theron 
& Schwella 2000:23). Urgent attention should therefore be paid to this aspect.
Apart from the abovementioned observations, there furthermore seems to be 
a need for the following actions:
• to establish legitimate vehicles to promote the interests of the discipline of 
public administration and its teaching and research staff in South Africa;
• to, as part of long-term training programmes for newly recruited public servants, 
make provision for short-term secondments to leading national private sector 
organizations;
• to contemplate a period of residence or study in an adjoining country;
• for sectoral management training capacity in priority sectors such as public 
enterprises and public utilities management, rural development management, 
international affairs and foreign trade management, local level development 
management. Increasingly more training capacity should be allocated to these 
areas, with the assistance of the particular sectors;
• for learning processes or learning experiences to be programmed whereby dif -
ferent programmes may then be offered for different contextual or occupational 
needs;
<<<PAGE=102>>>
92 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
• for the inclusion of academically-oriented practicing administrators from the 
public and private sectors in part-time public administration programmes; 
and
• for refreshment courses to supplement the knowledge of the public servants on 
a regular basis in order to meet the challenges of a constantly changing work 
and world environment (Kuye 2001:8).
These training programmes should, however, be supplemented with so-called 
‘aftercare’ programmes. This requires the implementation of a step (undertaken 
by training providers themselves) that goes beyond the traditional monitoring and 
evaluation of training. It is about performance, not only focused on the learner 
or trainee, but at the component where the work is done. Aftercare programmes 
could be useful in various ways, namely by:
• indicating whether the training need analysis was done properly; in other words, 
whether the identified needs were indeed those that made the employees not 
to perform as expected or that caused shortcomings in service delivery;
• providing proof of the ability of training providers, not only in terms of the 
subject knowledge, but in essence, of their ability to make it relevant to the 
world of work, thus serving as a mechanism to distinguish between professional 
training providers and fly-by-nights;
• providing information about the readiness of the system to create a culture that 
would be conducive for the application of new knowledge and skills by gradu -
ates and employees who successfully completed training courses. Employees can 
only perform to the degree that the system allows them to do so. Stumbling 
blocks that may hamper high level performances could either be people (the 
old guard), the corporate culture or the organizational structure; and,
• taking corrective measures in instances where goals were not achieved. The 
apparent lack of courage to undertake such measures are, in many instances, 
caused by a result of the strong degree of politicking in the public sector and 
the absence of clear definitions of the roles of politicians and public servants 
(Bekker 1999:16).
The slow development in South Africa of public administration and management 
as an academic discipline should be improved significantly by recent developments 
in the course content and teaching methodologies. Within the framework of the 
information society, the adoption and exploitation of information technology and 
communication applications and services is expected to have a significant impact on 
the educational and training strategies of institutions of higher learning. The new 
strategy must fulfill the requirements of continuous training or life-long learning 
(Kroukamp 2002). It requires a decision regarding the manner in which learning is 
organized, as well as the innovation of teaching methods in order to make training 
attractive and within reach of learners. The strategy furthermore needs to increase 
the efficiency of training and should provide the answer to the question of which 
basic skills and competencies learners should acquire in order to become adequately 
active in the knowledge and information society (Karagiannis et al. 2001:5).
<<<PAGE=103>>>
93
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: New Needs …
In achieving these objectives, alternative solutions to the conventional training 
method (C-learning) should be analyzed. Interactive distance learning, intranet-
based training, technology-based learning, web-based learning, online learning – all 
appear as different types of learning technologies with different capabilities – offer 
such alternatives. However, the distinctions and capabilities that once separated 
these categories are made fuzzier by advances in technology. Though there are 
particular differences between them, for instance in bandwidth, user interface, 
or interactivity, they share a common strategy to deliver flexible learning (Roffe 
2002:40). Moreover, these online learning platforms have begun to converge around 
common technology standards (the vehicle, according to Singh et al.  (2002:62), 
that will bring flexibility to content and infrastructure solutions) and a delivery 
infrastructure, the Internet as a means of enabling learning.
E-learning as a medium of delivery for education and training enables institu -
tions of higher learning to progress considerably in the adoption of information 
and online technologies. As opposed to distance learning, where a lack of interac -
tion and communication between the educators and learners/trainees exist, online 
learning allows both the educator and learner to draw on the strengths of traditional 
instruction and combine it with new technology and virtual tools, leading to the 
creation of online or virtual institutions of higher learning (T urban et al. 2002:420). 
It thus offers the opportunity of producing a learning experience tailored to the 
strengths and learning style of each learner or trainee, i.e. perhaps the most crucial 
factor in the success or failure of education and training.
Conclusion
Although all countries are pursuing similar objectives, the pace of change in South 
Africa will of necessity have an impact on public administration in the future. New 
approaches and specialized knowledge will be required, not only from politicians, 
but also from the corps of public servants. In this regard, training can fulfil a 
meaningful role. Institutions of higher learning providing learning opportunities 
will be expected to facilitate the integration of knowledge (information, concepts, 
theories and methodologies) together with skills and values, into the learners’ 
practice in a participatory and reflective manner. This, however, has yet to be 
demonstrated in South Africa.
To address the situation, new approaches to education and training of public 
servants and politicians have been discussed. It was indicated that inter alia legiti-
mate vehicles should be established to promote the discipline; learning processes 
and experiences should be programmed; refreshment courses should be presented 
and attended on a regular basis; and secondments to private sector organizations 
should be provided. Aftercare programmes should supplement these training 
programmes to determine whether the training needs analysis was properly done; 
the training providers were able to do the training and to institute corrective 
actions. Furthermore, institutions of higher learning, in adapting e-learning as 
an alternative mechanism to the conventional c-learning, can fulfill the require -
<<<PAGE=104>>>
94 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
ments of continuous training or life-long learning, thus offering the opportunity 
of producing a learning experience tailored to the strengths and learning style of 
each learner or trainee.
References
Barr, R.B. & T agg, J., From teaching to learning: a new paradigm for undergraduate 
education, Change: the Magazine of Higher Education, V ol. 27, No. 6, 1995:12 – 25.
Bekker, J.C.O., The paradoxes of quality service delivery and public sector transfor -
mation in South Africa, Paper delivered at the Human Resources for Development: 
People and Performance Conference, University of Manchester, Manchester, 27 – 30 
June 1999.
Farnham, D., Horton, S., Barlow, J. & Hondeghem, A., New Public Managers in 
Europe: Public Servants in T ransition, Hampshire, MacMillan Press Ltd., 1996.
Gibbons, M., Higher Education Relevance in the 21 st Century, New Y ork, The 
World Bank Education, 1998.
Hilliard, V . & Msaseni, W .S., Strategies for improving service delivery in the 
South African public service, Administratio Publica, V ol. 10, No. 1, June 2000.
Kailer, N. & Scheff, J., Knowledge management as a service: co-operation be -
tween small and medium-sized enterprises (SME’s) and training, consulting and 
research institutions, Journal of European Industrial T raining, V ol. 23, No. 7, May 
1999:319 – 328.
Karagiannis, G. & Pehlivanidis, H., From C-learning to E-learning. Paper delivered 
at the International IIAS Conference. Athens, Greece, 9 – 13 July 2001.
Kroukamp, H.J., T ransforming training in the public sector in South Africa: policy 
alternatives, Acta Academica, V ol. 30, No. 2, 1998.
Kroukamp, H.J., Capacity building in government to enhance the general welfare: 
a University of the Free State perspective , Paper delivered at the First International 
Conference on Higher Education and Economic Regeneration in Cape Town, 30 
October to 1 November 2002.
Kroukamp, H.J., Skills training: a prerequisite for the changing position and status 
of civil servants in South Africa, SAIPA, V ol. 37, No. 4, December 2002.
Kuye, J., The state of research and scholarship in public administration: Strategic 
leadership and governance parameters impacting on basic and applied research for 
the 21st century, Professorial Inaugural lecture, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 29 
May 2001.
Laegreid, P ., New Public Management – transforming governance and civil service 
systems, Paper delivered at the annual IIAS Conference in Athens, Greece, 9 – 13 
July 2001.
Mbere, A.M., T raining in the public sector, Unpublished paper delivered at the 
National Business Initiative Conference, Johannesburg, 27-28 March 1996.
<<<PAGE=105>>>
95
Public Administration Education and T raining in South Africa: New Needs …
Republic of South Africa, White paper on the transformation of the public service, 
Government Gazette 365 (16838), 24 November 1995.
Robson, W .A., Politics and Government at Home and Abroad , London, Allen & 
Unwin, 1967.
Roffe, I., E-learning: engagement, enhancement and execution, Quality Assurance 
in Education, V ol.10, No1, 2002.
Scarbrough, H., Swan, J. & Preston, J., Knowledge Management and the Learning 
Organization, London, IDP , 1999.
Singh, H. & Reed, C., Demystifiying e-learning standards, Industrial and Com -
mercial T raining, V ol. 34, No.2, 2002.
Skilling South Africa, Positive steps taken to resolve skills shortage, Supplement 
to Sunday Times, February 2001.
Theron, F. & Schwella, E. (eds.), The State of Public and Development Management 
in South Africa, Goodwood, NBD Printers, 2000.
T urban, E., King, D., Lee, J., W arkentin, M. & Chung, H.M., Electronic Commerce 
2002: a managerial perspective,  New Jersey, Pearson Education, 2002.
Wessels, J.S., Equipping public officials for the challenges of responsible gover -
nance: a South African perspective on lifelong learning, International Review of 
Administrative Sciences, V ol. 66, No. 2, 2000: 311 – 324.
Wessels, J.S., Globalisation and international compatibility – a challenge to learn -
ing within the context of application, Unpublished paper, University of South 
Africa, 2002.
<<<PAGE=106>>>
96 
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: 
The Case of India
R. K. Mishra *
The Indian polity is passing through critical times. Not only is the socio-economic 
and political structure of the country undergoing phenomenal change, but also 
the expectations of people in terms of the availability of greater opportunities 
and superior goods is repeatedly echoed in different forums repeatedly. Added to 
this, is the dilemma of rendering efficient and effective administrative support to 
people by a sprawling bureaucracy which has been labeled as “status-quoised” and 
obstructive to the factors which could be harbingers of change.
The recent Constitutional amendments in India have been intended to give 
power to the people. This has resulted in creating forces against the present excess 
of power, thus, seeking a change in the real relationship between the executives and 
people. The Country has reached a stage where it has been widely felt that what 
is important is the more effective running of it. The disintegration of the Soviet 
Union in the early 1990s has given rise to new perspectives, in the background of 
which the whole question of the functioning of the public administration system 
in the country needs to be examined, lest the Country is torn apart into pieces.
It is in this context that public administration education in India assumes a 
critical dimension. This paper seeks to present the genesis and growth of public 
administration education in India; the status of teaching, training and research in 
this realm, its pitfalls, and the challenges it faces in the path of its emergence as a 
well-established discipline in the field of Social Sciences, for its research method -
ology, contribution to knowledge, and relevance to the people in their day-to-day 
business.
Genesis
Public administration education owes its great legacy to the ancient Indian period 
of history . It was about 3000 years ago that Kautilya wrote the “ Arthashastra” which 
discussed the statecraft of administration, the functions of the king, the role of 
his advisers, the methods of recruitment for bureaucracy, the penalties for non-
implementation of the state directives, etc 1 In medieval India, Akbar the Great, 
in his treatise the “ Ain-e-Akbari” laid down the principles of state administration, 
the methods of preparation of state budgets, and the relationship between the 
Centre and its constituents.
In the period of British India, measures were taken to provide sound public 
administration to the masses including various enactments, such as the Indian Penal 
* Senior Professor and Director, Institute of Public Enterprise, Osmania University, India
1 Arora, Ramesh, K and Kaushik, S. L. (Ed), The Universe of Public Administration: Essays in 
Honour of Professor Sharma, Associated, New Delhi, 1994.
<<<PAGE=107>>>
97
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
Code, the India Companies Act, the Reserve Bank of India Act, etc. However, 
public administration education in its earliest form had its first seeds sown in the 
Department of Politics and Public Administration at the University of Madras in 
1939, with the introduction of a diploma course in public administration 2.
In 1938, the University of Allahabad launched a diploma course in local self-
government. In 1945, the University of Lucknow started a diploma course in Public 
Administration in the Department of Political Science. In 1949, the University of 
Nagpur started, for the first time, a full-fledged two-year programme in public 
administration under the auspices of a separate department called the Department 
of Public Administration and Local Self – Government. By 1973, 24 University 
Departments and several affiliated colleges had started under-graduate and post-
graduate courses in public administration. In 1995, the number of University 
Departments had gone up to 50.
Public administration was first a part of the history department in some universi-
ties. In other places, public administration became an integral part of the political 
science Departments in the universities and was taught mostly as a compulsory 
course at the post-graduate level. In the 1950s, a separate Department of Public 
Administration was set up for the first time at the University of Nagpur. Another 
feature of the 1950s was that in some universities, public administration teach -
ing was organised in their departments of economics. In 1955, in the University 
of Rajasthan, the Department of Economics was renamed as the Department of 
Economics and Public Administration to impart teaching in public administration 
as a separate degree.
It was in the 1960s that public administration began to be recognized as a 
full-fledged separate discipline, public administration being handled by “autono -
mous” departments within the faculties of social sciences. During this period, the 
University of Rajasthan, Osmania University, Punjab University, Sagar University, 
South Gujarat University, Himachal Pradesh University and Utkal University 
started separate Departments of Public Administration. In the 1980s, and in the 
current decade, there are two clearly discernible trends, one is the teaching of 
public administration as a part of post-graduate courses in political science, and 
the second, the organization of the teaching of public administration by a full-
fledged department in this area.
In the 1950s, another important development, which gave a great boost to public 
administration, was the Appleby Committee Report on Public Administration, 
and subsequently the establishment of a separate institute known as the Indian 
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) at New Delhi. The objective of the set -
ting up IIPA was to provide a forum for exchange of knowledge and experience 
among practitioners and teachers of public administration. In 1960, IIPA started a 
one-year post-graduate diploma in public administration which is mostly attended 
by the civil servants who are in the mid-point of their career.
2 Barthwal, C.P . Public Administration in India: Prospect & Retrospect, Ashish, New Delhi, 1993, 
pp.1-70
<<<PAGE=108>>>
98 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
The participants of the programme are also taken to some countries to have a 
perspective on comparative public administration. In the 1950s, the Administrative 
Staff College of India was set up to, among other things, train public administra -
tors. In the various States of the Indian Union, State Academies of Administration 
were also set up. These institutions from time to time were strengthened by way 
of financial support from the centre and their respective State Governments. In 
the 1980s, the training of civil servants was initiated in a very large measure by the 
central government which gave a big boost to public administration education.
T eaching of Public Administration
Public administration is organized at the post-graduate level as a part of instruc -
tions given in the political science departments in some universities. Fifty-six 
universities teach public administration at the Master’s level in political science 
degree programs. Of these, forty-seven universities have public administration being 
taught as a compulsory/elective course. Eight universities teach public administra -
tion as a compulsory subject, and nine universities provide public administration 
as an elective.
It is also interesting to note that most of the universities provide one course in 
public administration in the compulsory stream at the MA Political Science level. 
This course mostly deals with the principles of public administration. However, 
there are universities, which provide more than one paper in the compulsory 
stream. The University of Madras has two compulsory papers, namely, Principles 
of Public Administration and Modern Government. It is equally interesting to see 
that there are some universities, which do not have a compulsory requirement in 
their scheme of teaching Political Science. Among these are the Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, Madurai Kamaraj University, and the University of Mysore.
Some of the universities which have full-fledged courses in public administration 
at the post-graduate level, however, organise teaching in two streams. Some papers 
have been labeled as compulsory papers, whereas the students have the freedom 
to select optional papers from the various groups. Mostly, the course study is 
restricted to eight papers and the viva-voce examination. The students are given 
the freedom to opt for undertaking a project work in lieu of one optional paper. 
The students are given the freedom to take one of the two groups as electives. 
Group I includes Studies on Rural Government and Administration. Group II 
contains electives on Planning. Administration and the Public and Rural Develop -
ment Administration. The students have to take one paper from the courses on 
Research Methodology, Political Sociology, Politics and Development in India, and 
Development Administration.
In similar fashion, at the Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupathi, four com -
pulsory papers are taught in MA (Previous) in the nature of compulsory papers. 
These include Comparative and Development Administration, Comparative Po -
litical Systems, Administrative Theories, and Local Government in UK, USA and 
France. In MA (Final), the courses taught include Local Government in South
<<<PAGE=109>>>
99
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
Asia, Financial Administration in India and Policy Studies. There is an option 
offered to the students between Urban Local Government in Andhra Pradesh or 
Panchayati Raj in Andhra Pradesh.
A suggestion has been made that public administration education at the post-
graduate level should be organized in the form of core courses and optional papers. 
The core courses could include Administrative Theory including State Theories, 
Administrative System of India, Public Personnel Administration, Comparative 
Public Administration, Public Policy Analysis, and Research Methodology. The 
optional papers could include Indian Constitution; Bureaucracy: Theories, Func -
tions and Role; Administrative Thought; Rural and Agricultural Development 
Administration including Irrigation, Health, Labour and Social Welfare Adminis -
tration; Educational Administration; Financial Administration; State Administra -
tion; Rural and Urban Local Administration; Development Administration; Crisis 
and Emergency Administration; Organization of the Public Sector; Sociology of 
Administration; and Politics and Administration.
T o strengthen the quality of research at the post-graduate level, the M. Phil 
teaching started in Public Administration in the 1970s. Nine Universities provided 
for public administration in their M. Phil Political Science Programmes  3. The MS 
at University of Baroda has three papers in their M.phil programme in the elec -
tive group, which include Public Administration and Social Change, Development 
Administration and Issues in Local Government. Dibrugarh University follows the 
same approach by including three papers on Social Administration in India, Manage-
ment of Public Enterprises in India, and Rural Development in India. The Jawaharlal 
Nehru University provides two papers in the elective stream, namely , Bureaucracy: 
Its Institution, Function and Changing Roles, and Leadership: Problems of Recruit-
ment, Socialization, Role and Function. The Marathwada University provides in its 
electives a course entitled Recent Advances in Public Administration.
The teaching of public administration had percolated down to the under-gradu-
ate courses. At the under-graduate level an effort is made to provide a general 
background of public administration dealing with the knowledge and information 
on local administration, state administration, and the administrative set up at the 
centre. This started in the 1960s when public administration was either allowed 
to be offered as an elective or it figured as a component of political science elec -
tives at the under-graduate level. There are about 39 Universities having courses 
in public administration at the under-graduate level.
A study of the organization of teaching at the various levels point out that at the 
post-graduate level public administration lacks a strong theoretical base. It continues 
to place its emphasis on structures and organizations instead of providing insights 
into the administrative problems and the realities of organizations. Further, there 
is no agreement about the core and periphery in terms of papers that are taught. 
The disciplines which have made a great headway have a solid core and a strong 
3 Bhattacharya Mohit, Crisis of Public Administration as a Discipline in India, EPW , 22(48), 28 
November, 1987, pp.M139-M42.
<<<PAGE=110>>>
100 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
periphery. 4 In the case of public administration, the general opinion is that both 
are weak. Further, there is a lack of agreement on what constitutes the core. 5 The 
syllabi of some universities tilt towards economics, while other institutions have 
a heavy bias towards management.
The study of policy analysis has been generally neglected. There should be three 
or four electives so that a student could specialise as per their interest. In most of 
the Universities no systematic effort has been made to group electives. The focus 
is more on administration and the “Public” component has been widely ignored 
in the syllabus-making exercise by the Universities. The universities which have 
public administration at both the under-graduate and post-graduate levels have 
not taken the University Grants Commission (UGC) syllabus seriously. Most of 
the Universities give a heavy dose of Administrative Theory in the under-graduate 
programme. At the M. Phil level, no systematic effort has been made to organize 
instruction in Research Methodology. As public administration lacks its own re -
search tools and the contribution of its teachers has been minimal, in this respect 
instruction on research methodology lack credibility. Further, the electives taken 
at the M. Phil level are not geared to the topic of research as most of the students 
choose optional papers without any bearing on their topic of research.
Public Administration has become more popular as a course for students acquiring 
their degree through distance education and private appearance modes. In 1987, the 
Union Public Service Commission, in its scheme of examination, approved public 
administration as one of the subjects. Each year about 100,000 students appear in 
the Civil Service Examination at the center, and an equal number of applicants write 
the Civil Service examination conducted by the State Civil Service Boards. Most of 
the examinees in the competitive examinations prefer to take public administration 
without having had any background of it as they come from non-political science/
non-public administration streams. Though this speaks volumes about the popular-
ity of public administration as a subject of study , it also points out the weakness of 
the discipline in that people, without acquiring any specialised knowledge of public 
administration, pass these examinations offering only a few papers in this subject. 6
Research
Research in public administration has been undertaken at the universities for 
obtaining a Ph.D. degree. On the other hand, some institutions such as IIPA and 
the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) have been engaged in the 
publication of research on public administration respectively. The number of Ph.D. 
theses submitted between 1979 and 1989 amount to 246 as detailed in Table 1.
4 Bhattacharya Mohit, Public Administration in India: A Discipline in Bondage, Indian Journal of 
Public Administration, 32(2), April-June 1986, pp.19-29.
5 Bhattacharya Mohit, Recent Advances in the Discipline of Public Administration, Indian Journal 
of Public Administration, 36(1), January- March 1990, pp.1-15.
6 Datta Prabhat Kumar, Public Administration- Old Issue and New Challenges, Indian Journal of 
Political Science, 48(1), January-March 1987, pp.42-59.
<<<PAGE=111>>>
101
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
T able 1
Ph.D. Theses in Public Administration (1979 – 89)
SL. 
No. Area of Specialization No. of Ph.D. theses 
completed
1. Rural Development Administration/Panchayati Raj 41
2. Urban Local Government/Administration 34
3. State Government/Administration 29
4. Public Sector Administration 22
5. Personnel Administration (including Civil Services) and Industrial Relations 20
6. Central Government/ Administration 13
7. Police/Law & Other Administration 12
8. District Administration 10
9. Welfare/Tribe Development Administration 10
10. Development Administration 10
11. Health Administration 9
12. Financial Administration 9
13. Centre-State/ Administrative Relations 9
14. Administration ideas/Concepts 5
15. Comparative Administration 4
16. Labour Administration 3
17. Agriculture/Food Administration 3
18. Forest/Environment Administration 3
TOTAL 246
It is clear from the table that a wide range of topics have been researched in 
public administration 7. The areas of specialisation attracting major attention are 
Rural Development Administration/Panchayati Raj, Urban Local Government/
Administration, State Government/Administration, Public Sector Administra -
tion, Personnel Administration(including Civil Services) and Industrial Relations, 
Central Government/Administration, Police/Law and other Administration and 
Development Administration, Welfare/T ribal Development Administration, and 
Development Administration.
The emerging areas in the field of doctoral research included health administra-
tion, financial administration, center-state/administrative relations, administrative 
ideas/concepts, comparative administration, labour administration, agriculture/food 
administration, and forest/environment administration. The ICSSR have surveyed 
trends in research in public administration thrice.
The first survey covered the period up to 1969, the second survey 1970 – 79, 8 
and the third survey related to 1979 – 89. 9 The first survey concluded that as an 
7 Kumar, Umesh, Koutilya’s Thought on Public Administration, National Book Organization, New 
Delhi. 1990, pp-1-80.
8 Maheshwari Shriram (Ed), Education in Public Administration in India, The Indian Institute of 
Public Administration, New Delhi, 1992.
9 Maheshwari, S. R, Study of Public Administration in India, Lakshmi Narain Agrawal Educational 
Publishers, Agra, 1973, pp.7-35.
<<<PAGE=112>>>
102 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
academic discipline, public administration was still in the formative stages of de -
velopment. According to the survey, contributing input to the formation of public 
policy , such as famine policy , flood relief policy , agricultural policy , and public health 
policy , should have been research priorities. The survey suggested to accord priority 
to research on relations between the legislature and administrative behavior, and 
comparative studies. The survey concluded that the discipline as a whole was not 
showing a sense of buoyancy of achievements either in the academic or the practical 
worlds or of being of continuing relevance to the needs of the country.
A lurking doubt in the academician and even in the practitioner existed as to 
whether, as a field of study and inquiry, public administration could develop as a 
useful and relevant independent discipline as well as a practical and applied science. 
One of the most important issues facing the discipline of public administration in 
India, according to the survey was the development of a set of properly tested and 
validated theoretical constructs. The survey suggested interpenetration between 
theory and practice.
The second survey by  ICSSR noted the limitations of the discipline. It noted 
that the most familiar paradigm guiding research in the field continued to be 
that of Max Weber. It noted that little attempt was made to develop alternative 
conceptual frameworks even though this was the exhortation of most academics 
and professionals during the period. The second survey categorised the trends 
for research in public administration in five major areas and it found that whereas 
there was a pool of work on Rural Development Administration and Indian Bu -
reaucracy, some important areas like Urban Administration, Administration of Law 
and Order and Justice, and T rends in Administrative Reform, did not receive the 
required amount of attention.
The most recent survey of research on public administration analysed about 
25 major areas. Some new areas making their place in the survey include disaster 
management, management of environment, gender issues, etc. the survey is still 
under print. The broad conclusions that emerged from the trends in research in 
public administration hint that the results of the surveys conducted by ICSSR 
have not received serious attention. Academic researchers lack financial support, 
whereas practitioners have not given serious attention by the research. Further, 
the research is conducted in narrow bounds, totally losing sight of the fact that 
multi-disciplinary research is the need of the day. The researchers have chosen to 
tread conventional areas and have failed to undertake studies on contemporary 
socio-political issues. Interestingly, while a massive exercise is underway in regard 
to economic liberalisation, privatisation, setting up new regulatory frameworks, 
and environmental interface with administration, researchers have shown their 
diffidence to move into these areas of research. 10
A study of the 1550 papers published in the Indian Journal of Public Admin -
istration during 1961 – 1990 throws interesting light on the issues researched in 
10 Mathur (Ed), A Study of Research in Public Administration 1970-1979, ICSSR, New Delhi, 
1986.
<<<PAGE=113>>>
103
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
public administration during these three decades. Of the more than 1550 papers 
published, nearly 60% were focused on planning, administrative structures and 
systems, agencies and management of public enterprises, and other governmental 
organisations. The remaining 40% were spread over nearly 40 sub-areas of public 
administration. Of these, slightly more than 37% dealt with administration/or -
ganisational/development theories and critiques of bureaucracy.
An important sub-area of public administration, like public policy analysis 
and evaluation, did not cross the 29% mark in the three decades. Studies on 
public participation, voluntary social action, and representativeness also made a 
poor appearance in the journal, only 11%. Studies on public accountability and 
responsiveness to the public also yield a poor picture (about 18%). The percentage 
of studies on local organisations, democratic decentralisation, and administrative 
development came down from 9.23% during 1961-70 to 4.38% during 1981 – 90. 
Articles on evaluation of the implementation of development programmes and on 
administrative reforms also dwindled to 4.21% during 1981 – 90 from 6.61% in 
1971 – 80. A grossly neglected area is labor relations and industrial management. 
In the same way, studies on financial management, inter-governmental relations, 
management of technology production, and personnel administration did not get 
their expected share.
It is clearly visible that normative empirical, structural and organisational studies 
overshadow others in the Journal. It is further seen that theorising about administrative 
practice is a highly backward sub-field of research in the public administration. It was 
further revealed that studies on the review of literature of public administration required 
serious attention. The general approach of the research papers was descriptive, narrative 
and information-oriented. The empirical analysis was confined to the method of simple 
observation. The correlation or cross-sectional analysis, relational and attitudinal studies 
and structural or system analysis studies constituted a negligible percentage.
Training
Most university departments are not involved in training – though they do extend 
their support to the training institutions conducting programmes in areas related to 
public administration. In fact, university faculty in the Country could contribute 
a great deal to training in public administration for Indian Civil Service personnel 
who abound in number. According to one estimate, the total employment in the 
public sector in India is about 70 million.11 The State Academies have tried to fill in 
the gaps. Among the State Academies, the ones in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh and Rajasthan have done a splendid job. In terms of infrastructure, they 
offer a wide range of programmes. However, innovation in terms of the addition 
of new training programmes to the already existing ones is not very commendable. 
These academies, which are operated by the State Governments, mostly train the 
11 Rao, V . Bhaskar, Paradox of Public Administration in India: Emerging Issues, Indian Journal of 
Public Administration, 40(3), July-September, 1994, pp.479-86.
<<<PAGE=114>>>
104 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
civil servants employed in the various departments of the State Government and 
operate through their sub-offices in the respective States.
They do undertake programmes for bureaucrats in the State Governments as per 
needs analysis. They often join hands with the Central Government Departments/IIPA 
to launch training programmes. Despite their huge infrastructure, the training effort 
undertaken is not proportionate. The faculty of these institutes is mostly manned by 
civil servants and, to that extent, they lack academic inputs, which amounts to weak 
delivery in the classrooms. Further, the relations between the faculty drawn from the 
civil services in such institutes and the Academy staff coming on deputation or absorbed 
on permanent basis, is not congenial for achievement of the objectives.
For policy-makers, IIPA became a nucleus of training in Public Administration 
from its very inception. It also started considerable training for public administra -
tion practitioners dealing with district administration. Later on, it created unique 
strengths in the areas of economic administration, financial administration, project 
administration, management accounting, and social administration. It promoted 
training programmes based on its own researches and also commissioned many such 
programmes sponsored by the central government and the State Governments.
A lot of ground has to be covered in the area of public administration training. 
There is a need to create a strong institutional framework as the existing system 
is not in a position to cope with the requirements. T raining has to have a user-
orientation. 12 Need-based training programmes should be mounted in place of 
general training programmes. The methodology of training should change from 
lecture to interactive mode. In case of training where a change in practice needs to 
be effected, the workshop method could give the best results. Further, the training 
programmes dealing with delivery systems which need to be more effective should 
require action research or field research. Finally, the Country’s vast number of 
non-governmental organizations need to be involved in training.
The Agenda for the Future
Public administration is in quest of an identity in India.  13 This identity could be 
achieved if professionals in public administration take the responsibility of com -
mitting themselves fully to the growth of the discipline and greatly intensify their 
research effort. They have to create a sound, vital, theoretical base. In order to do 
this, the members of the profession should discard their aversion to drawing upon 
the social sciences. Public administration should come out of its narrow shell and 
see the world outside. It should define both the core and its periphery. The core 
should address itself to the issues relating to public which could be both publicness 
and the accountability of academics and practitioners to the public.
12 Report of the Curriculum Development Centre in Political Science, University Grants Commission, 
New Delhi, 1991.
13 V arma, Vishwanath Prasad, Perspectives and Challenges of Public Administration: Role of the In -
dian Institute of Public Administration, Bihar Journal of Public Administration, 1(1), Spring 1984, 
pp.13-17.
<<<PAGE=115>>>
105
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
Public administration in India has to redefine its scope. Any discipline, to justify 
its existence, has to keep on growing and adjusting its direction, giving due cognizance 
to the environment. The time has come when public administration should take up 
the challenge of addressing itself to the current societal issues concerning efficient 
and effective delivery of public services. It should help in the transformation of the 
bureaucracy to a great managerial order. It needs to give due regard to the mode 
and method of its conduct in the present stage of the economic transformation, 
including privatisation, deregulation and globalisation of the country .
Public Administration has to add to its kit of tools and techniques. Interacting 
with the masses is one thing but satisfying the masses based on effective decision-
making is another thing. Public Administration has to increase its use of the tools 
and techniques of information technology . The teaching of public administration has 
to improve substantially at the under-graduate level which should have a knowledge-
orientation. Post-graduate level courses in public administration should be problem-
focused and should have an interconnection with real problems that need to be 
researched. At the M. Phil level, the courses assigned should have an interconnection 
with the problems to be researched. A heavy input of research methodology could be 
provided at this stage. This should go beyond the mundane details of cross-sectional 
analysis, multi-variant analysis and to the application of existing software.
T o improve the teaching standards, qualified staff need to be recruited. Strangers 
to the public administration discipline should not be allowed to make it their home 
and then desert it when they see greener pastures elsewhere. T eachers must develop 
a basic programme for their research and teaching, and identify their contribution in 
terms of the standards laid down there. The research directions should change fun-
damentally . Issues in ecology , environment, public distribution, defense management, 
comparative administration, education, health, irrigation, infrastructure management, 
center-state relations, financial administration, optimisation of the number of per-
sonnel in government departments, work flow, disaster management, gender issues, 
privatisation, reconstitution of ministries and departments, should receive greater 
attention. The training institutes should change their basic character. They should 
promote need-based training programmes and formulate their training goals on the 
basis of the product approach. They should promote the concept of networking to 
pool faculty resources. They should make better utilisation of their infrastructure. 
The pedagogy should shift in favour of field research/action research.
Prior to making public administration an inter-disciplinary exercise, it is essential 
that the rivalry and/or indifference between the practitioners of public administration 
and academicians in this field is removed. The two should work hand in hand.
Conclusion
Public administration education made its first appearance on the Indian scene in 
the 1930s. From modest beginnings, it attained the status of a full-fledged post-
graduate course on university campuses in the 1950s. Today public administration 
education has made its mark at the under-graduate, post-graduate and M. Phil levels.
<<<PAGE=116>>>
106 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
It has become an attraction for doctoral research among students. More than 50 
Universities teach public administration at the post-graduate level, either through 
a separate department or as a part of programs offered at the post-graduate level 
in departments of political science.
Besides teaching the principles of public administration in the compulsory 
stream, the electives on public administration include administrative theory, rural 
administration, financial administration, urban administration, and management 
of local self- government. Research has been mostly related to the theoretical 
aspects of administrative theory, rural administration, and local self government. 
Important areas such as public policy, personnel administration, budget/finance, 
and technology have not attracted the attention of researchers.
T raining efforts have been minimal at the university-level. However, some spe-
cialised institutions such as IIPA and the State Academies of Public Administration 
have done significant work in this area. There is a need for such institutions to 
streamline their training plans, giving due regard to the socio-economic transfor -
mation which the country now is experiencing. The content of such training also 
needs to be improved. Public Administration in India is in quest for its identity. 
Both its core and periphery needs to be strengthened. It has to live by itself, 
though it needs to increase both the speed and scope of interaction with the other 
disciplines in the Country. This will be possible only when public administration 
education is taken as a serious matter by the academicians and the rift between 
them and practitioners is overcome.
Diagram 1
Public Administration Education in India
ResearchEducation
BA
Other
(Public Deptts.
Administration)
State Academies IIPA DoPT*Central Govt. DepttsMA
(Public
Administration)
M.Phil
(Public Administration)
Ph.D
(Public Administration)
Training
* Department of Personal and Training, Government of India
References
Arora, Ramesh, K and Kaushik, S. L. (Ed), The Universe of Public Administration: 
Essays in Honour of Professor Sharma, Associated, New Delhi, 1994.
Barthwal, C.P . Public Administration in India: Prospect & Retrospect, Ashish, 
New Delhi, 1993, pp.1-70.
<<<PAGE=117>>>
107
Enhancing the Quality of Public Administration Education: The Case of India
Bhattacharya Mohit, Crisis of Public Administration as a Discipline in India, EPW , 
22(48), 28 November, 1987, pp.M139-M42.
Bhattacharya Mohit, Public Administration in India: A Discipline in Bondage, 
Indian Journal of Public Administration, 32(2), April-June 1986, pp.19-29.
Bhattacharya Mohit, Recent Advances in the Discipline of Public Administration, 
Indian Journal of Public Administration, 36(1), January- March 1990, pp.1-15.
Datta Prabhat Kumar, Public Administration- Old Issue and New Challenges, 
Indian Journal of Political Science, 48(1), January-March 1987, pp.42-59.
Kumar, Umesh, Koutilya’s Thought on Public Administration, National Book 
Organization, New Delhi. 1990, pp-1-80.
Maheshwari Shriram (Ed), Education in Public Administration in India, The Indian 
Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, 1992.
Maheshwari, S. R, Study of Public Administration in India, Lakshmi Narain Agrawal 
Educational Publishers, Agra, 1973, pp.7-35.
Mathur (Ed), A Study of Research in Public Administration 1970-1979, ICSSR, 
New Delhi, 1986.
Rao, V . Bhaskar, Paradox of Public Administration in India: Emerging Issues, Indian 
Journal of Public Administration, 40(3), July-September, 1994, pp.479-86.
Report of the Curriculum Development Centre in Political Science, University 
Grants Commission, New Delhi, 1991.
V arma, Vishwanath Prasad, Perspectives and Challenges of Public Administration: 
Role of the Indian Institute of Public Administration, Bihar Journal of Public 
Administration, 1(1), Spring 1984, pp.13-17.
<<<PAGE=118>>>
108 
The United Arab Emirates Experience in Developing Standards 
of Excellence in Public Sector Education & Training
Yousuf Essa bin Hassan Al Sabri *
Introduction:
Interest in the development of standards of excellence in public sector education 
and training has heightened over the past few years due to the concerted efforts 
of both scholars and regional and international organizations involved in the busi -
ness of education and training. Especially salient among such efforts have been 
those of the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration 
(IASIA), the National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration 
(NASPAA), the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) and 
the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA). The contributions of numerous individual 
scholars have added focus and illumination to the issue.
In this contribution, an attempt is made to reflect on the experience of the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) in search of standards of excellence in public sec -
tor education and training. This experience is represented by UAE’s Institute of 
Administrative Development’s efforts in looking for appropriate indicators for 
evaluating its training activities with an eye on improving the provision of training 
to a level commensurate with the standards of excellence accepted elsewhere.
The UAE experience in developing standards of excellence in higher education more 
generally will not be dealt with here because this falls within the domain of the Ministry 
of Higher Education and Scientific Research and the UAE University . The Ministry has 
developed a set of criteria for accrediting higher education institutions that conform to 
the international standards by which accredited institutions should abide.
The focus here will be mainly upon the efforts of the UAE’s Institute of 
Administrative Development as the sole government organization entrusted with 
administrative development in the country. Following an overview of the past two 
decades of those efforts, an attempt will be made to provide a classification of 
the standards of excellence in public sector education and training along the lines 
proposed earlier in this volume by Professor Blue Wooldridge under the following 
four headings: inputs, processes, outputs and outcomes.
The UAE Experience: An Overview
The UAE experience referred to here is represented by the Institute of Admin -
istrative Development’s efforts towards developing and applying standards of 
excellence in its training activities. The Institute of Administrative Development 
(IAD) in the UAE was established two decades ago to provide training to public 
* Director General, the Institute of Administrative Development (IAD), the United Arab Emirates
<<<PAGE=119>>>
109
The United Arab Emirates Experience in Developing Standards of Excellence…
sector organizations in order to improve their effectiveness while functioning in 
an environment characterized by significant change.
In this context, IAD has acted as an agent of change to promote administrative 
development in the UAE and to contribute to the process of integrated develop -
ment in the country. IAD has played an important role in training public sector 
employees at all levels through its various training activities including – conferences, 
seminars, leadership development programs, in service training for middle manage-
ment, executive training and preparatory training for new employees.
Annual training plans are designed in collaboration with government organiza -
tions to cater to their training needs and to provide support within the policies 
chartered by the Board of Directors of the Institute. For the purposes of offer -
ing high quality training, IAD employed qualified instructors, provided suitable 
facilities and sought the support of visiting trainers well known for their profes -
sional competency, both from within the country and abroad. Contracting visiting 
trainers provided additional help to permanent technical staff and enabled the 
Institute to expand its training activities to cover the needs of more government 
organizations.
Through its general and special training programs, IAD has been able to provide 
training services for more than twenty thousand public sector employees over the 
past two decades. This has meant surviving in an age characterized by change and 
competition at the global level and in a culture subscribing to total quality manage-
ment (TQM) motivated by Dubai Government initiatives at the local level.
Since the mid nineties the Dubai’s Government has pioneered in the area of 
total quality management. Several awards were initiated by the Government of 
Dubai  – and then by the governments of the other Emirates comprising the Union 
of Arab Emirates. Those awards were directed to encourage both private and public 
sector organizations to comply with the international standards of quality in service 
provision and the production of goods. Those awards included: Dubai Quality 
Award and Dubai Award for Excellence in Government Performance.
The latter award actually incorporated three awards: one for a high perform -
ing organization; a second for a high performing department or project or team 
within the organization; and the third for the high performing individual employee. 
Standards of excellence for each level of the award have been developed along the 
lines of international standards and awards such as the U.S. Baldridge award and 
the Japanese Deming Award.
Along the same lines of the pursuit of excellence, the Federal Government in 
the UAE required all federal government organizations (ministries and public cor-
porations) to qualify for ISO (9001-2000) within a specified period of three years. 
This represented the first of three initiatives. The other two relate to application 
of electronic transactions in the business of government (e-government) and the 
training of leadership at Harvard University (John F. Kennedy School).
<<<PAGE=120>>>
110 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
IAD recognizes that qualifying for ISO (9001-2000) is just a beginning and not 
an end in itself. It is the beginning of a movement of continuous improvement in 
the provision of training, consultations and other services to its clients, both in 
the public and private sectors.
Collection of data for the purposes of evaluating the quality of training in the 
IAD moved from an emphasis on efficiency to an emphasis on effectiveness, i.e. 
from focusing on inputs and the utilization of resources in the training process, 
to focusing on the outcomes of this process. Evaluation of training included both 
formative and summative assessments. Data generated from the evaluation of train-
ing is used as an input for improving the training process on a continuous basis.
Three types of evaluations are currently conducted by IAD namely: Evaluation 
of the T raining, Evaluation of T rainees and Evaluation of Instructors. Data is obtained 
via written questionnaires using the following indicators in each case:
A. Evaluation of Training:
1. Attainment of programs objectives as stated in the annual plan.
2. Meeting individuals’ training needs as expressed by their organizations in 
the nomination forms.
3. Suitability of duration of providing the training as specified in the program’s 
brochure and decided upon by participants.
4. Knowledge and skills gained as a result of training conducted.
5. Applicability of that knowledge and skill to the work place.
6. Suitability of training facilities to the proper functioning of a learning en -
vironment.
7. Cooperation of the IAD staff with the trainees.
8. Need for future improvements of the programs.
9. T ype of improvements needed.
B. Evaluation of Trainees:
1. Attendance.
2. Participation.
3. Evidence of behavioral change (the learning that took place).
C. Evaluation of Instructors :
1. Success in attracting trainees’ attention.
2. Consistent presentation of subject matter.
3. Encouragement of participation.
4. Subject coverage in terms of both theory and practice.
IAD encourages feedback from both participants in its training program and 
their superiors in the work organization. A high premium is put on both written 
and orally expressed opinions. This includes not only the above enumerated indi -
cators of success in training, but also an assessment of the transfer of training to 
work places. Whether training improved actual performance (as measured by the 
satisfaction of clients) is an important test for the success of training at the work
<<<PAGE=121>>>
111
The United Arab Emirates Experience in Developing Standards of Excellence…
place. It is an indicator, and a standard of training excellence at the organizational 
and community levels.
Classification of Standards of Excellence:
Building on the existing knowledge about standards of excellence in public sec -
tor education and training, and the classification scheme provided by Professor 
Wooldridge, one can suggest additional indicators that may be useful for further 
development.
The systems approach to standards of excellence in public sector training offers 
a comprehensive and systemic way of organizing whatever standards are found or 
utilized or even proposed under the four main categories of: Inputs, Processes, 
Outputs, and Outcomes. Taking this scheme as an acceptable guideline, and look -
ing back into the UAE experience in public administration, some new data can be 
proposed under the four main headings as follows:
1. Inputs:
a. Budgetary appropriations / financial resources.
b. T raining needs assessment.
c. Number and quality of training support staff.
d. Premises.
2. Processes:
a. T raining programs design.
b. Objectives setting.
3. Outputs:
a. Behavioral change / learning at the individual / group level.
4. Outcomes:
a. Results / improved performance at organizational level.
In addition, more data on standards of excellence in public sector training can 
be generated though empirical research covering the institutes of administration in 
the Gulf region and the Middle East. Results of such a study will shed more light 
on the experience of those institutions with standards of excellence.
References
HEFCE, Information on Quality Standards in Higher educations “Final report of 
the Task Group, HEFCE, 2002 ( www.befce.ac.uk/pubs/befce/2002/02.ishtm).
NASPAA, Standards for professional masters degree program in Public Affairs, 
Policy and Administration ( www.naspaa.org)
QAA, Subject Overview report: Business and Management 2000 to 2001. TheQual-
ity Assurance Agency for Higher Education. Q05/2001 ( www.agg.ac.uk).
UAE, IPA., Annual Plan for the year 2004.
UAE, IPA., Annual Report for the year 2003.
<<<PAGE=122>>>
112 
PART I     Enhancing the Quality of Education and T raining for the Public Sector
Wooldridge, Blue. Achieving High Performance Schools and Institutes of Admin-
istration: The Role of Standards of Excellence, 2004.
<<<PAGE=123>>>
Part II
Enhancing Leadership Capacity 
Through Education and Training: 
An African Perspective
<<<PAGE=124>>>

<<<PAGE=125>>>
115
A Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative  
for the African Continent
John-Mary Kauzya *
Introduction
The United Nations Millennium Declaration lays out a development agenda for 
the next fifteen years that if even partially achieved, will represent a significant step 
forward in socio-politico-economic development. It calls for economic development 
and the eradication of poverty; the insurance of environmental sustainability; the 
support of democracy, good governance and human rights; and the maintenance 
of peace and security. In setting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
Member States of the United Nations, including those from Africa, expressed 
their commitment in this regard.
There are other manifestations of intergovernmental commitment to develop -
ment and poverty reduction that go in the direction of translating the MDGs 
into regional thematic actionable strategies. They include the Johannesburg Plan 
of Action and, most especially, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
(NEPAD) as significant commitments at the highest level that show the resolve 
to get societies out of the claws of poverty. The New Partnership for African 
Development is particularly relevant to the issues of leadership development on 
the African continent which this paper seeks to introduce and discuss. In terms 
of congruency and convergence, the United Nations Millennium Declaration 
confirms the global community’s readiness to support Africa’s efforts to address 
the continents underdevelopment and marginalisation.
However, the unfortunate reality that is becoming more and more imposing as 
efforts to implement these commitments get under way, is that, in far too many 
instances, leaders in many countries at various levels, and in all sectors (public, 
private, and civil society), will not have all of the skills, knowledge, attitudes, and 
networks necessary to provide the quality of leadership that will translate the com-
mitments made at global and regional levels into national, local and community 
level strategies, actions and tangible results. The logical conclusion from the above 
observation is that in many countries there is need for effective leadership education 
and training to enhance the capacity in this respect and enable them to translate 
the commitments into strategies and actions as well as concrete positive results.
The United Nations Department of Social and Economic Affairs (UNDESA) 
is directly concerned with this reality. It has the UN mandate, expertise, and 
experience to initiate and engage in activities of strengthening public administra -
tion capacity around the world. In this regard it has initiated efforts to mobilize 
partners around the world to plan and implement strategies and programmes for 
* Chief, Governance and Public Administration Branch, Division for Public Administration and 
Development Management, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations
<<<PAGE=126>>>
116 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
developing and strengthening leadership capacity for the implementation of the 
Millennium Goals and other intergovernmental commitments.
Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative
One such initiative was a United Nations Ad hoc Expert Group Meeting on “the 
New Challenges for Senior Leadership Enhancement for Improved Public Manage-
ment in a Globalizing World” organized in T urin (Italy) on 19 and 20 September 
2002 which was co-chaired by Guido Bertucci and Allan Rosenbaum. The objective 
was to consult a core group of leading experts in public administration and train -
ing, with special interest in, and knowledge of, the education and training needs 
of senior public sector leadership, on the design of an appropriate methodology 
for enhancing the skills of the current and future generations of senior public 
sector leaders. The meeting was intended to promote the exchange of experiences 
and ideas and create opportunity for new thinking in order to produce an output, 
which would be relevant for guiding countries to provide more effective education 
and training opportunities for their top-level public sector leadership. The Expert 
Group Meeting also aimed at identifying the implementation mechanisms of the 
initiative and the most effective manner of involving relevant regional organiza -
tions. Finally , by promoting exchange of country experiences and best practices, the 
Meeting had the goal of providing guidance to appropriate strategic partnerships 
and the synergies, which can result from them.
The gist of the conclusions of the meeting was that the strengthening of pub -
lic administration capacity (especially public sector leadership) is critical for the 
achievement of the United Nations Millennium Goals. The meeting stressed that 
leadership is critical to the future of governance, future of democracy and future of 
people’s well being. This message was reinforced by a letter that the Chairperson 
of the United Nations Committee of Experts on Public Administration, Prof. 
Apolo Nsibambi, the Prime Minister of Uganda, faxed to the meeting, reiterating 
the importance of leadership capacity development and calling for particular at -
tention to be placed on the specific problems of specific regions, especially Africa, 
and underlining the relationship between leadership and governance.
One key conclusion from the meeting  – which is of direct relevance and 
consequence to NEPAD, and which was mostly underlined by the experts from 
Africa present at the meeting – was that leadership is culture loaded and situation 
specific. As such the UNDESA leadership development initiative should be, and 
has been, planned and implemented in close association and collaboration with 
regional and national training institutes on the African continent. The meeting 
took this observation to be applicable in all regions where the leadership capacity 
development initiative will be implemented.
Key Issues Facing Senior Public Sector Leadership
The following six main issues were identified as being key challenges facing the 
top public sector leadership of developing countries in the next five years:
<<<PAGE=127>>>
117
A Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative for the African Continent
(i) Development of future leaders
(ii) Promotion of horizontal management
(iii) Assessing and addressing the impact of HIV/AIDS
(iv) Introducing performance management in the public services
(v) Managing rapid change
(vi) Designing a strategic vision and developing own-thinking capacity.
It is interesting to note that although these issues and challenges were raised 
in a global meeting, they echo directly the issues and challenges identified and 
singled out in the Summary of Nepad Action Plans of July 2002.
The meeting strongly felt that leadership capacity enhancement programs must 
be conceived and implemented with the aim of making leaders capable of effectively 
addressing the key issues facing the world today and that its planning and imple -
mentation must be interdisciplinary , international and inter-sectoral (involving public 
and non-profit organizations). Clearly any initiative for leadership development 
on the African continent needs to be conceived with the aim of enabling African 
leaders at all levels in all sectors to meet the challenges facing the African people 
as identified and expressed in NEPAD. It must be recognized that the current 
political leaders of Africa, in expressing their commitment to NEPAD goals, have 
already created a base on which leadership capacity development on the continent 
can be constructed. They have given the ultimate objective that must be pursued 
by any leadership capacity development efforts on the continent.
The following issues were singled out as some of the critical ones facing the 
leaders in the world, at least for the next five years:
Globalization: Globalization needs to be understood in its nature, its impact, in 
the way it can be harnessed to limit its negative impact and how benefits can derive 
from its positive effects on development. This is especially relevant for countries 
of the South, which have difficulty in influencing globalization.
Strategic approaches to poverty alleviation: Leaders have to develop cross-
sectoral approaches to solving problems to reduce poverty. The following aspects 
need attention:
• financing development
• developing civic engagement
• improving service delivery especially in water, health, HIV/AIDS, education, 
environment
• promoting horizontal management
Conflict	prevention	and	resolution:	The specific case of countries in conflict or 
needing rebuilding was discussed and it was recognized that stability and security 
are key to promoting sustainable reforms. For conflict countries, special strategies 
need to be in place to ensure that the seeds of conflict are not planted again.
Legitimacy of state institutions: Creating legitimacy and trust is critical. This 
can be done by establishing strong participation mechanisms and by defining in
<<<PAGE=128>>>
118 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
a transparent manner the roles and relationships of different spheres of govern -
ment. It includes also the development of an administrative culture based on the 
rule of law and a system that ensures security to attract investment and encourage 
property ownership.
Strengthening leadership in a world of increasing interdependency: Taking 
into account the present political environment in an increasing globalizing world, 
new areas of leadership competency need to be developed, in particular:
• Diversity management
• Knowledge management
• Horizontal management
• Resource and information management
• Partnerships and negotiation skills
• Communication and ICT skills
Facilitating large-scale transformations: This challenge involves the follow -
ing tasks:
• Working with stakeholders
• Balancing and managing long term and short term objectives in the context of 
change
• Communication skills
• Creating a shared vision
• Empowering employees
Coping with contradictions and paradox: The world is changing so rapidly that 
contradictions continuously emerge. It is incumbent on leaders (and employees) 
to be able to deal with more ambiguity. These following areas were singled out:
• Economic liberalism versus social welfare
• People getting poorer but at the same time having more voice
• Managing change while ensuring stability and security
For African leaders who have gone through the process of designing, discuss -
ing, agreeing and adopting the NEPAD Action plans, these issues are critical but 
certainly not new. What may be comforting perhaps is that the concerns on the 
African continent are actually similar to the concerns expressed by other develop -
ing countries.
Strategies, Approaches, and T echniques for Leadership Training 
Programmes
Whether it is called training or competency enhancement and/or development 
(or by any other name), leadership training needs to be undertaken with a clear 
understanding of both the ultimate purpose being pursued and the impact of cul -
ture on leadership because the culture of politics varies, often significantly, from 
country to country.
<<<PAGE=129>>>
119
A Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative for the African Continent
Given the diversity of administrative cultures, and the great variety of societal 
environments, each country leadership has to be open-minded and look at all of the 
potential solutions to their own problems. The key element is to develop a sense 
of direction for the public service of a given country which takes into account its 
history , its environment and its position in the global world in a realistic manner.
In this sense, the basic guideline on strategies, approaches, techniques and 
methodologies for leadership capacity development is that each situation, the needs 
it imposes as well as the composition and nature of the targeted audience, should 
dictate the approaches, techniques, thematic content and training methods to be 
adopted. In designing, planning, implementation, monitoring and the evaluation 
of leadership development programmes – whether they be in the immediate, short 
term, medium term or long term – organizers should adopt a participative approach 
involving the beneficiaries and target groups of such programmes.
Framework matrix for target audiences:
The meeting concluded that, in many circumstances, leadership capacity develop -
ment programmes need to target the following different levels:
• Potential leaders who are still at University and other tertiary institutions
• Junior civil servants
• Senior civil servants
• Other policy makers such as Parliamentarians and Ministers in central and local 
governments
• A mixed group of leaders from public sector, civil society, and private sector
Each of the target groups would require a strategy , an approach and methodologies 
that are congruent with their needs. Even the thematic content for the programme 
would vary depending on the target group. A framework matrix incorporating target 
groups, thematic issues and a methodology for a leadership training strategy was 
proposed in the meeting. It is presented below . The Expert Group emphasized that 
this can only serve as a framework of analysis whose contents can be specified only 
after careful participative analysis of target identification and needs assessment
T able 1
Y oung and Mid-Career Civil Servants to be Prepared for Global Leadership
Target Major purpose Methodology Thematic content
Young Civil servants at 
Central and local 
government levels
Enhancement of 
knowledge, skills, and 
inculcating attitudes, and 
values related to Public 
service
Various including, formal 
training in management 
development institutions, 
universities, seminars 
and workshops, etc
Various depending on 
technical fields but with 
a good mix of public 
service/administration 
related subjects. Context 
and content of the 
NEPAD goals.
It was emphasized that universities and management development institutions 
need to be at the leading position in this initiative, especially to determine target 
groups, methodologies and the thematic content of the training of young public 
servants on the continent who are going to be the future leaders.
<<<PAGE=130>>>
120 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
T able 2
Experienced High Level Civil Servants and Policy Makers
Target Major purpose Methodology Thematic content
(i): Parliamentarians 
(ii): Ministers
(iii): Top Civil Servantts 
(Permanent 
Secretaries and 
other senior ranks.)
(iv): Local Government 
councilors and top 
leaders
(i): Reinforcing the 
values of leadership 
and serving the 
public
(ii): Sharing experiences 
and best practices
(iii): Inculcating the 
Millennium goals 
and NEPAD goals, 
etc.
(iv): Enhancement of 
team spirit
(i): Workshops
(ii): Retreats
(iii): Exchange visits
(iv): Coaching
(v): Distance learning
(vi): Teleconferencing
(i): Strategic planning 
and policy making 
etc
(ii): Sustainable 
development
(iii): Globalization
(iv): Poverty reduction 
strategies
(v): Public sector reform
For this level, there has to be close consultation with governments and manage-
ment development institutions at national and regional levels since they are in a 
better position to determine both the opportunity and necessity for this kind of 
training, its approaches and methodology and its content.
The Critical Role of the Management Development Institutes
In the process of public sector leadership capacity development, Management De -
velopment Institutes have a critical role to play. Especially in Africa, they constitute 
the infrastructure in their respective countries for management development; they 
have human resources capable of doing management research, training, and technical 
advisory work, as well as consultancy services in different aspects of management. 
Governments should count on them for taking further initiatives such as those 
addressed by this paper. Right from the start of training; for the purpose of needs 
assessment, human resource policy design, personnel development programmes 
formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, these institutes should 
play a leading role. It is understood that some of them – in fact, most of them – will 
need to have their capacities reinforced, but this does not in any way minimize the 
role they must play. In addition, they have networks at national and regional levels 
through which they can pool expertise, facilitate exchange of successful practices 
and share innovative practices. As such, they must play a leading role in the public 
sector leadership capacity enhancement initiative.
Some Suggestions for Starting the Initiative
In a brainstorming exercise, numerous suggestions were made by members of 
the Expert Group to improve leadership-training strategies and they represent a 
starting point from which experts from management development institutions in 
Africa can assess what type of training and for what specific targets is currently 
required. They included:
• Designing of a week long flagship training course
• Combining regional and national workshops
• Developing training of trainers
<<<PAGE=131>>>
121
A Leadership Capacity Enhancement Initiative for the African Continent
• Experimenting with innovative approaches based on real cases based on local 
experiences
• Disseminating case studies and highlight best practices
• Using role playing as an effective technique
• Developing networks enabling leaders to exchange their views (UNPAN could 
play that role by creating chat groups on selected issues)
• Adopting a vertical system of training aiming at training organizations rather 
than individuals
• Further exploring the subject by encouraging researchers to work on the theme; 
especially on the way culture impacts on leadership and the way various societ -
ies may understand the concept of leadership differently.
• Focusing learning on concrete issues, especially for programs targeting senior 
civil servants.
• The profile of ideal facilitators should be (i) A senior person who has respect 
of the target audience and (ii) one or two experts recognized for their expertise 
on the issue at hand. The two should work together and focus on problem 
solving.
• Supporting the leadership of national and regional institutions to meet the chal-
lenges of design, strategy, marketing and ensuring credibility of management 
development programmes.
• Pooling together institutions inside and outside a particular region including 
making effective use of the networks created by them.
The Need for Resource Mobilization Strategies and Partnerships
One critical reality is that the kind of leadership capacity enhancement that will 
enable countries to have a critical mass of capable and competent leaders will re -
quire a substantial amount of resources, especially in financial terms. One of the 
issues that need to be discussed therefore is how such resources can be mobilized 
and how various linkages and partnerships can be forged to mobilize the needed 
resources. This should be among the issues that management development institu-
tions on the African continent should be encouraged to discuss.
Finally, participants felt that it would be useful to carry out more research on 
leadership enhancement and to make an inventory of innovative initiatives done 
by training institutions in the field. It was recommended to support local capacity 
development especially in the area of process consultancy services.
Conclusion
What has been presented here is an initiative which is global and involves global 
actors. However, it must be subjected to both regional and national thinking for 
it to be translated into strategies and actions that respond to national and regional 
needs and can be implemented in ways that fit into the specific conditions. The 
NEPAD Secretariat, and a selection of Management Development Institutions, 
could hold a session to reflect on this initiative and design an Africa wide strat -
egy for leadership capacity development in the public sector. This draft strategy
<<<PAGE=132>>>
122 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
could be submitted to a committee of Ministers to consider it and adopt it for 
implementation. As a point of departure, the UNDESA would support a seminar 
putting together high-level civil servants (at the rank just below that of Permanent 
Secretary) during which seminar the NEPAD secretariat and the management 
development institutions would design and discuss the strategy framework in 
consultation with the public servants present.
<<<PAGE=133>>>
123
Analyzing the Leadership Capacity Challenge:  
T owards Potential Intervention Strategies
Patrick Fitzgerald *
Leadership and Leadership Theory
The leadership question is an old, actually, an ancient issue. The stories, myths, 
fables and legends of pre-history, within the lore of any or all cultures, abound in 
the narration and interrogation of the leadership role – and its drama.
The development of leadership theory during the course of the last century is 
both instructive and unhelpful at the same time. Instructive in that various theoreti-
cal approaches to leadership such as “trait theory”, “behaviourism”, “situationalist”, 
“transactional”,”transformative”, and so on, have provided a vocabulary capable of fa-
cilitating discussion beyond the merely “great man” or entirely mystical approach.
This is not to say that leadership, and its fostering and nurture in individuals, 
organizations or societies, is without mystery. Despite the numerous scholarly, 
semi-scholarly and populist texts abounding in airport and other bookshops, the 
issues around leadership, and how best to develop it, remain somewhat opaque. To 
this extent leadership theory has been unhelpful, insofar as it is yet to rise beyond 
the descriptive grammar of a range of observed leadership-related characteristics 
and behaviour – without actual cogent or “scientific” explanation of leadership in 
action or its strategic cultivation.
It is said that in the case of the discipline of philosophy, it is unfair to expect 
precise knowledge or predictability-orientated explanation, as whenever such para-
digm emerges it becomes a fully-fledged discipline in itself. Thus, mathematics, 
physics, astronomy, history, political science, chemistry, psychology and so on have 
all emerged from the work of philosophical discourse and speculation.
Leadership theory is in very much the same position in that what can be reli -
ably known and easily replicated is quickly assimilated to management “science”, 
organizational behaviour theory , communication theory , sociology of organizations, 
social psychology, political science or even constitutional and legal procedure. 
Leadership itself thus remains in a situation of constantly moving goalposts, 
continuing to represent contextual applications of implicit knowledge. What we 
tend to ascribe to “leadership” is precisely those tacit and complex attributes and 
insights which are constantly eluding our available theoretical and managerial 
concepts and vocabulary.
Metaphorically then, we are always turning our heads to squint at the leadership 
concept, having glimpsed seeming coherent flashes of explanatory methodology 
* Director of the Graduate School of Public & Development Management, University of the Wit -
watersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
<<<PAGE=134>>>
124 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
out of the corners of our eyes. Leadership is a vocabulary on the tip of our tongue, 
and at the tip of our consciousness. Leadership development is similarly like a lost 
recipe, which we are only able to cook imperfectly, or on occasion, when all the 
ingredients come right, almost by accident.
None of the above should be taken to indicate that new understandings of 
leadership should not be constantly sought, or that leadership development should 
not be energetically pursued and strategically implemented. It is precisely through 
such constant activities that leadership knowledge is built, transmitted, developed 
and consolidated in our individual consciousness; and within the governance and 
institutional networks of our public management systems.
Leadership is, by definition, always bound up with new and emerging insights 
related to effectively dealing with the growing complexity, including policy and 
institutional complexity of the environment(s) in which our governance systems 
and developmental efforts exist.
African Challenges, Culture, Management and Leadership
In the same way that art or music are universal, so is management. All societies make 
use of global and generic management knowledge, skills and techniques. Y et, as in 
the case of art and music, the management craft works best and is most inspired 
when it is rooted in the conditions and circumstances of its environment.
It is incontrovertible that American, French or Japanese managers do not man-
age in the same style or manner – yet successful management cultures exist in all 
these societies. This is because the management tools and techniques have been 
adjusted, reinterpreted or indigenized to fit in with the cultural and socio-political 
milieu of that particular society.
A problem for newly emerging economies and previously colonized societies is 
that an “authentic” or “effective” indigenous organizational and management way 
of life needs to be achieved. In our circumstances we need to develop an “ African 
Management” approach that would assist organizations in our society to tackle 
and solve a multitude of problems and challenges.
It is important not to lose direction in overly sentimental, parochial or narrow 
conceptions of an African Management approach. Management skills are certainly 
global and generic, but they work best when anchored and related within a strong 
and committed culture of motivation, innovation and achievement.
Therefore, within the effective ongoing development of a grounded public 
management capacity, the constant interrogation as to how individuals and orga -
nizations are actualizing and deploying management knowledge and skills in the 
particular governance and developmental situation of African organizational life is 
useful. In this sense, scholarship and documentation would contribute to rendering 
much more explicit the implicit or instinctive knowledge which successful man -
agement practitioners may be, to whatever extent, already utilizing in the running
<<<PAGE=135>>>
125
Analyzing the Leadership Capacity Challenge: T owards Potential Intervention …
of successful public management processes and organizations – as well as giving 
affirmation and a vocabulary to such endeavours.
The mobilization of management knowledge, techniques and skills is not 
simply a technical issue. A society needs role models, metaphors, stories and its 
own language which serves to inspire people to learn management and to relate 
management concepts and practices to their own daily struggles and aspirations. 
And much of this is, of course, the work of leadership.
One has to walk a careful golden way here between claiming too much and 
too little in regard to the significance of the issue of African culture. On the one 
hand, it seems incontrovertible that a richer and more dynamic African Manage -
ment culture needs to be developed on our continent in order for “universal”, 
global or, for that matter, particular management techniques and tools to be better 
fitted and suited to their “local” purpose. On the other hand, the leadership role 
and function is in any case almost always considered to be strongly contextual 
and environment-bound.
There is nothing particularly radical or counter-paradigmatic in locating cur -
rent or potential leadership capacity in African, regional, national or local context 
conditions. Hence, within the conventional wisdom, leadership is invariably closely 
bound-up with the cultural and politico-socio life-world in which it is manifested. 
This is precisely a large part of what renders it cryptic in nature and difficult to 
transfer through textbook or conventional training formats.
The Public Management Context
Nor is the public management domain the easiest in which to identify and verify 
leadership hypotheses. The vast bulk of leadership theoretical literature, research and 
case studies prefer the realms of politics, warfare, sport, exploration or especially 
the melodramatic neo-warfare of private sector competition in which to forward 
their paradigms and postulates.
For a lengthy period, the working of public administrative systems were seen 
as mechanical and routine. Politicians sought mandates and created policies and 
legislation – public administrators merely implemented accordingly . Max W eber, the 
founding theorist of bureaucracy, assumed that the bureaucratic mentality would 
render progressive thinking and innovation virtually impossible within the civil 
service and made especial methodological provision for forward-looking thinking 
to come from outside the administrative system.
Unquestionably there is a traceable thread of leadership studies within the 
traditional public administration literature. The themes explored however, tend 
to be those of personal integrity, setting good examples, competent stewardship 
of resources and diplomatic communicative behaviour. In the famous, British TV 
series, “Y es Minister”, the “leadership” role of the civil servant is caricatured as 
guarding of the status quo, the bamboozling of the politicians and the defense of 
personal position and prestige.
<<<PAGE=136>>>
126 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
All of this is very far from the blood and thunder of the leadership role as -
cribed to politicians, or even more spectacularly, to private sector executives who 
heroically battle their competitors, the vicissitudes of the market and the inertia 
of their own organizations.
Certainly the Reinventing Government  movement and the onset of public 
management (as opposed to public administration) discourse, has (in a small way) 
brought some of the management-leadership issues and approaches to the govern-
mental and public milieu. T o some extent, senior public servants have also been seen 
as institutional leaders in the epic struggle to transform intractable institutional 
environments into sites of efficient customer-friendliness and service delivery.
Even in the developing world, the 1990’s saw a new realization of the impor -
tance of a “capable state”, and the onset of new paradigms of good governance 
served to highlight the role of well managed public institutions. A rhetoric of 
leadership development previously reserved for the private sector began to find 
its way into the collective consciousness of the public management system. The 
profile of leadership “skills” and “attributes”, in terms of career development, as 
well as attendance at leadership courses and programmes, was certainly on the 
rise – though whether the concomitant leadership value has been systematically 
added to the activities and core business of national public services has remained 
an open question.
Public Servants and Politicians: Partners, Competitors or Accomplices
Politicians, especially those who have come democratically to power, are by definition 
expert leadership practitioners. Political contestation, effectiveness and legitimacy 
is predicated on a practical and sure grasp of real world operational leadership 
concepts and applications.
To what extent then can the robust leadership of the politicians harmonize and 
synergize with the “functional” leadership expected of senior public servants? This 
is a matter of fair complexity as even the term used above, “functional”, serves to 
disguise the range and extent of functions carried out (or needing to be carried 
out) by the management leadership of contemporary government departments and 
other kinds of state agencies. The rate of change and transformation evident in 
the strategic and institutional environment, the challenges of nation-building and 
globalization, as well as the overall complexity of the ongoing developmental chal-
lenges, all suggest that a neat and clinical separation of the political and managerial 
leadership spheres and functions is not always possible.
We do not always see a predominant situation where political leadership and 
public serviced leadership explicitly understand themselves to be partners in a 
development mission, each with their own tasks and prerogatives. In certain en -
vironments or at certain times political and public service leadership seem to be in 
competition, whereas at other times they are seen as accomplices in bad governance 
denying the population their developmental prospects.
<<<PAGE=137>>>
127
Analyzing the Leadership Capacity Challenge: T owards Potential Intervention …
A culture of leadership co-operation needs to be facilitated, developed and 
consolidated, whereby both political and “functional” leadership can be openly and 
unashamedly manifested. Such a culture needs to embody the democratic principle 
that the elected, not the appointed, leadership are finally accountable and must 
therefore finally decide. However, the protocols of mutual respect, the serious 
consideration of professional advice, and non-interference in purely administrative 
matters also should apply.
Political and managerial leadership in Africa need to self-consciously see 
themselves as operating within a strategic partnership for development. In such a 
partnership, the respective leadership roles would be understood and accommo -
dated. The point would not be to remove tensions, or any possibility of tensions, 
between the two kinds of leadership. This would probably be impossible and also 
possibly undesirable. The aim should rather be the creation of a culture capable 
of handling and resolving such tensions, if and as they may arise, as normal and 
acceptable challenges within the governance process.
In fact, no coherent and strategic leadership development process can be put 
in place for public managers unless there is genuine political will from the side of 
the political leadership that such a programme is a necessity and an operational 
priority.
Leadership Capacity Approaches
Approaches to leadership capacity building have differed in terms of the perspective 
adopted as to what exactly it is that is needed to engender and empower leadership 
aptitudes, skills, attitudes and overall abilities. Some that have occurred in regard 
to the current African scenario are listed below:
•	 Leadership Capacity as Enhanced Management Skills
 This approach puts emphasis on the need for greater management competency 
and better management skills. The assumption here seems to be that, if such 
were in place, then the public service cadre would be able to act as more con -
fident and consummate leaders.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Managing Differently
 This viewpoint sees a significantly different management style as of the essence. 
A shift to more state-of-the-art, contemporary management techniques would 
serve to carry along with it a considerably improved leadership paradigm.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Formal Knowledge
 This approach would seek to educate public managers with information and 
knowledge in regard to a range of issues including globalization, development 
theory and practice, managerial and institutional benchmarks, and the nature 
of leadership. The assumption seems to be that such a knowledge input would 
build leadership stature and ability.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Surfacing and Sharing T acit Knowledge
 This approach assumes that implicit knowledge possessed by some managers can 
be surfaced and communicated to the cadre as a whole. This implies a certain
<<<PAGE=138>>>
128 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
kind of expert facilitation, which brings important tacit skills, networks and 
approaches to a wider group.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Accelerated Experience and Broadened Horizons
 This approach emphasizes the need for the public management cadre to be 
exposed to greater world and life experiences in an accelerated manner. This 
could include travel, placements in other organizations or sectors, professional 
exchanges, study visits, or even facilitated community inter-actions. Greater 
volume and quality of experience would broaden the intellectual horizons of 
the manager and expedite their leadership development.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Self Discovery
 This approach normally takes the form of facilitated leadership programmes 
where the object is to allow for self-discovery and personal growth. Criticized 
by some as too “touchy-feely”, the objective is to render managers more open 
and astute to their own (and other peoples) strengths and weaknesses, and to 
undermine the frequent arrogance and defensiveness characterizing the way 
managers wield power. The purpose is to build leadership characteristics such 
as humility, listening skills, and the ability to see a situation from points of view 
other than your own. Attitudes are expected to change significantly, opening 
the way to a path of wisdom.
•	 Leadership Capacity as the Shaping of Environments
 This perspective places most importance on socializing an entire organizational 
environment to enhance leadership growth and development. T eambuilding, 
opening up lines of communication within an organization and binding all to 
the shared mission are prioritized. The idea here is that institutional leadership 
is about trust, common purpose and mutual support.
•	 Leadership Capacity as Acculturation to “Chaos”
 This approach takes an overtly post-modern stance and sees the Post-Modernist 
management leader as operating within a situation of great diversity , complexity 
and surprising change. An ability to tolerate ambiguity , to innovate constantly and 
find an ethical compass amidst contradictory and seemingly chaotic phenomena is 
emphasized. Heightened and constant strategic alertness and continual readiness 
for new challenges would define vital leadership characteristics of this new era.
Clearly the above items constitute a semi-arbitrary typology of approaches and 
potential leadership development interventions could conceivably combine any or 
all of the above. Often, however, one or other of these approaches is hegemonic 
and gives a particular direction or spin to the nature of the leadership development 
programme and process.
Intervention Modalities and Experiences
A body of experience in terms of actual leadership capacity-building exercises cer -
tainly exists on the African continent and could be accessed, analyzed and evaluated 
by applied research. A recent programme to build the leadership capacity of Vice 
Chancellors of Higher Education Institutions (an initially sceptical and disunited 
group) is illustrative.
<<<PAGE=139>>>
129
Analyzing the Leadership Capacity Challenge: T owards Potential Intervention …
An initial breakthrough occurred during an analysis of the skills profile needed 
for Vice Chancellors in the current era. A shared revelation took place when the 
individuals realized through facilitated discussion that the skills required for the 
task were neither those they had built in their career prior to their appointment, 
nor those specified in the advertisement for the job and interrogated within the 
application and interview process. This process involved some not inconsiderable 
fatalistic humour, as members of the group internalized the need for a major re -
construction of their skills profile and leadership style.
Another leadership development event, which galvanized a group of higher 
education leaders, was a presentation on “Emotional Intelligence”. The group 
was much struck by the difference in the approach from the kind of academic or 
analytical intelligence they had been schooled to cultivate and affirm. The group 
moved from initial criticism of the emotional intelligence concept to an appreciation 
of its functionality and usefulness in their role as managers of higher education 
processes (rather than in their previous role as successful disciplinary academics). 
The group agreed that the session was likely to lead to a fundamental change in 
their management and leadership styles.
A further example was the positive response of a group of professionals who 
were exposed to a course on storytelling. Paying attention to the elements and 
constituent parts of a story, the thinking and techniques needed to tell a story 
well, and the particular “truths” that could be highlighted or emphasized with 
the narration of events was described as life-changing by many participants, who 
stated that their professional communication would be radically improved in future 
(after all, storytelling is both deeply embedded in African traditions, as well as an 
extremely durable and useful leadership technique).
These three brief examples are meant to be illustrative of the variety of pro -
gramme design, which can serve to build leadership capacity within particular 
constituencies. In the same way that leadership is contextual, innovative and 
creative – so too must be the design of the leadership development process. The 
programmes offered should resonate with the felt needs and concerns of the tar -
get audience and although a certain generic element may be present, it should be 
uniquely tailored for each individual group.
Conclusion
Leadership capacity interventions may vary in nature, length and methodology. 
They may involve an intensive experience outside of a person’s usual professional 
scope or an intensive comparative experience within their professional ambit. 
They may take the form of a programme with colleagues or else a programme 
with complete strangers.
Programmes may be self-standing or be knitted into a variety of follow-up ac -
tions and activities. Knowledge may be conveyed by experts or, alternatively, the 
knowledge to be shared may be “mined” from the participants themselves. Formulaic
<<<PAGE=140>>>
130 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
programmes are unlikely to make much impact on senior cadre, however successful 
approaches and methodologies can certainly be replicated with other groups.
The activity of leadership capacity development and the building of success -
ful mechanisms and institutional arrangements to sustain such a programme is 
itself a leadership process. Thus, to some extent, the approach to be pursued will 
emerge as much through intuition and gut instinct, and a leap of faith, than an 
academic and abstract sifting of alleged international best practices. The point is 
to apply our minds and to take account of many views and considerations – but 
also finally to agree on and plan a course and programme of action, and to do, to 
act and to reveal.
<<<PAGE=141>>>
131
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering  
Socio-Economic and Political Development in Africa
T ag Elsir Mahgoub Ali *
Introduction
The moment of truth for Africa and African leadership has dawned, triggering an 
awakening in all African societies that see themselves gradually being eclipsed by the 
giant leaps of developed countries. People throughout Africa are beginning to realize 
that dramatic words and phrases might provide a platform for temporary crowd pleas-
ing, ego satisfaction and what have you, but they cannot solve fundamental problems 
nor satisfy aspirations for a better life. What is needed is a philosophy which should 
both build upon Africa’s past and be an intellectual stimulus to its renaissance. Per-
haps the only solution to Africa’s problems lies in courageously confronting Africa’s 
maladies and the predicaments that manifest themselves in the following:
• Internal and external conflicts that have resulted in devastation of infrastructure 
and low economic performance due to poor macro-economic management;
• Unbridled lust for power and the growth of unscrupulous careerists;
• Inter-group cleavages that hampered real growth and development;
• Fragile institutions hobbled by traditional tribalism and nepotism that resulted 
in reduced efficiency and the poor functioning of organizations;
• Growing poverty and deprivation and abysmal ignorance;
• Poor governance systems giving way to a mismanagement crisis of increasing 
dimensions, due to lack of transparency and accountability;
• Weakened trust in government as an institution;
• Poor service delivery, and increasing endemic diseases;
• Lack of creativity and innovation and aggressive pursuit of excellence.
It is therefore critical for us to tenaciously face up to these inadequacies, engage 
in objective and sober self-critique and slough off self deception before we start 
thinking about prescriptions to disentangle us from this messy situation so as not 
to address symptoms rather than underlying causes.
W e need first and foremost to come to grips with the reality of our situation, 
however harsh it may look, and honestly see the challenges facing us if we are keen to 
have a place in this turbulent, fast-moving world. The issue is one of survival in this 
callous world. That is why there is this call for an honest undertaking and an upheaval 
to revitalize out vision, to reshape our values and hit the track in pursuit of achieve-
ment and excellence.
Challenges Facing African Leadership:
The challenges facing Africa and African leadership are enormous, but the most 
daunting ones are:
* State Minister of Labor and Administrative Reform, Sudan
<<<PAGE=142>>>
132 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
1. The challenge of governance, public service reform and bureaucracy;
2. The challenge of consolidating democracy and promoting sustainable human 
development and poverty reduction;
3. The challenge of conflict prevention and management;
4. The challenge of the development crisis posed by HIV/AIDS pandemic;
5. The challenge of human capital drain;
6. The challenge of private sector development;
7. The challenge of regional co-operation and integration;
8. The challenge of external debt burden;
9. The challenge of globalization;
10. T rade flow and the challenge of trade negotiation:
11. The challenge of the information revolution and scientific and technological 
progress;
12. The challenge of resource flow to Africa;
13. The challenge of tensions within African societies created by increasing de -
mands for recognition of cultural and ethnic diversity in both political and 
economic spheres;
14. The challenge of facing the growing interest in the decentralization of previ -
ously highly centralized governments and the broadening and strengthening 
of local government capacity;
15. The challenge of addressing the issue of gender equality;
16. The challenge of multinational integration;
17. The challenge of understanding the international political and economic order 
and responding intelligently to it;
18. The challenge of reshaping and leading organizations and people through a 
culture that is conducive to excellence to react dynamically to the above chal -
lenges.
These diverse and daunting challenges, no doubt, require strategic vision, a 
clear sense of direction, the ability to plan and organize and the muscle to pursue 
excellence, which can only be attained through aggressive, hard-nosed leadership 
that has the capacity to deliver, be it political or executive leadership.
Leadership Defined:
Leadership will continue to be the challenge of the future. Any reform effort is 
doomed if this aspect is not addressed sufficiently. It is at the heart of the matter, 
for much of the change or shift in paradigm will depend on how well leadership 
perceives its role in re-engineering change. Leadership is one of those qualities that 
are easier to recognize than define. The nature of leadership varies according to 
the demands of a particular situation, as leaders themselves are divers individuals. 
Peter Drucker, a prominent analyst of organizational leadership has noted:
 “ Among the effective executives I have known and worked with, there are extroverts 
and aloof, retiring men, some even morbidly shy. Some are eccentrics, others are 
painfully correct conformists. Some are fat and some are thin. Some are worriers
<<<PAGE=143>>>
133
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering Socio-Economic and Political …
and some are relaxed. Some drink quite heavily and others are total abstainers. 
Some are men of great charm and warmth; some have no more personality than 
a frozen mackerel.”
Stephen Covey notes, in his book Principle-Centred Leadership:
 “Leadership focuses more on people than on things; on the long-term rather than 
the short term; on values and principles rather than activities; on mission, purpose 
and direction rather than on methods, techniques and speed.”
He goes further on to talk about transformational leadership and transactional 
leadership, which he describes as follows:
T ransformational Leadership:
• Builds on the need for meaning;
• Is preoccupied with purposes and values, morals and ethics;
• T ranscends daily affairs;
• Is oriented towards meeting long-term goals without compromising human 
values and principles;
• Separates causes and symptoms and works at prevention;
• V alues profit as the basis of growth;
• Is proactive, catalytic and patient;
• Focuses more on missions and strategies for achieving them;
• Makes full use of human resources;
• Identifies and develops new talent;
• Recognizes and rewards significant contributions;
• Releases human potential;
• Models love;
• Leads in new directions;
• Aligns internal structures and systems to reinforce overarching values and 
goals.
T ransactional Leadership:
• Build on the need to get a job done and to make a living;
• Is preoccupied with power and position, politics and perks;
• Is mired in daily affairs;
• Is short term and hard-data oriented;
• Confuses causes and symptoms and concerns itself more with treatment 
than prescription;
• Focuses on tactical issues;
• Relies on human relations to lubricate human interaction;
• Follows and fulfils role expectations by striving to work effectively within 
current systems;
• Supports structures and systems that reinforce the bottom line, maximize 
efficiency and guarantee short term results.
But whether it is transformational or transactional, effective leadership is a 
quality that is very much in demand, particularly in situations where mediocrity
<<<PAGE=144>>>
134 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
is the least desired. New leadership attributes like setting a strategic vision and 
direction, challenging old rules and processes, enlisting support, providing good 
role models and challenging the heart to bring about change and achieve excellent 
results are crucial. They will make or break any effort at improving the effectiveness 
of organizations and, in particular, the civil service in the new era. To be able to 
achieve that, we have to investigate and analyze the critical dimensions of leader -
ship, to grasp its real essence as it is relevant to the modern age and kindles the 
awareness of the magnitude of African problems and inspires the will and drive 
of leaders to mobilize human effort and resources.
We have to identify these critical dimensions by answering the following 
questions:
• Is leadership simply cultural or political innovation?
• Is it essentially inspiration?
• Is it goal setting and goal fulfilment?
• Is leadership the attainment of progressively worthy goals and objectives 
through the intelligent integration of human and production resources, or 
is it simply driving the herd?
• Is leadership a process of situation appraisal, problem analysis, decision 
analysis, potential problem analysis and potential opportunity analysis, or 
is it fire-fighting and thinking after the fix?
• Is leadership continuously assessing strengths and weaknesses, evaluating 
opportunities and threats for a clear sense of direction with identified and 
controlled risks, and thus sound decision-making or is it simply repeating 
yesterday?
• Is leadership concerned with focusing on contribution and making strength 
productive or is it concerned with bossing and playing the cop?
• Is leadership concerned with shaping values and instilling them through a 
culture conducive to achievement and excellence led by the leader or is it 
paying no attention to organizational values, considering them new-fangled 
nonsense?
• Is leadership concerned with achieving a major paradigm shift making the 
public service more mission-oriented, dynamic and resilient in a rapid chang-
ing environment?
• Is leadership concerned with exerting big effort in making incremental but 
significant reforms encompassing not only structural and systems changes, 
but changes in values and in the mind set of civil service, or is it satisfied 
with maintaining the status quo?
The answers to these questions determine the roadmap to effective leadership.
The Changing Role of Public Sector Leadership:
The role of modern governments in Africa is indeed very complex, especially with 
current issues of global interdependence, the communications and information 
technology revolution and the expectations of the public to be more involved
<<<PAGE=145>>>
135
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering Socio-Economic and Political …
in the decisions that affect their lives. With the advent of the Internet and open 
government, we need to acknowledge that the days of policy making behind closed 
doors might well be numbered.
As the buttress of government, the public service should work towards ensuring 
an effective administrative framework that delivers goods and services efficiently, 
maintains security, law and order and ensures access, fairness and justice – all of 
which are critical to a government that governs effectively. Hence the leadership 
function within the public service is crucial, while being well informed and able to 
deal with complex social problems it must recognize that, in the future, technol -
ogy will have a profound impact on governance; that societies and the organized 
entities within them must be characterized by the learning mode; and that human 
resources rejuvenation is the key to renewal of the public sector.
Despite huge strides in socio-economic development, leaders must be ready to 
continue to address fundamental public policy issues of poverty , education, housing, 
security and health effectively as these will continue to dominate the public agenda. 
More importantly they will have to grapple with the dilemma of how governments 
can remain credible and focused when significant resources are not in their control 
or are assigned to organizations with limited ability to carry them through and lack 
accountability to the government. Leadership through good governance must be 
able to manage diversity, identify and develop key strategic areas, seek and nurture 
productive partnerships and focus on outputs as well as outcomes. The key leader-
ship role would thus be to seek ways to build the necessary institutional, human 
resources and technological capacity to support governance
The public sector leadership should equally measure up to the requirements 
of a quality culture in African organizations, a culture that gradually moves out 
of its traditional boundaries and transcends them to embrace compelling shifts 
in structure and content that address issues such as strategic vision and strategic 
planning, reengineering organizations by leading change, managing knowledge, 
internalizing quality, entering the digital age, building partnerships, managing for 
accountability and getting values and ethics right.
Public sector leadership should respond to the real and daunting challenges facing 
African governments and enhance their capacity to deal with them. The key factor here 
is to differentiate between leading and managing. Leaders in the public service need to 
be constantly reminded of the need to go beyond management. In the words of W arren 
Bennis “management is doing things right; leadership is doing the right things.”
Effectiveness is what should be sought in programmes undertaken in the public 
service, or for that matter in any other field of work. Effectiveness is very much 
a function of leadership, for effectiveness is not so much about the effort that 
went into carrying out a plan of action; rather it is whether the effort went into 
an action plan that is headed in the right direction in the first place. This kind of 
metamorphosis, that is from management to leadership, is going to have to deal a 
lot with the intrinsic or personal elements of the individual leader. That is why it
<<<PAGE=146>>>
136 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
is equally critical to pay a lot more attention to the personal attributes of leaders 
in hoping to achieve what we want the public service to achieve as a whole.
Personal Attributes of Leaders:
Some of the personal attributes of leaders compiled by Edwin A. Locke developed 
from an integration of recent works on leadership consist of four key parts:
1 – Vision
2 – Implementing the vision
3 – Motives and traits
4 – Knowledge skills and ability.
1) Vision: Vision is a vital leadership component – the leaders’ drive, motivation 
to lead, experience and intelligence provide them with the capacity to:
• define what their organization should strive to be and to do;
• articulate that vision succintly;
• formulate a strategic visions that specifies the means by which the vision 
will be attained;
• promote commitment from their followers by communicating in a manner 
that is both clear and compelling.
2) Implementation of the Vision: Implementation of the vision is a require -
ment for leadership success. A vision that is not implemented remains only a 
dream. The effective leader takes steps to ensure that the vision is translated 
into specific actions, which usually are accomplished with the help of managers 
and their subordinates.
Effective implementation actions fall in six categories:
• structuring;
• selection, training and acculturating of personnel;
• motivating;
• managing information;
• team building;
• promoting change.
3) Motives and Traits: Effective leaders are:
• full of drive, energy and ambition;
• tenacious and pro-active in pursuing their goals;
• want to lead – they do not crave power for the sake of dominating others 
but for the sake of achieving an overarching goal;
• honest and have integrity;
• have a high degree of self-confidence, which enables them not only to un -
dertake grave responsibilities and generate confidence in others but to cope 
with many potentially stressful situations with equanimity;
• often creative;
• strategically flexible;
• sometimes charismatic.
<<<PAGE=147>>>
137
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering Socio-Economic and Political …
4) Knowledge, Skills and Ability: Leaders have:
• extensive knowledge of their discipline, technology and the organizational 
environment in which they are working;
• a variety of skills. Because of the relational nature of leadership, “people 
skills” are important. These include listening, communication, network 
building, conflict management, and assessment of self and others. Problem 
solving, decision-making skills are also vital;
• cognitive ability, especially the intelligence to process a large amount of 
information, integrate it and draw logical conclusions from it.
The Soft Stuff of Leadership:
And soft is hard! Tom Peters in “ In Search of Excellence ” has summed up the 
characteristics of excellent performing organizations in the following:
1. Bias for action;
2. Closeness to the customer;
3. Obsession with quality;
4. Instilling unique values;
5. Productivity through people;
6. Encouraging innovation;
7. Stick to the knitting;
8. Simple form, lean staff.
In his sequel “ A Passion For Excellence”, Peters demonstrates how that passion 
is borne by leadership that makes excellence real, through real people who are made 
to deliver, because they want to deliver. It is the organizational culture shaped by 
those leaders that makes the entire system become obsessed with achievement 
and excellence.
Here comes the soft stuff of leadership. I have developed a model out of the 
letters of the word “ Leadership” in an attempt to get to the heart of the soft stuff 
of leadership. The model depicts LEADERSHIP as:
L = Love
E = Empathy
A = Attention
D = Dedication
E = Enforcement of V alues
R = Reward
S = Synergy
H = Hoopla
I = Integrity
P = Perseverance
Love: That is the demonstration of love, real love to the organization one 
leads, love of vision, love of people to be reciprocated, love of the values one 
preaches – love that permeates the entire system.
<<<PAGE=148>>>
138 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
Empathy: The need to adopt a human approach in all actions, to strengthen 
not just the minds of followers but also their hearts by shoring up confidence in 
themselves and their abilities, understanding their difficulties and appreciating their 
contributions, celebrating their achievements and publishing their successes! It is 
heightening confidence and involvement of followers both in the organizational 
as well as the national agenda.
Attention: Leaders pay attention to their people throughout the hierarchy. 
People need to stand out, to be noticed, to be respected. Effective leaders provide 
that … Examples include being on a first name basis, no reserved parking or skunk 
works, improvement teams and inverted organizational charts – all are examples 
of the effort of leaders to mobilize human resources by paying attention to the 
individual and treating them with dignity.
Dedication: Leaders provide a critical role model in their dedication to work, 
to the vision they preach, to the values they hold dear. They are very careful that 
words match deeds; they realize that their one thousand little actions day in and 
day out are being observed by their people and that they also provide reinforcement 
to the value system. Otherwise, they become mere show business that results in 
sarcasm and disbelief in leadership.
Enforcement of Values: Leaders formulate values, and not only preach them 
but do them. The leader becomes a value shaper par excellence, and he or she 
compromises on anything except the values set. They exert every effort to instill 
values throughout the system and engage all people in the organization to rally 
behind them.
Reward: Effective leadership rewards good contribution, and rewards it immedi-
ately. Immediacy creates trust and revitalizes energies. Lack of appreciation creates 
resentment and triggers anti-creativity. Fairness is also key to rewarding. Leaders 
make sure that the reward is well deserved. Rewarding could be to all individuals, 
to a group, or to the entire organization and it could take different forms.
Synergy: It translates to one plus one equals three! Effective leaders seek 
synergy of ideas in order to perfect decision-making, to create involvement and 
to ensure commitment.
Hoopla: Effective leaders tend to break the monotony created by daily work 
routines.. they engineer events to have fun, to make a break, to renew blood and 
to revitalize the soul… but all this is integrated around the value system so that 
fun itself becomes productive!
Integrity: To live the people message, to live the leader-as-servant requires 
total integrity. A leader should always be confident in their beliefs, and to live 
them with integrity, as Tom Peters says “Y ou don’t lose your dignity if you wear 
coveralls and if you believe in people, you likewise do not lose your dignity if 
you admit mistakes.”
<<<PAGE=149>>>
139
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering Socio-Economic and Political …
Perseverance: Leaders believe in all of the above; they don’t pay them lipser -
vice but do them as role models and persevere in instilling them in all to become 
bone-deep beliefs in the entire system!
T ackling Capacity Needs: The African Capacity Building Foundation states 
that for:
 “The development challenges for Africa to be addressed and for the enhance -
ment of leadership capacity needs to be decisively tackled… the availability and 
effective utilization of the requisite capacity will determine the continents’ ability 
to meet these challenges in the new millenium. Therefore sustained structural 
transformation in Africa in the next two decades requires a significant leap in 
the quantum of support and commitment to capacity building as well as reforms 
for effective utilization of such capacity.
Indeed, it is useful to end this analysis with the African Capacity Building 
Foundation’s view on the capacity dimensions of Africa’s development challenges 
on a sectoral basis. It provides some indications as to the breadth and depth of 
capacity needs that face Africa in the decades ahead, if it is to provide a robust 
response to the development challenges.
Sectors and Capacity Needs:
African countries fully recognize the need for market-based, private sector-oriented 
economic systems and policies. They are also aware that an autonomous, vibrant 
civil society is a key building block of a potent Africa. The public sector, especially, 
at the central level, must retain a strategic place and role precisely to enable the 
private sector, civil society and other stakeholders to play their developmental 
role in a constructive, synergetic and sustainable manner. Given the foregoing 
challenges, the corresponding capacity implications, especially, at the level of the 
key sectors are obvious. These are as follows:
The Public Sector: To effectively lead the process of tackling the development 
challenges, the public sector in Africa must be strengthened to perform the key 
functions of a capable state in support of poverty reduction, equitable development 
and participatory governance. Given the present state of the public sector on the 
continent, it needs enhanced capacity to:
•	 Successfully design and implement development policies and programmes;
•	 Provide efficient, cost-effective and responsive public services;
•	 Promote, through policies and programmes, a sustained environment that will 
facilitate the emergence of a strong and vibrant private sector and civil society 
and a policy environment that will allow for a good measure of predictability 
in the direction of adjustment of socio-economic policies in response to the 
development challenges;
•	 Establish and manage an effective and transparent regulatory and legal framework 
to guide the growth and development of the private sector, reward innovative -
ness and risk-taking, and adequately protect consumers and the environment;
<<<PAGE=150>>>
140 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
•	 Address, more vigorously, the issue of transparency and accountability in public 
service;
•	 Enhance institutions that promote and enforce the rule of law for legitimacy, 
social stability and the protection of property rights;
•	 Enhance the role of civil society in development policy management, and 
constructively engage all other stakeholders in dialogue in order to promote 
participatory development, consensus building and responsive governments;
•	 Put in place a sound framework for managing public resources and attendant 
issues such as decentralization, fiscal federalism, debt, poverty reduction and 
intergenerational equity;
•	 Manage the changing role of the public sector in the context of globalization, 
market economy , multiparty democracy , and information revolution, which have 
significant implications for openness in public sector management, innovation 
and the spread of best practices in development policy management;
•	 Cultivate and nurture an environment that will accelerate poverty reduction 
and sustainable development.
The Private Sector: As regards the private sector, capacity is needed for it to 
carry out the following, among others:
•	 Provide efficient and competitive services;
•	 Compete effectively in the global economy;
•	 Dialogue effectively with other stakeholders in development, especially the 
public sector and civil society, in order to influence the policy agenda;
•	 Perform functions traditionally a monopoly of the state;
•	 Enhance good corporate governance and social responsibility;
•	 Establish codes of best practices;
•	 Improve productivity and output;
•	 Promote adaptation and application of science and technology;
•	 Undertake research for development;
•	 Bridge the digital divide by promoting information technology.
Civil Society: To play an effective role in efforts to address the development 
challenges, civil society in Africa in the 21st century has to emerge as a strong voice 
in the development process. It has to play a vital role in mobilizing and articulat -
ing social demands and providing countervailing influences to elicit accountable 
performance and transparency in the public and private sectors. It thus requires 
capacity to contribute effectively to formulation, implementation and responsive -
ness/accountability of development policies and programmes. To this end, it will 
require capacity for the following, among others:
•	 Independent, professional policy analysis and research;
•	 Strengthening of non-governmental organizations and their networks;
•	 Effective interface with the public and private sectors;
•	 Provision of support to development policies, strategies and programmes for 
poverty reduction;
<<<PAGE=151>>>
141
The Role of Public Sector Leadership in Fostering Socio-Economic and Political …
•	 Participation in, and monitoring of, public service delivery in the search for 
accountable, transparent and efficient government.
Additional Strategic Areas: Beside the foregoing, there are numerous additional 
areas of capacity needs in which strategic interventions are directly needed in the 
efforts to tackle the development challenges. Some of these include:
• Conflict prevention, resolution and management;
• Enhancement of governance institutions and practices;
• Improvement of national statistics;
• Strengthening of consultation among stakeholders and participatory develop -
ment;
• Rehabilitating educational institutions and systems, and reforming curricula for 
relevance to development challenges;
• Fostering regional cooperation and integration;
• Strengthening of regional institutions for the provision of regional public 
goods;
• Strengthening of special initiatives geared towards:
• Designing, implementing and monitoring poverty reduction policy strategies 
and programmes;
• Speeding up the recovery of post-conflict countries;
• Setting up institutional networks, collaborative and exchange programmes;
• Enhancing capacity for international negotiations.
Referemces
Covey, Stephen. Principle-Centred Leadership, First edition; Simon and Schuster, 
New Y ork, NY : 1990.
The African Capacity. Occasional Paper, Building Foundation
Peters, Tom. A Passion for Excellence ; Random House New Y ork, NY : 1985.
Rosenbaum, Allan. “New Challenges for Senior Leadership Enhancement for 
Improved Public Management” for United Nations meeting: 2002.
<<<PAGE=152>>>
142 
Leadership Challenges in Mainstreaming Performance 
Enhancement in the Public Service
John Kiyaga-Nsubuga *
Introduction
The primary function of a public service is to translate the national vision into 
tangible outcomes. How it does this depends on the clarity with which the 
national vision is articulated, the resources available to the public service, the 
competence of its managerial leadership and the partnerships it structures with 
other players.
A major issue in current development discourse is how to enable public ser -
vices in Africa to become more effective agents of change in the face of daunting 
development challenges. Countries must respond creatively to the opportunities 
and constraints arising from globalization and the rapid changes in information 
technology. Additionally, they must consolidate nationhood, expand their econo -
mies and respond effectively to increasing citizen demands for improved service 
provision and accountability.
The current debate is occasioned by the disappointing manner in which most 
public services in Africa have handled the development process in spite of so much 
earlier promise. The general consensus is that public services in Africa have been 
weakened by, among other things, inadequate funding, unattractive incentives, 
exponential growth in size, antiquated regulations and malfunctioning systems; 
and that they could do a much better job if they are leaner, have adequate tools 
and funding, and are able to retain higher caliber and better motivated personnel. 
It is for that reason that most public service reforms have sought efficiency gains 
through, among other things, creation of new structures, reduction of the overall 
size of the service, improving incentives, updating antiquated regulations or draft -
ing new ones, and refining systems.
It is now generally recognized that such reforms must be complemented by 
enhanced leadership competencies if national development visions are to be real -
ized. Initially, the need for enhanced leadership was mostly conceived in terms of 
the political class, largely because of the political turmoil many African countries 
have suffered over the years. However, the continuing under-performance of 
public services across the continent has made clear that leadership competencies 
must also be developed among the managerial and technocratic class in order to 
galvanize public employees towards the realization of national goals. This chapter 
provides a brief discussion of these issues, and illustrates them with an overview 
of Uganda’s experience to show how they relate to concrete reality. A conclusion 
is provided in which the major challenges are summarized.
* Director, Uganda Management Institute, Kampala, Uganda
<<<PAGE=153>>>
143
Leadership Challenges in Mainstreaming Performance Enhancement …
Critical Leadership Competencies for Public Managers
T ransforming and directing the energies of others into purposive action requires 
the right knowledge and information, skills, abilities and attitude. For that matter, 
effective leadership requires a balanced combination of job related attributes and 
personal qualities. The following comprise the competencies that are most com -
monly cited in the literature as being core to effective leadership:
• Ability to inspire a shared vision
• Strategic thinking
• Customer focus
• Decision-making
• Developing organizational talent
• Delegation and empowerment
• Creating and leading teams
• Leading by example
• Personal strength and maturity
• Effective communication
• Resilience
• Innovation/creativity
• T ransparency and accountability
• Sound technical knowledge
• Ability to mentor others
Top leaders in the public service require the above competencies for a variety of 
reasons. Organizational or departmental teams must be directed towards a vision 
of the future in an inspirational manner; strategic goals must be identified and 
effectively communicated to all categories of public employees; organisational op -
portunities and constraints must be identified and appropriate responses developed, 
proper judgement must be applied in decision-making; and, once made, decisions 
must be effectively implemented.
The above competencies require strong nurturing in order to become second 
nature to an individual. Mentoring, in particular, is rarely applied in the public 
service in a structured manner in spite of the fact that a key requirement of 
leadership is to groom others for the future. Mentoring involves determining the 
mentee’s performance gaps, establishing a common understanding of these gaps 
with the mentee, developing (with the mentee) a realistic workplan for addressing 
these gaps, using personal experience and other relevant methodologies to help the 
mentee to find solutions to identified bottlenecks, and reviewing performance with 
the mentee to gauge the extent to which mentoring has achieved its objectives. 
This process is common in business organisations and needs to be mainstreamed 
into the public service as well.
Challenges of Enhancing Efficiency in the Public Service
Current public service reform efforts in many African countries have been under -
taken for a variety of reasons. Some of them include introducing best management
<<<PAGE=154>>>
144 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
practices in public management in order to reverse the earlier decline in profession-
alism; creating a conducive atmosphere for the private sector to play a leading role 
in economic development and transformation; improving citizen access to public 
services; and making government more accountable to the citizenry.
A number of difficulties have been associated with public service reforms across 
the continent. These include difficulty in generating consensus over the direction 
and scope of the reforms; mobilising the necessary resources; building effective 
partnerships with key stakeholders; developing effective systems to ensure proper 
utilisation of human, financial and material resources; ensuring that political leaders 
and their technical staff work in tandem rather than at cross purposes; focusing 
on outcomes rather than on outputs; and, most importantly, developing key com -
petencies among the top managerial leadership to ensure that they can develop 
a strategic vision and direct the energies and creativity of their staff towards the 
realization of that vision.
Each country has addressed these issues differently owing to differences in 
history and circumstances. An overview of Uganda’s response to these issues is 
provided below in order to illustrate how the country has attempted to translate 
its strategic goals into tangible outcomes in the face of significant constraints.
Overview of Uganda’s Experience with Public Service Reform
The Poverty Eradication Framework:  Uganda faces an enormous development 
challenge. Approximately 88% of the population live in the countryside, of whom 
nearly 80% live on subsistence agriculture. The population currently stands at 24.7 
million and is growing at an astounding 3.4% per annum; per capita GDP income 
is US$ 330; and average life expectancy is 43 years. 1 The average female fertility 
rate is a very high 7%, which is putting pressure on primary health and education, 
and other services. 2 Furthermore, income inequality bas increased between rural 
and urban areas and between regions. 3 It is estimated that 68% of the popula -
tion in the northern region lives below the poverty line while the corresponding 
figures for the central, western and eastern regions are 20.3%, 28.1% and 36.5% 
respectively.4
T o address these and other related challenges, the Government of Uganda (GoU) 
has developed a broad policy framework in which poverty is identified as the key 
element that must be addressed if the country is to overcome its underdevelop -
ment. Since 1997 GoU has been implementing an extensive Poverty Eradication 
1 Office of the LTN Resident Coordinator, Uganda: Promise Performance and Challenges for At -
taining the PEAP and Millennium Development Goals  (October 2003), p.viii
2 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Developrrient, Background to the Budget, Financial 
Y ear 2003/04 (June 2003,), p.6; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Uganda 
Poverty Status Report, 2003, pp.7-8.
3 MOFPED, Poverty Status Report, 2003 , p. 1 02.
4 Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, The Social Development Sector Strategic 
investment Plan (SDIP) 2003-2008 – Final Draft (February 2003), p. 4.
<<<PAGE=155>>>
145
Leadership Challenges in Mainstreaming Performance Enhancement …
Action Plan (PEAP) whose broad goal is to reduce poverty levels to not more 
than 10% by 2017. It has four pillars: (i) creating a conducive framework for eco -
nomic growth and structural transformation, (ii) strengthening good governance 
and security, (iii) increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes, and (iv) 
improving the quality of the life of the poor.
The PEAP is implemented using the Sector Wide Approach (SWAP). Sec -
tors that directly target poverty include: education; health; water and sanitation; 
agriculture; social development; justice law and order; and transport, housing and 
communication. Government, donors, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
civil society organisations and other stakeholders determine sector priorities 
jointly. The partners also plan, budget, monitor and evaluate sector programmes 
together. Resource ceilings are established through the Mid-T erm Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF) to facilitate sector planning and budgeting. Financial resources 
are transferred to local governments from the centre through the Poverty Action 
Fund (PAF), which comprises GoU funds, donor contributions and savings from 
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. PAF funds constitute 
conditional, unconditional and equalization grants to local governments and are 
protected from budget cuts.
Poverty eradication programmes and activities are implemented through a 
decentralized framework in which popularly elected local governments determine 
local development priorities, plans and budgets, and implement local programmes 
using PAF funds and locally generated revenue. NGOs also participate in develop-
ment activities at the local level and are usually funded by development partners 
that do not subscribe to basket funding. Poverty trends are monitored through the 
Uganda Poverty Participatory Assessment Process (UPPAP); the Uganda Bureau 
of Statistics also conducts national household surveys to keep track of poverty 
changes at the lowest unit level. A poverty monitoring and evaluation strategy has 
been developed to review the poverty monitoring scope, indictors, data collection 
methods, use and dissemination of poverty related data, and institutional roles and 
scheduled activities. 5 These activities are undertaken with strong support from 
bilateral and multilateral development partners.
Significant gains have been made in the struggle against poverty as defined 
within the PEAP , although a great deal of work still remains to be done. Among 
other things, GDP growth has averaged 6% annually over the last ten years; an -
nual inflation has largely been contained below 5%; and, as indicated above, there 
has been a sharp decline in the percentage of Ugandans living in absolute poverty . 
Primary school enrollment has jumped dramatically , due to the Universal Primary 
5 See: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Poverty Monitoring and Evalua -
tion Strategy (June 2002); Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Deepening 
the Understanding of Poverty (Second Participatory Poverty Assessment Report, December 2002); 
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Uganda Poverty Status Report, 2003; and 
Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Uganda National Household Survey : Report on the Socio-Economic 
Survey (November 2003).
<<<PAGE=156>>>
146 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
Education (UPE) programme, from 2.1 million in 1996, to 7.3 million in 2002 6; and 
HIV/AIDS overall prevalence has dropped from 18% in 1992, to 6.2% in 2002/03 
(implying that Uganda is on its way to meet the Millennium Development Goal 
on this) 7. Also, the rural population with access to safe water increased from 18% 
in 1991, to 55% by June 2002 (access varies by district, though), while access to 
safe water in urban areas had increased to approximately 63%. 8 The proportion of 
Ugandans living below the poverty line has fallen sharply from 56% in 1992, to 
35% in 2002/2003, although this is still unacceptably high. 9
These developments imply that some of the public service reforms are work -
ing, although a great deal of work still remains to be done. Some insight into the 
nature of these reforms is provided below.
Key Public Service Reforms in Uganda and their Challenges
Uganda has been undertaking, public service reforms since 1989 following the 
recommendations of the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission 
(PSRRC) of that year, and those of an earlier commission that had been set up 
in 1987 to review the structure and operations of the country’s local government 
system. The reforms have essentially been driven by the need to improve efficiency 
in service provision, and to provide a strong foundation for macro-economic sta -
bility and growth. Key features of the reform have included, devolution of power 
to popularly elected local governments, restructuring government ministries and 
departments, pay reform, introduction of results oriented management into the 
service and improving public expenditure systems.
Decentralization of power to local governments 10 was undertaken to improve 
service delivery by shifting responsibility for policy implementation to the benefi -
ciaries themselves; to promote good governance; to develop, broaden and deepen 
political and administrative competence in public management; to democratize 
society through inclusive, representative and gender-sensitive decision-making; and 
to alleviate poverty through collaborative efforts between Government, develop -
6 Ministry of Education and Sports, Sector PEAP Revision Paper  (Paper presented at the National 
Stakeholder Conference on PEAP Revision, International Conference Centre, November 2003), 
p. 1.
7 United Nations Development Programme , Uganda Human Development Report 2002, The Chal -
lenge of Maintaining the Momentum of Success , p.3, Ministry of Health, The Health Sector PEAP 
Review Paper (October 22, 2003), p. 19.
8 Ministry of W ater, Lands and Environment, PEAP Revision Document: W ater and Sanitation Sector 
 Draft Final (10th November, 2003), pp2-3
9 Aide-Memoire, Fourth Poverty Reduction Support Credit (RSC4) – Uganda, (Pre-Appraisal Mission: 
October 27-November 7, 2003), p.3; John Okidi and Sarah Ssewanyana (Economic Policy Research 
Centre), Income Poverty In Uganda, 1992-2003, (Paper presented at the National Stakeholder 
Conference on PEAP Revision, International Conference Center, Kampala, October 28, 2003).
10 There are six types of local governments in Uganda’s system of decentralized governance. These 
are 56 districts, 930 sub-counties, 5 city divisions 13 municipal councils, 34 municipal divisions, 
72 town councils. For functions that have been devolved to local governments, see- Republic of 
Uganda, Local Governments Act, 1997 (Entebbe: Government Printer, March 1997) schedule 2.
<<<PAGE=157>>>
147
Leadership Challenges in Mainstreaming Performance Enhancement …
ment partners and other stakeholders. 11 Local governments were given powers 
to make and implement their own development plans, approve and execute their 
own budgets, raise and utilize resources according to their own priorities, appoint 
statutory committees, boards and commissions 12, make ordinances and bye-laws, 
and hire and manage their personnel.
The other reforms were primarily efficiency driven. Restructuring and ratio -
nalisation of government ministries was undertaken to eliminate duplication of 
functions and to get rid of excess staff. Ministries and departments were reduced 
from 38 to 22 in 1992, and reduced further to 17 in 1998. The size of the public 
service was reduced from 320,000 in 1990 to 191,324 by March 2001 (although it 
rose to 218,417 by September 2003 – largely due to the Universal Primary Educa -
tion programme). Significant increases in pay were made, notwithstanding severe 
budgetary constraints, in order to attract, retain and motivate public servants. Re -
sults oriented management was introduced to re-orient the public service towards 
measurable outputs; a new staff performance appraisal instrument was developed 
and applied; and an implementation strategy for the integrated personnel and 
payroll system was developed.
Public expenditure reforms undertaken include enactment of the Public Fi -
nance and Accountability Act in July 2003; introduction of the Medium T erm 
Expenditure Framework (MTEF) to facilitate forward planning and budgeting; 
development of an integrated financial management system for central and local 
governments; introduction of new guidelines on procurement and enactment of 
the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act 2003; and development of a 
new chart of accounts.
These reforms have not been without challenges. Some of the major challenges 
that have been experienced relate to inadequate funding, lack of effective monitor-
ing and evaluation systems, and inadequate leadership capacities to ensure effective 
and timely implementation of programmes.
Inadequate funds have been a major problem with key reforms. For instance, 
government has not yet been able to pay public employees at rates that are close 
to those in the private sector because, among other things, public revenue amounts 
to only 12% of GDP , well below what is required. The weakness of government’s 
monitoring and evaluation systems is recognized as well. In fact, efforts are under 
way to strengthen the Office of the Prime Minister so that it can effectively carry 
out this important function across the entire breadth of government. The weak 
capacity of both the central and local governments in implementing the reforms is 
also recognized widely, although the weakness is not uniform across government. 
11 Republic of Uganda, Decentralisation in Uganda: The Policy and Its Philosophy , Booklet # 
1(Kampala:Ministry of Local Government, May 1993); and, Republic of Uganda, Decentralisation 
in Uganda: The Policy and its Implications  Booklet # 2 (Kampala: Ministry of Local Government, 
April 1994).
12 These comprise the District T ender Board, the Local Government Public Accounts Committee, 
the District Service Commission and the District Land Board.
<<<PAGE=158>>>
148 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
It is hoped that these weaknesses will be addressed through two comprehensive 
initiatives: the Local Government Development Programme (LGDP), which is 
already under way, and the Capacity Enhance Programme (CAPEP), which is still 
in the preparatory phase.
Another challenge that lies in the way of enhancing competencies in Uganda’s 
public service relates to the political-administrative interface, particularly in local 
governments. Relations between the two sets of officials are sometimes characterised 
by tension, which inevitably affects implementation of development programmes 
and activities. Numerous efforts have been made to resolve this, including review 
of the Local Governments Act, 1997, and regular issuance of guidelines by various 
government bodies, but the problem still persists.
Another major challenge to overcome relates to lack of a structured manage -
ment development programme for senior managers through which they can develop 
the competencies enumerated earlier as they progress upwards through the public 
service. Because of this, it is still possible for one to reach very senior ranks in the 
public service without having developed adequate competencies in critical areas. 
Fortunately, this problem has been recognized and is being addressed. Among 
other things, a study has been completed for the Ministry of Public Service to 
determine the competence needs of all senior public managers from Assistant 
Commissioners to Permanent Secretaries, and the Ministry of Local Government 
has taken steps to develop mentoring competencies within the local government 
system. This initiative could, in fact, be applied to central government as well. 
Proper sequencing of reform components is another issue of utmost significance 
in ensuring realization of intended outcomes; otherwise the overall impact might 
take time to be registered.
Conclusion
The above discussion makes clear that development of core leadership compe -
tencies is essential for the success of performance enhancement reforms in the 
public service. The top managerial leadership must have the capacity to develop 
a strategic vision and to galvanise their colleagues to translate that vision into 
tangible outcomes. The challenges that must be overcome in this process include 
generating broad consensus on the leadership competencies that must be developed 
for different individuals and cadres, mobilizing sufficient resources and partner -
ships to successfully undertake leadership development, obtaining commitment to 
the reforms from all stakeholders, sequencing reform components carefully, and 
ensuring that political leaders and technocrats work in tandem.
<<<PAGE=159>>>
149
Leadership for Reform and Modernization of Governance
Ousmane Batoko *
A very significant number of problems with which African countries are confronted 
arise, on the whole, from shortage of capacities of the States to carry out effectively 
the various reforms introduced as well as those already in progress in the institu -
tional, administrative and economic fields. In implementing these reforms, priority 
was always given to structural and normative changes, but the human element was 
often left behind, or even purely overshadowed. In this respect, one deplores the 
fact that adequate attention is not given to leadership that is to the capacity that 
responsible officials ought to have at all levels in order to generate, mobilize and 
channel the energy of others is a given direction, so that these could voluntarily 
commit themselves to the pursuit and achievement of common objectives.
The persistence of such shortage is the very least curious, since leadership 
skills in the animal world seem to be a natural phenomenon. Indeed, in any herd 
of cows, buffaloes or elephants, wild or domesticated animals, there is always a 
leader who incarnates authority and directs the actions of the group. It is the same 
in the daily expeditions of ants, or in the seasonal migrations of the cormorants. 
The defect of taking into account leadership in human resource management in 
general, and in implementing reforms in particular, does not mean to say that the 
human space is incapable. Human history tells us of the existence of great leaders 
who, thanks to the strong influence that they had on their people, knew how to 
lead them to accomplish great things rather well, both for the good, and, unfor -
tunately, sometimes for evil too.
The problem in undertaking reforms in our countries often lies in the choice 
of the persons in charge, because not all persons could have the profile of leaders.  
It also should be emphasized that a leader is not always the official or the public 
servant who is recruited on the basis of one criterion, that of diplomas.  For this 
reason, within the context of governance reforms, leadership must respond to a 
certain number of conditions, which would enable the creation of a favourable 
atmosphere for the achievement of expected results.
Also, it is essential that:
- leadership is marked;
- leadership can not merge with authoritarism;
- the leader must be used as a model;
- the leader is constant.
1) It is necessary that leadership is marked
Administrative reforms can not take place without causing opposition. It is an 
established fact that one is often constrained by obstacles coming from the mi -
* Professor of Public Law, University of Benin
<<<PAGE=160>>>
150 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
lieu, such as, changing structures of traditional institutions (bureaucratic or not), 
transforming attitudes and behaviours, both individual and collective, or finally, 
combining several of these measures when improvements in public administration 
are being introduced.
The questioning of old ideas and habits ineluctably encourages tendencies to 
resist change. In such a context, the leader shall impose himself as an expert whose 
knowledge, skills and competence will bring them the respect of others and, con -
sequently, identify him as a significant resource for the desired change.
A leader should find the intellectual, technical and emotional resources needed 
to enable them to maintain the effectiveness of their actions for a long term per -
spective, pinpoint delicate stages which could be overcome; stages around which 
attention should be given to the identification of problems and their causes. With 
this intention, the leader must demonstrate much patience, tact, social sense of 
smell, animal like, in order to enable them to approach each individual or each 
group with the appropriate method. The crux of the matter is to have capacities 
and resources to convince others, rather than take measures to impose oneself.
2) Leadership cannot merge with authoritarianism
The only way to lead others to accomplish an action is to raise in them the desire for 
accomplishment. One can force a passer-by to give up his watch by sticking a gun 
to his temple or by making an employee work until his backaches, or threatening 
to fire him but these methods can no longer bring about lasting results. Therefore, 
leadership must not be based on the “method of the whip” or that of force, but 
on confidence, influence and encouragement. To obtain results from someone, it is 
necessary to wake in him a keen desire to make the thing according to the Beninois 
proverb: “To collect good honey, the hive should not be hustled”.
The situation of a person in charge of safety in a company is to make sure 
that employees wear a helmet for protecting themselves. In the past, when the 
person in charge met the workers with naked heads, he ordered them to obey the 
rules and did so in such a tone of voice that nobody dared to answer back. One 
executed unwillingly the order and as soon as the officer turned his back, each 
took off the helmet from his head. The officer in charge then decided to change 
his method, and when the occasion arose, he asked if the helmet was a good size. 
He reminded them, in a pleasant tone, that the helmet was conceived to avoid 
work accidents and advised that it should always be worn in the work place. Since 
then, with a good grace, workers conformed to the rules.
On the whole, to change and make grow while innovating and while improving, 
the leader must have a vision, that is, he or she must scan the future with opti -
mism. However, the leader’s vision alone is not sufficient to create an organized 
movement. The leader needs to involve others in the shared vision by calling on 
their values, interests, wishes and dreams and to see to it that they recognized it 
as being theirs.
<<<PAGE=161>>>
151
Leadership for Reform and Modernization of Governance
Because of numerous socio-economic and professional implications, governance 
reforms require from the beginning select social partners to associate with their 
design and elaboration. Such social partners include representatives of trade unions 
and of civil society (including economic operators and religious orders). By doing 
this, the leader creates an atmosphere of mutual confidence and respect. He forms 
teams and makes it possible for all of them to feel like partners. He thus develops 
the forces of others by sharing information and power and by making them visible 
in what they do together.
If the leader is soaked in his power to the point that he does not seek to make 
others endorse the change, he will make those consenting to become obsequious 
followers; little more than profiteers but ready to face out or to turn the back as 
of the first favourable occasion, and even with the least difficulty.
The long process which led to the holding of a national conference on Strong 
Forces in February 1990 in Benin is an illustrative example of this. In fact, after 
seventeen years of a monolithic political regime based on Marxism-Leninism, the 
then revolutionary Head of State – with a courageous and prospective vision, in -
spired by the initiative from this conference (which gave convincing results) became 
today the pride of the Beninois people. We thus assisted in a desired change to 
which nearly the totality of the citizens adhered. This Beninois example, as each 
one knows today, gave rise here and there to national socio-political approaches for 
settling internal crises in a certain number of countries in the African continent.
3) The leader must be used as a model
The true leader should not be satisfied to make professions of faith only. His or her 
daily social practice must be in perfect appropriateness with the values of change 
which he or she preaches and advocates.
Psychologically, they must be as far as possible an apt and able leader:
1) their professional qualifications must be unquestionable.
2) his or her social experience in the field of governance should be attractive to 
all.
3) without necessarily obtaining the unanimity of all people, they must be a person 
of value whom a great number of the target group respect.
With regard to governance reforms in Africa, the fight against corruption must 
become a slogan to which all people must stick spontaneously. This is especially so 
because of the many bad examples that are happening, sometimes even shameful, 
and this is what we have lived and are still living with.
The leader must absolutely avoid certain behaviours or remarks which may 
lead to confusion. Each one of his or her collaborators, whatever their level of 
competence and responsibility, must not pose the least problem which could put 
into doubt the sincerity of the power and the commitments made by officials 
responsible to fight corruption.
<<<PAGE=162>>>
152 
PART II  … Capacity Through Education and T raining: An African Perspective
The trap, in which the leader falls most easily on the matter, either by one’s 
own doing or, more generally because of collaborators and/or close relations, is 
that of “such is taken who thought of taking”. In this respect, the recent examples 
of Zambia and Benin speak for themselves. The best way of changing others, to 
help them to accept the reforms for better governance, is to begin with oneself 
as a source of good example. Henceforth, it is necessary to practice transparency, 
starting with the leader, in order to avoid obscure zones which could sow doubt 
in the spirit of targets or partners of change.
Man is not only a logical and rational human being. He is also an emotional 
being moved by pride and self-esteem; he is sensitive to the model, which incarnates 
authority, which pushes him to change and make him give the best of himself. In 
this regard, failure of plans on the fight against corruption in our States is most of 
the time due to the simple fact that civil servants have the feeling that at the sum -
mit of the State, the sacrifices asked of them are not agreed to and carried out.
On the whole, the leader must defend his or her beliefs and convictions by 
example. He or she develops their credibility by maintaining consistency between 
words and actions. To make converge energies and commitments, one must align 
the values of the leader with those of the others. The leader must thus convince 
all that it is possible to make the impossible by taking the first step, by planning 
small victories which develop progress and build confidence. This is why leaders 
must have authority and be sustained.
4) The leader must have authority and be sustained
To undertake governance reforms, it matters that persons in charge enjoy the au -
thority and confidence needed for the way forward. The important matters must 
come from the Head of the State, or from the Government, in a way that they 
are never called into question by other members of the government or by lobbies, 
namely by those whose powers or interests, attributions or competences (and even 
beliefs or convictions) might be touched or reduced by the reforms. In this logic, 
certain realities support the idea that governance reforms must come directly from 
the President of the Republic or the Head of Government.
It is especially important to support the leader who came out with reforms by 
combining the implementation of the first acts of the new approach of governance 
with material advantages, financial and moral, obvious and immediate, for the 
benefit of those targeted by the reform. Without these, even though they may be 
tiny advantages, the leader would have more difficulty in gradually widening the 
base of followers to the objectives. For this reason, governance reforms should 
not only be normative or institutional, but must above all have obvious and im -
mediate material content.
In implementing a programme geared to fight corruption, or to advocate moral 
standards of public life, it matters that beneficiaries directly or indirectly handle 
the situation and the majority of the people concerned be rewarded at the same
<<<PAGE=163>>>
153
Leadership for Reform and Modernization of Governance
time with a certain number of advantages without which the programme may risk 
to fail. As well, it is true that “conditions of existence for a man determine his 
consciousness”.
Governance reforms must be considered today as an imperative challenge which 
our States must face by putting persons in places, which are appropriate to them. 
Leadership implies unquestionable qualification, proven experience and unfailing 
competences.
In view of the involvement of African public administrations in the process of 
development of States of the Continent today, and undoubtedly again tomorrow, 
the implementation of NEPAD, whose Africans are supremely equipped, and for 
which unanimous support was expressed by the international community is urgently 
required. Without question, its durability and success depends, to a large extent, 
on the design and place of leadership with regard to governance reforms in our 
countries. This, it must be recognized, will take some doing.
<<<PAGE=164>>>

<<<PAGE=165>>>
Part III
Concluding Comments
<<<PAGE=166>>>

<<<PAGE=167>>>
157
Public Sector Leadership Capacity Building  
Through Education and Training
T urgay Ergun *
In order to be successful in this new millennium, which is characterized by a global-
izing world, governments must develop clear and well-defined policies concerning 
the preparation of both current and future generations of public sector leadership. 
This is especially true in terms of the preparation of senior administrators for the 
successful implementation of new development policies. Indeed, the training of 
public sector administrators in the most contemporary techniques of management 
is important for the realization of all aspects of public policy. In fact, in many parts 
of the world, a large majority of the public administrators have had little or no 
training in administration, which, of course, accentuates the problems caused as 
a result of the inadequacy of the organization of the public sector in many coun -
tries. Serious training would not only increase the effectiveness and efficiency of 
the administration, but it would also make it possible for it to provide its services 
impartially without being affected by various political influences. As a result of 
partisanship, governments face the danger of failing to fulfill its functions because 
of incompetent administrators.
In many developing countries, the personnel systems require no qualification in 
terms of either a post-graduate degree in public administration, or even administra-
tive training, for appointment to senior positions. In some cases, a certain level 
of education is required, but a person’s ability to effectively administer a govern -
mental program or agency can not be measured solely on the basis of a diploma 
or the degree achieved at graduation. Appointments to administrative positions 
or removal from office must be based upon some objective criteria which mea -
sures the individual’s capabilities. T raining which builds one’s capacity as a public 
administrator often is best provided when it is conducted in close relationships 
with the governmental organization in which the administrator will be working. 
Consequently, what is needed is specialized training institutions which collaborate 
with the administration for the purpose of training administrators but which remain 
independent of the administration to a certain extent.
The rapidity of change in the modern world also required more effective train -
ing of our public administrators. The industrial age lasted two centuries and was 
followed by our current and digital information age. However, we are now begin -
ning a new journey into the “quantum age”, which will be categorized by uncer -
tainty and the need to take risks and innovate. Creative and non-linear thinking 
are important aspects of this new age. Undoubtedly, the most important element 
defining the direction of change is knowledge. Knowledge is the rising value of 
our age. As a result, there has been a changing direction in public administration 
* President of the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration and Director 
of the Public Administration Institute for T urkey and the Middle East
<<<PAGE=168>>>
158 
PART III   Concluding Comments
around the world. This change has been characterized by a closer relationship 
and closer cooperation between the public and private sectors, and civil society 
organizations, a shift from public administration to public management. This can 
be viewed as a new way of governing, or considered by some scholars to be a new 
paradigm in public administration.
If our current public institutions are to survive, they will need to adapt themselves to 
changing conditions. At the same time, there will need to be major investments by the 
public sector in the building of human resources. Both current and future governmental 
leadership will have to be sensitive to new approaches to governance, and certainly be 
aware of the newest information technology innovations, and how they may enhance the 
overall quality of public administration. Government leadership in the new millennium 
needs to have a positive attitude towards changes and developments, the administrators 
need to have acquired professional values, and they need to feel responsible for the 
achievement of national goals, and demands from the citizens.
Education is the key concept in transporting, interpreting and redefining knowl-
edge. Education and training for the public leadership capacity building and training 
of administrators at various administration levels is very important for the realiza -
tion of an accountable, transparent, effective and efficient public service. Whatever 
the administrative system of a country, these characteristics have to be taken into 
account in the development and training of administrators. Every administrator 
has to be effective and his/her attitude towards global and environmental changes 
must be in harmony with the realities of his/her country. All public administration 
education and training programs must start from this framework.
Among various institutions of education, public administration schools and 
institutes often have been considered the best means of solving training problems. 
In many countries these schools and institutes fulfill a number of functions such as 
training at various levels, research, consultation, documentation, publishing books 
and periodicals, and in-service training. In some countries, public administration 
schools and institutes also have power in the selection and promotion of public 
personnel. Some schools and institutes establish training centers in various parts 
of the country to carry out training on a regional basis. The function of educa -
tion and training is a common function for all public administration schools and 
institutes. But there are differences in practice. Some institutions undertake only 
the education of those entering the public service. Some institutions undertake 
in-service training.
Although some schools and institutes existed for fifty or sixty years in various 
countries, there is no firm agreement concerning the organization and functions 
of them. In any event, it is necessary to give many of these institutions a stronger 
structure by reviewing their training programs, methods of training, the status 
of their academic personnel, and their institutional relations to the government. 
While these steps are being taken, strengthening their autonomy in order to make 
it possible for them to stay unaffected by various political influences should not 
be neglected.
<<<PAGE=169>>>
159
Public Sector Leadership Capacity Building Through Education and T raining
The United Nations (UN)  Millennium Declaration laid out an agenda which 
emphasizes economic development and the eradication of poverty; the insurance 
of environmental sustainability; the support of democracy, good governance and 
human rights; and the maintenance of peace and security. A unique partnership was 
established several years ago between the UN and the International Association of 
Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA) to undertake a joint partnership 
aimed at enhancing the capacities of both future and current government leadership 
throughout the world. Thus, the joint UN/IASIA initiative aims to assist govern -
ment leaders to adapt effectively to the complex problems described in the UN 
Millennium Declaration. As such, it is an effort to improve the quality of education 
and training in public administration for both the existing and next generation 
government leaders. As part of the UN/IASIA initiative an expert group meeting 
was held in T urin, Italy in September 2003, on “New Challenges for Senior Lead -
ership Enhancement for Improved Public Management in a Globalizing World”. 
In this meeting, the immediate target groups for the programs to be developed 
were singled out as the politicians at central and local levels, senior civil servants, 
junior civil servants, and top civil servants of local governments.
The joint UN/IASIA initiative places particular emphasis upon initiating ac -
tivities in developing countries and has had a special focus on Africa. For most 
countries of developing world, decision making processes about reforms require 
highly competent political leadership and highly professional staff. Unlike the 
negative attitudes of the past, today it is generally accepted that the training 
especially of senior level people, and of those who are likely to become senior, 
in administration is of vital importance. The establishment of an effective public 
administration is dependent, above everything else, upon the training of adminis -
trators and approaching administrative problems with scientific research methods. 
With the systematic approach to and regulation of the training of administrators, 
the administration will select for training its members who are candidates for 
higher levels of administration, and will send them to the training institutions 
established for this purpose. And the training institution which has been put in 
charge of training administrators will train the persons who will be appointed to 
higher levels of administration in the future or who are already in those positions 
with programs designed for this purpose.
IASIA can play its role in confronting the challenges of the new millennium 
by providing new training mechanisms and supporting member institutions. In 
this respect holding regional conferences is very meaningful for the discussion of 
issues concerning leadership capacity development in a globalizing world. The Rio 
de Janeiro and Kampala meetings, from which the papers found in this volume 
originated, are two important and fruitful examples of the joint UN/IASIA initia -
tive. Exchanging of good practices and experiences can, and does, create a common 
ground for the enhancement of public administration education and training.
<<<PAGE=170>>>

<<<PAGE=171>>>

<<<PAGE=172>>>

<<<PAGE=173>>>
