<<<PAGE=1>>>
A comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework for 
evidence to policy networks
Tanja Kuchenmüllera,*, Evelina Chapmana, Ryoko Takahashia, Louise Lesterb, Marge 
Reinapa, Moriah Ellenc, Michelle M. Habyd,e
Evelina Chapman: evelinachap@gmail.com; Ryoko Takahashi: takahashiry@who.int; Louise Lester: 
louise.e.lester@hotmail.co.uk; Marge Reinap: reinapm@who.int; Moriah Ellen: ellenmo@bgu.ac.il; Michelle M. Haby: 
haby@unimelb.edu.au
aWHO Regional Office for Europe, Copenhagen, Denmark
bPublic Health, Nottinghamshire County Council, West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire, United 
Kingdom
cDepartment of Health Policy and Management, Guilford Glazer Faculty of Business and 
Management and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
dDepartamento de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad de Sonora, Hermosillo, Sonora, 
Mexico
eCentre for Health Policy, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Abstract
Objective—To describe the development of a framework for monitoring and evaluating 
knowledge translation (KT) networks.
Method—The framework was developed using mixed methods over four phases, including i) a 
targeted literature review of KT networks, activities and indicators, ii) two scoping reviews to 
further enhance the set of indicators, iii) peer-reviews by international KT experts and an online 
expert consultation, and iv) piloting.
Results—A comprehensive theory of change (ToC) and indicators, both for the Network 
Secretariat and its participating member countries, were identified to develop the monitoring and 
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 International license.licensee Elsevier
*Correspondence to: WHO Regional for Europe, UN City, Marmorvej 51, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. kuchenmullert@who.int. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
TK conceived the idea and designed the study. TK, RT and LL developed the framework (with RT drafting in collaboration with 
TK the initial framework document and LL managing the piloting of the framework). TK and LL analysed the data and revised the 
framework. MH and EC contributed to the interpretation of the results. TK wrote the manuscript in collaboration with MH and EC. 
TK, EC, RT, LL, ME, MR, MH critically reviewed and provided input into the manuscript, as well as read and approved the final 
version. TK supervised the study, including members of the WHO Secretariat of EVIPNet Europe that are external to the group of 
authors.
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
TK, RT, and MR are employed full-time with WHO and have been working for EVIPNet Europe. EC had a short-term staff contract 
with WHO, working for EVIPNet Europe and LL was seconded from the NHS to EVIPNet Europe when conducting the pilot study. 
ME served as a peer-reviewer to the M&E framework. WHO Europe had no role in the decision to publish, or preparation of the 
manuscript, although they did approve the final manuscript for submission.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Eval Program Plann. 2022 April 01; 91: 102053. doi:10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2022.102053.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=2>>>
evaluation framework. The framework includes (i) a ToC, including three key indicator domains 
across the results chain (outputs, short term outcomes, intermediate outcomes), and (ii) indicators 
for the three key domains, that can be selected depending on the stage of network maturity, along 
with suggested data collection methods. The three key indicator domains are 1) KT capacity and 
skill building; 2) network (structure, governance and leadership); and 3) KT/evidence-informed 
policy value and culture.
Conclusion—The monitoring and evaluation framework that links KT activities with policy and 
health outcomes fills an important gap in optimizing KT procedures, generating lessons learned 
and increasing accountability of major multipartner KT networks.
1 Introduction
The use of sound evidence to inform public health policy is likely to ensure greater and 
more equitable population health gains (Shaxson, Datta, Tshangela, & Matomela, 2016; 
van de Goor et al., 2017) and optimize resource allocation (Lavis et al., 2003). This has 
increased global interest in the role that knowledge translation (KT) can play in informing 
policy (Grimshaw, Eccles, Lavis, Hill, & Squires, 2012; WHO Regional Office for Europe, 
2016a). In parallel, research into new models and mechanisms of KT has expanded (Oliver, 
Innvar, Lorenc, Woodman, & Thomas, 2014; Shaxson et al., 2016). KT is defined as: “the 
exchange, synthesis, and effective communication of reliable and relevant research results. 
The focus is on promoting interaction among the producers and users of research, removing 
the barriers to research use, and tailoring information to different target audiences so that 
effective interventions are used more widely”(World Health Organization, 2004).
Translating research into policy is recognized as a complex and iterative process (Lavis et 
al., 2012; Moat, Lavis, & Abelson, 2013; Woolf, 2008). Acknowledging the political nature 
of decision-making (Mair, 2019), a systems approach is required that shifts attention from 
assessing individual components (such as change in KT capacity at an individual level) to 
the dynamic interfaces of the components (including structures) in a complex system (Best 
et al., 2009).
Networks, such as the Evidence-informed Policy Network (EVIPNet) Europe, use a 
systems thinking approach (Willis, Riley, Best, & Ongolo-Zogo, 2012) and play a critical 
role in facilitating KT processes (Mendizabal, 2006; Perkin & Court, 2005). Other 
examples of KT networks include the global multi-year programme, Building Capacity 
to Use Research Evidence (BCURE). The BCURE programme developed organizational 
knowledge brokering projects in 12 low- and middle-income countries between 2013 
and 2017 spanning beyond health. In addition, the Partnership for Evidence and Equity 
in Responsive Social Systems (PEERSS), funded by the International Development and 
Research Center (IDRC) and the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, is aiming 
to advance evidence-informed policy-making (EIP) in the social systems. While these 
initiatives are multi-sectoral in nature, the Regional East African Community Health Policy 
Initiative (REACH-PI) (Campbell, 2013; East African Community, 2006) is a subregional 
KT network that bridges the gap between health research and policy and decision making 
through the establishment of Knowledge Translation Platforms (KTPs) in Kenya, Tanzania 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 2
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=3>>>
and Uganda. As a result of the similar mandate, REACH-PI and EVIPNet established a close 
interaction. The establishment of EVIPNet Africa was inspired by the preparatory work 
undertaken by REACH-PI, which then became a part of the EVIPNet Africa as a subregion 
(Lavis & Panisset, 2010). EVIPNet Africa also explicitly supported the REACH-PI’s Rapid 
Response Service in Uganda, which was then rolled out into other countries within the 
African region and in other regions (World Health Organization, 2016).
To date, few evaluations have been conducted of organizational or system-level KT activities 
(Dobbins, Traynor, Workentine, Yousefi-Nooraie, & Yost, 2018; Haby et al., 2016; Lester, 
Haby, Chapman, & Kuchenmüller, 2020; The CIPHER Investigators, 2014; Willis et al., 
2012). In part, this may be due to the complexity and context specific nature of KT 
activities, which make them challenging to evaluate (The CIPHER Investigators, 2014; Van 
Eerd et al., 2011). In addition, the lack of evaluation infrastructure and knowledge, and 
challenges and concerns about how findings will be acted on (Lavis et al., 2003) may further 
explain the limited KT evaluation activity.
This paper describes the development of a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
framework for EVIPNet Europe, which is meant to capture KT activities for EIP at both 
the Network Secretariat and the individual country team levels. While the framework was 
developed in the context of EVIPNet Europe, it is meant to serve also other KT networks or 
programmes at national, regional or global levels.
2 EVIPNet Europe
In 2005, as a response to Member States’ request, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
launched EVIPNet as a KT capacity building network (Hamid et al., 2005). It has the 
objective of improving public health and reducing inequities by supporting Member States 
in routinely using the best available scientific evidence in policy development (WHO 
Regional Office for Europe, 2015).
Since 2005, regional EVIPNet networks have been created in Asia, the Americas, sub-
Saharan Africa, and the Eastern Mediterranean to support Member States in this endeavour. 
In 2012, the WHO European Region launched EVIPNet Europe, which is the most recent 
EVIPNet regional network (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015), to accelerate the 
achievement of important health goals such as the Millennium Development Goals (World 
Health Organization, 2005) and the subsequent Sustainable Development Goals (World 
Health Organization/General Assembly, 2015). As of 2020, 23 countries were part of 
EVIPNet Europe. Additional details on the strategic directions and approaches of EVIPNet 
Europe can be found in the EVIPNet Europe Strategic Plan (WHO Regional Office for 
Europe, 2015), which has served as the roadmap for the implementation of the network.
EVIPNet Europe aims to address the substantial gap between what is scientifically known 
and what is done (Straus, Tetroe, & Graham, 2009). The ultimate goal, as expressed in 
the network’s vision, is to ensure that high-quality, context-sensitive evidence is routinely 
used to inform health decision-making processes to strengthen health outcomes across the 
Region (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015). Key to achieving this goal is to bring 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 3
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=4>>>
together national health policy-makers, managers, researchers, members of civil society, 
practitioners who operate on multiple levels to advance and facilitate policy development 
and implementation informed by the best available evidence (WHO Regional Office 
for Europe, 2015). These country teams – so-called KTPs (El-Jardali, Bou-Karroum, & 
Fadlallah, 2020)1 – plan, implement, monitor and evaluate KT interventions at country 
level, including priority-setting exercises, evidence briefs for policy (EBPs), policy dialogue 
exercises (PDs), rapid response services, clearinghouses and capacity-building (WHO 
Regional Office for Europe, 2017).
The changes initiated by EVIPNet in view of strengthening EIP are based on the strategic 
directions and cross-cutting approaches defined in the EVIPNet Europe Strategic Plan. They 
cover the following three domains (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015):
1) KT capacity and skill building: responding to the need to strengthen the KT 
capacity throughout the WHO European Region, EVIPNet Europe provides 
technical assistance, mentorships and exchanges, plus routine capacity-building 
workshops to improve the skill base of its network members.
2) Network structure, governance and leadership: regional network and governance 
structures have been established at regional level to provide leadership and 
facilitate network functioning. In addition, EVIPNet Europe assists in the 
establishment of country teams/KTPs to drive country-level activities. Country 
teams are national networks dedicated to strengthening innovative health 
partnerships among researchers, policy-makers and civil society.
3) KT and EIP value and culture: recognizing that country teams/KTPs will be 
most successful and sustainable in an enabling environment, EVIPNet Europe 
aims to increase awareness and commitment to improve the culture and practice 
of KT and EIP.
In the early stage of the network, EVIPNet Europe functioned as a centralized network, 
i.e. the WHO Secretariat is a hub connecting and coordinating the country teams/KTPs 
– serving as network nodes. The network builds vertical and horizontal linkages, which 
strengthen and amplify the culture and practice of KT (see Fig. 1). With time, it is expected 
that the network will gradually become more decentralized, with the nodes of the network 
increasingly interconnected and mutually supportive, reducing the central facilitation role of 
the WHO Secretariat.
Like similar networks, the EVIPNet Europe network life-cycle (see Fig. 2) is expected to 
include a formative phase; followed by a second phase of status quo and/or growth; a third 
phase of stagnation, decline or renewal as the role of the Secretariat decreases; and finally, 
a sustainability phase in line with the increased role of member countries, during which 
continuity and increased country ownership is ensured (Creech & Ramji, 2004).
1KTPs bring decision-makers, researchers, practitioners, civil society groups and other stakeholders together to facilitate the process 
of translating evidence into policy and action by: aligning research topics with policy priorities, responding to pressing issues 
through developing policy briefs, rapid responses and evidence summaries; and convening dialogues to guide policy formulation and 
implementation, taking into consideration local and political context.
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 4
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=5>>>
During the initiation and initial growth phase of the network (Fig. 2), the WHO Secretariat 
plays a strong and leading role. The WHO Secretariat regularly convenes the country teams/
KTPs (virtually or in person), coordinates the network activities and offers technical support 
to individual countries with the aim of strengthening and institutionalizing knowledge 
brokering (see textbox in Fig. 1). Network member countries inter-connect horizontally: 
from early on, in the establishment of the Network, peer-support and mentoring as well 
as the exchange of experience between network members has been promoted. Throughout 
network maturation (Fig. 2), the leadership and coordination role of the network is expected 
to be increasingly transferred from the Secretariat to the network and country teams/KTPs. 
This encourages the KT process to be locally owned and, thus, more sustainable (Bennett & 
Jessani, 2011).
EVIPNet Europe embraces M&E and has subscribed to the principle of being a learning 
organization that seeks to regularly assess progress, identify good practices and lessons 
learned in order to improve and optimize performance (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 
2015). Overall, WHO defines monitoring as “the routine tracking and reporting of 
priority information about a programme and its intended outputs and outcomes” (World 
Health Organization, 2011, p. V) and evaluation as the “rigorous, science-based analysis 
of information about programme activities, characteristics, outcomes and impact that 
determines the merit or worth of a specific programme or intervention” (World Health 
Organization, 2011, p. V).
In line with its focus on M&E, EVIPNet Europe also encourages critical evaluative thinking 
(WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2016b) and sharing of lessons learnt among network 
members (Scarlett et al., 2018; WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2019). Through its M&E 
work, EVIPNet Europe aims to (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015):
• ensure transparency and accountability of its activities;
• measure progress, effectiveness and efficiency of its strategy and activity 
implementation;
• facilitate the identification of implementation challenges and improve operations;
• enable network-wide knowledge sharing and learning; and
• contribute to KT research by creating evidence about which strategies are 
effective to inform future work and scaling-up.
3 Methods
Mixed methods were used for the development of the EVIPNet Europe M&E framework. 
An overview of the process is shown in Fig. 3.
First, a targeted literature review was conducted of the M&E of knowledge (translation) 
networks and KT activities. This was combined with the experience and expert knowledge 
of the study team and used to develop a draft conceptual framework. The Framework 
includes: (i) a theory of change (ToC), including three key indicator domains across the 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 5
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=6>>>
results chain (outputs, short term outcomes, intermediate outcomes) and (ii) measures 
(indicators) for the three key domains, along with suggested data collection methods.
Outcome mapping (Earl, Carden, & Smutylo, 2001) served as an underlying approach to the 
framework development. A key principle of the outcome mapping methodology is its focus 
on contribution rather than attribution. In other words, instead of claiming to achieve impact, 
outcome mapping focuses on a programme’s influence on outcomes. These outcomes 
include changes in behaviours, actions and relationships. A programme’s outcomes can, 
subsequently and in the longer term, then heighten the possibility of achieving impacts. 
However, this relationship is not necessarily one of direct cause and effect due to the 
complexity of change processes and the involvement of multiple actors. The construction 
of the results chain in the ToC followed the logical framework (log frame) approach 
(Morton, Shaxson, & Greenland, 2012), which describes a succession of elements and 
causal interlinkages between them (Jones, 2011). It includes the assumptions, inputs, outputs 
and short- and intermediate-term outcomes.
This initial draft framework was submitted for peer-review by international KT and M&E 
experts to assess the framework’ s relevance and applicability. The initial framework 
suggested 72 Secretariat indicators and 73 country team/KTP indicators in line with the 
proposed ToC. For this, and subsequent revisions, the indicators were purposively selected 
based on relevance for measuring the success of EVIPNet Europe’s activities, and alignment 
with the ToC.
For the second phase of the process, two scoping reviews were undertaken to inform 
the development of a comprehensive set of evidence-based indicators and further enhance 
the framework. One was on country-level/KTP indicators (the detailed methodology is 
published elsewhere, see (Scarlett, Forsberg, Biermann, Kuchenmüller, & El-Khatib, 2020)) 
and the other on indicators related to the work of the Network Secretariat (see Appendix A 
for the methods and results). The scoping reviews relied on comprehensive search strategies 
applied in the following electronic databases (Medline, Global Health, and the WHO Library 
Database) and the grey literature (OpenGrey, DART-Europe and website searching). These 
reviews were complemented by the context-specific knowledge of the study team. A further 
79 Secretariat and 22 country team/KTP indicators were identified from these sources. 
These indicators further expanded and populated the initial list of key indicators.
Third, the draft framework was peer-reviewed in two phases: (1) by international KT experts 
in April/May 2016 to ensure quality and feasibility. These experts were purposively selected 
and had both substantial experience in M&E and familiarity with EVIPNet. The framework 
was sent via email together with instructions and a peer-review template to be filled out. 
The refined framework was then (2) subsequently submitted to an expert online consultation. 
A maximum variation purposive sampling strategy was applied to select knowledgeable or 
experienced consultation participants and to ensure maximum variation in experience and 
responses, thus making more effective use of limited evaluation resources (Palinkas et al., 
2015). Participants were found from the existing published and grey literature (OpenGrey, 
DART-Europe, and OAIster as well as hand searching through conference programmes), 
personal contacts (European Advisory Committee on Health Research, EVIPNet Europe 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 6
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=7>>>
national champions) and further snowball sampling. For the consultation, a total of eight 
experts participated on a pro bono basis (from 24 invited). The relatively low participation 
rate is a result of the fact that the consultation took place during the summer vacation period.
The data obtained were analysed by one member of the study team and discussed 
with a second team member to inform the revision of the framework. Discrepancies in 
interpretation were discussed and resolved. Key changes undertaken related to further 
detailing the ToC. Among other changes, the reviewers recommended including a causal 
logic for each of the domains for both the Secretariat and the country teams/KTPs, and to 
make the assumptions and contextual factors more explicit. Moreover, the sets of indicators 
were reworded for clarity and aligned with the amended ToCs and logic models. Also, to 
further guide the user, a column on the proposed “data collection methods" was added to 
the indicator tables and the sets of indicators were prioritized by creating two categories 
of ‘required’ and ‘recommended’ indicators. Indicators that are ‘required’ are those that 
in the context of EVIPNet Europe are essential for measuring the network’s progress and 
effectiveness at the Secretariat and country levels.
Finally, the peer-reviewed and amended framework was piloted during the EVIPNet Europe 
formative evaluation (Lester et al., 2020) to further develop it as a tool to be used by 
all stakeholders of EVIPNet Europe (and other KT initiatives) who are involved with 
promoting, strengthening and institutionalizing EIP at national and regional levels. A mixed 
methods design was utilized to pilot the framework. For the details on the process and 
results see (Lester et al., 2020). Following this pilot phase, the M&E framework was 
further revised by the team member who led the pilot through structured reflections and 
deliberations with the study lead. Each of the three domains at both WHO Secretariat and 
country team level were reviewed and revised in turn following this practical application. 
The wording of some of the indicators was refined to make them easier to measure and 
some data collection methods/sources that were identified during the piloting were added. 
In addition, gender equality measures/indicators (as suggested by the evaluation steering 
group review) were added. As a final step, the indicator tables were carefully reviewed and 
further simplified by streamlining and reducing the overall number of indicators, including 
removing any duplication.
4 Results
The framework outlines (i) a ToC (Brennan et al., 2017; ESSENCE on Health Research, 
2016; Garforth, Ozor, Usher, & Bell, 2014; Hanley, Gould, Harle, & Nelson, 2012; Jones, 
2011; Morton et al., 2012; Tsui, Simon, & John, 2014; V ogel, 2012; V ogel & Punton, 
2017), and (ii) measures (indicators) to understand the extent to which EVIPNet Europe 
is implemented and its progress (both at the Secretariat and country team/KTP level). The 
indicators are separated into required (core) and recommended indicators. Some suggested 
data collection methods are also included with the indicators.
4.1 The EVIPNet Europe theory of change
A ToC describes “how the policy influencing activities are envisaged to result in the desired 
changes in policy or in people’s lives” (Jones, 2011, p. 3). The EVIPNet Europe ToC 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 7
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=8>>>
includes contextual factors (enablers) in which EVIPNet Europe member countries operate, 
an expected pathway of change and the underlying assumptions for policy change. Based 
on the EVIPNet Europe Strategic Plan (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2015), changes 
need to be realized in three domains for the network to successfully implement its mandate: 
1) KT capacity and skill building; 2) network (structure, governance and leadership); and 3) 
KT/EIP value and culture (see Fig. 4).
As noted in the methods section, the ToC of this framework relies on two seminal 
M&E approaches: 1) ‘outcome mapping’ (Earl et al., 2001), which is a methodology for 
monitoring and evaluating complex development processes such as KT (Balls & Nurova, 
2020) and; 2) the logical framework (log frame) approach (Morton et al., 2012), one of the 
most used types of ToC, which describes a succession of elements and causal interlinkages 
between them (Jones, 2011).
At the programme level, the log frame sets out the hypothesized causal chain that can serve 
as a basis for a ToC. It identifies the assumptions, the required inputs (including resources 
and investments) that affect the immediate deliverables (outputs), leading to short- and 
intermediate changes (outcomes). Impacts (changes at a system and/or population level) are 
challenging to attribute to the programme activities since they occur a long way downstream 
from programme implementation and through the contributions of many players and forces 
(Earl et al., 2001). Therefore, although impact is included in the ToC, the M&E framework 
of EVIPNet Europe follows the ‘outcome mapping’ approach and focuses on changes 
occurring within a programme’s sphere of control (the network’s operational environment, 
i.e. inputs, activities and outputs) and influence (the network’s wider environment in which 
the network can effect change, i.e. outcomes) (Earl et al., 2001). Detailed logic models for 
both the WHO Secretariat and the country teams/KTPs can be found in Tables 1 and 2, 
respectively.
A range of contextual enablers were identified as an important component of the ToC. These 
can be seen on the left-hand side of Fig. 4. The process of joining EVIPNet Europe as a new 
network member includes assessing many of these contextual factors. Overall, these may 
vary over time and from country to country. The enablers include:
• EVIPNet Europe members have resources to implement activities;
• Support and commitment of policy-makers to promote KT;
• There is a commitment to establish a country team/KTP in an EVIPNet Europe 
member country;
• Country teams/KTPs aim to become autonomous and sustainable in 
implementing EVIPNet Europe activities;
• Stakeholder turnover does not jeopardize the production and use of evidence;
• Sufficient and quality evidence is available;
• Incentives exist for EIP;
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 8
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=9>>>
• Favourable contextual factors for EIP (political, economic, logistic, and 
administrative); and
• Strategic partnerships provide technical, financial and in-kind support.
Jointly with its partnerships (shown in the second column of Fig. 4), EVIPNet Europe 
generates and provides the required inputs for its capacity building and KT activities. 
The inputs (shown in the third column of Fig. 4) include the network structure both at 
the network- and country-level, sufficient human resources (e.g. staff, consultants, fellows, 
interns, etc.), adequate financial resources (e.g. WHO core contributions and voluntary 
contributions to the network), effective management of resources and KT activities, 
including technical assistance of the WHO Secretariat, and mentoring and peer support.
EVIPNet Europe is meant to use these inputs to achieve the foreseen outputs and outcomes, 
grouped according to the three key domains of the ToC, i.e. 1) KT capacity- and skill-
building; 2) Network (structure, governance and leadership); 3) KT/EIP value and culture. 
While the ToC provides an overview of the outputs and outcomes foreseen at both the WHO 
Secretariat and country levels, the logic models outlined in Tables 1 and 2 provide more 
detailed information.
There are a number of assumptions behind this ToC (summarized in Fig. 4), which would be 
necessary for EVIPNet Europe to achieve its objectives.
• EVIPNet Europe acknowledges that the pathway of change is complex, with 
feedback loops, leading to incremental or cumulative changes, which may be 
challenging to measure (Brennan et al., 2017; Jones, 2011).
• In KT processes, research plays a primary role but is not the only factor in policy 
decision-making. Research competes with factors such as local context and 
contingencies, different interests, priorities, ideas and values (Green & Bennett, 
2007; Oliver et al., 2014; Verboom, Montgomery, & Bennett, 2016).
• Research use may take different forms and be less instrumental and rather 
conceptual in nature (to introduce new ideas and concepts to guide thinking 
and action) or symbolic (to e.g. legitimize decision-making) (Lavis et al., 2009; 
Weiss, 1979).
• Since it is challenging to assess the contributions of one programme/initiative 
to policy changes, it is advisable for EVIPNet Europe to concentrate its M&E 
efforts on assessing its direct influence (where the network’ s contributions are 
assumed) or where changes are measurable (Institute of Development Studies, 
2013). These M&E efforts can also serve as the basis for an intervention to 
foster evidence-informed policies or active critical reflection on how and why 
EIP could be addressed (Tudisca et al., 2018).
4.2 Output and outcome indicators to measure performance of the WHO Secretariat and 
the country teams/KTPs
Based on the detailed logic models, sets of indicators were identified: 100 output and 
outcome indicators at WHO Secretariat level and 52 at country team/KTP level were 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 9
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=10>>>
included in the final framework. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the structure of M&E indicators 
in the developed logic model. Appendices B and C provide a menu of indicators for KT 
network secretariats and member countries respectively to choose from, depending on their 
own contexts, targets and expected changes.
To make the framework more manageable and provide further guidance to the users, the 
indicators were classified into ‘required’ or ‘recommended’ to facilitate their application 
(see Appendices A and B). They were also separated into output, short-term outcome and 
intermediate outcome indicators in line with the ToC and detailed logic models (Tables 1 
and 2). The user can, thus, more easily identify the relevant indicators depending on the 
M&E purpose and network maturity. For example, if the network is still in a formative 
phase, the output and short-term outcome indicators will be most relevant.
Indicators that were labelled as ‘required’ are those that in the context of EVIPNet Europe 
are essential for measuring the network’s progress and effectiveness at the Secretariat and 
country levels. Other KT networks using the indicators may choose a different set of 
‘required’ indicators, depending on their context. Some suggested data collection methods 
are also included with the indicators. While some of these are specific to the EVIPNet 
Europe context most can easily be adapted for other KT networks.
5 Discussion
As EVIPNet Europe continues to expand, a critical activity to its sustainability and success 
is assessing its work and current achievements to inform future developments and strategic 
planning of the network. EVIPNet Europe has therefore developed the comprehensive 
M&E framework to be used by the WHO Secretariat of EVIPNet Europe and its member 
countries. The framework may also serve other stakeholders involved with KT networks 
in their efforts to assess the performance, effectiveness and efficiency of their network’s 
approaches and activities. M&E is important because the science and practice of KT 
is growing rapidly, making it even more necessary to understand how best to translate 
knowledge into policy and practice (Ekirapa-Kiracho et al., 2014).
Based on the outcome mapping methodology, the EVIPNet Europe M&E framework 
focuses on changes in behaviours and relationships that can be linked to the network’s 
activities both at the WHO Secretariat and the country team/KTP levels. This is aligned with 
and promotes good practice in KT M&E (Balls & Nurova, 2020; Bennett & Jessani, 2011; 
Earl et al., 2001; Young et al., 2014). A ToC and the underlying log frame guide the user in 
their M&E efforts. However, the relevant indicators and data collection methods need to be 
selected dependent on the stage of network maturity, the specific KT context (enablers) and 
the assessment purpose (including whether the indicators are used for continuous monitoring 
of the programme or for evaluating the KT activities; both in a formative and summative 
manner).
It should be noted that a log frame, although much used in KT M&E (Bennett & Jessani, 
2011; ESSENCE on Health Research, 2016; Garforth et al., 2014; Hanley et al., 2012; Jones, 
2011; McLean & Tucker, 2013; The Networks of Centres of Excellence Secretariat, 2008; 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 10
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Tsui et al., 2014; V ogel & Punton, 2017; Yazdizadeh, Majdzadeh, Alami, & Amrolalaei, 
2014), is a heuristic device aiming at simplifying complex and dynamic processes of how 
the policy influencing activities are meant to result in the foreseen changes in policy and 
practice (Asian Development Bank, 2010; Jones, 2011; Ottoson et al., 2009).
5.1 Lessons learned
A comprehensive framework was designed, with different levels and domains and a high 
number of quantitative and qualitative indicators. While the framework was initially difficult 
to navigate, feedback from the peer-reviewers and experience gained through the piloting 
helped us to contextualize the framework to provide further guidance for the user and to 
make it more user-friendly – without losing the framework’s intended comprehensiveness. 
Two important changes were made as a result of these steps: (i) the indicators were classified 
into required (core) and recommended indicators, thus providing further guidance to the 
users in selecting relevant indicators; and (ii) the indicator tables were carefully reviewed 
and further simplified by streamlining and reducing the overall number of indicators. An 
important lesson learned when piloting the framework was that ample time needs to be put 
aside to clarify the evaluation purpose, identify the related evaluation question(s), determine 
the data collection procedures, and in particular to identify appropriate indicators given the 
size of the draft M&E frame-work. Also, the timing of the data collection needs to be 
well chosen and vacation periods avoided, if possible, to ensure availability of respondents. 
Finally, setting-up and closely collaborating with a steering group – comprised of relevant 
stakeholders, evaluation experts and intended beneficiaries – to obtain advice when planning 
for and conducting the evaluation proved to be highly valuable in increasing the quality, 
utility and use of the evaluation work.
5.2 Strengths and limitations
The EVIPNet Europe M&E framework is one of few M&E frameworks that goes beyond 
assessing individual-level changes to also focus on the progress and performance at 
both an organizational- and system-level. It was developed based on a comprehensive 
methodology: literature reviews, expert review and consultation, as well as pilot-testing 
to ensure maximum relevance and feasibility of the framework and its indicators. This 
mixed-methods, iterative approach provided a solid foundation for the current version of the 
framework. A limitation of the process to date is that we were not able to pilot the full set 
of framework indicators due to time constraints and the current level of network maturity 
of EVIPNet Europe. Instead, we focused more on piloting the Secretariat’s logic model. 
To some degree, we tried to mitigate this effect through a careful process of selecting the 
indicators, guided by a M&E steering group. However, this means that some indicators of 
the final M&E framework have not yet been tested within the context of EVIPNet Europe 
for their suitability and feasibility. However, the EVIPNet Europe Framework should be seen 
as a living document that will be periodically revised and updated by the WHO Secretariat 
of EVIPNet Europe.
Another limitation of this, and any M&E framework, is that it does not guarantee that the 
results will be used to improve practice. As pointed out by Marra (Marra, 2021) cognitive 
biases associated with evidence use in decision-making hampers the instrumental use of 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 11
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=12>>>
evaluation findings. Marra suggests that one way to circumvent this may be to include a 
behavioural design into government and institution evaluation policies.
5.3 Conclusions and next steps
Establishing a framework with a ToC and indicators for both the Secretariat and the country 
teams/KTPs fills an important gap in the literature. It provides an instrument that addresses 
network evaluation holistically and that can be flexibly adapted and applied to the unit 
of analysis and stage of development. The EVIPNet Europe M&E framework is as an 
analytical tool providing technical guidance to stake-holders when developing specific KT 
evaluation plans at various stages of the maturity of a network/KT initiative.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us, yet again, of the importance of mobilizing 
the best available evidence rapidly for sound and expeditious decision-making. To a large 
extent, this relies on existing KT capacity, mechanisms and infrastructure and their regular 
evaluation for quality improvements and learning (El-Jardali et al., 2020; Salvador-Carulla, 
Rosenberg, Mendoza, & Tabatabaei-Jafari, 2020; Tricco et al., 2020). While the framework 
has been successfully piloted (for the results of the formative evaluation (see (Lester et al., 
2020)), a systematic user validation, in particular at country level, is still outstanding. It is 
envisaged that this will be undertaken to validate the amendments made based on the pilot 
testing (i.e. prioritization and streamlining of indicators) and to test the remainder of the 
indicators for feasibility.
To support network member countries in M&E, the development of a M&E guide and 
templates, training, and the establishment of a community of practice would be valuable. 
The WHO Secretariat should also consider repeating its evaluation in five years, in line 
with the EVIPNet Europe strategy. In addition, while aspects of KT institutionalization 
were included in the M&E framework, these could be further explored as the process 
for achieving, and determinants of, genuine sustainability and longevity of the network’s 
activities, both at regional and country levels, are not well-known.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks go to all peer-reviewers and experts who participated in the online expert consultation. We would also 
like to thank former members of the WHO Secretariat of EVIPNet Europe for their support of the M&E framework 
development, in particular, Julia Scarlett for her work on the two scoping reviews.
Biographies
Tanja Kuchenmüller has been coordinating the World Health Organization (WHO)’s 
research-to-policy activities at the WHO European level and most recently at Headquarters. 
With a focus on enhancing country leadership, she has initiated and managed multilevel 
capacity-building programmes aiming to strengthen and sustain national capacities in 
generating and using the best available evidence in policy. This includes normative work and 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 12
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=13>>>
the development of new tools and approaches to guide countries in enhancing their research-
to-policy activities. Her main research interests include examining how to effectively link 
research evidence to health policy decisions, systems change, and organizational learning.
Evelina Chapman is an Argentinian MD & Pediatrician. She also has a Ph.D. in Public 
Health and a master’s degree in Clinical Epidemiology. She has more than 20 years of 
experience in the clinical field, and in capacity building, mainly in epidemiology as well 
as knowledge translation/evidence-informed decision-making in policies, laws and practice. 
For more than 10 years, she has worked at WHO in the Offices for the Americas and Europe 
and continues supporting PAHO’s in the Emergencies area until now. Evelina has numerous 
peer-reviewed publications, with a focus on knowledge translation processes at programme 
and policy levels.
Ryoko Takahashi is a Technical Officer for health systems research, evidence-informed 
policy and health information system at the World Health Organization. Her experience 
extends at national, regional and global levels in the areas of monitoring and evaluation, 
health research system strengthening, evidence-informed policy-making, HIV , TB, and 
reproductive health. She has worked extensively in country settings in Tanzania, Malawi, 
Ethiopia and South Africa and Indonesia.
Louise Lester is a Consultant in Public Health at Nottinghamshire County Council, a Local 
Government Authority in England. She has experience in both public health research and 
practice from working across the National Health Service, Public Health England, Local 
Authorities and Universities.
Marge Reinap is a Technical Officer on Evidence for Policy Development in the Division 
of Country Health Policies and Systems at WHO Regional Office for Europe. Her main 
research interests are evidence-informed decision making for policy and practice, knowledge 
translation, health policy and health policy reforms, policies and policymaking for NCD risk 
factors, such as nutrition, alcohol and tobacco.
Moriah Ellen is on faculty at Ben Gurion University of the Negev’s Department of Health 
Systems Management in Israel. She is also an Assistant Professor (Status) at the Institute 
of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation at the University of Toronto, Canada and 
Investigator at the McMaster Health Forum in Canada. Prof. Ellen’s primary research 
interests are health systems and policy, knowledge transfer and exchange, implementation 
science, addressing the overuse of health services, and ageing.
Michelle M. Haby is a Professor at the University of Sonora, Mexico and Honorary Senior 
Fellow at the University of Melbourne, Australia. She has a range of experience in both 
research and policy, focusing on evidence-informed decision making, including the conduct 
and use of systematic reviews and rapid reviews to inform public health policy.
Abbreviations
EIP, evidence-informed policy-making
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 13
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=14>>>
EVIPNet, Evidence-informed Policy Network
EBP, evidence brief for policy
KT, knowledge translation
KTP, Knowledge Translation Platforms
M&E, monitoring and evaluation
PD, policy dialogue
SA, Situation analysis
ToC, Theory of change
WHO, World Health Organization
References
Asian Development Bank. Knowledge Solutions: Tools, Methods, and Approaches to Drive 
Development Forward and Enhance Its Effects. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development 
Bank; 2010. 
Balls E, Nurova N. Outcome mapping and research into use: analysing monitoring data for effective 
strategies. Development in Practce. 2020; 30 (2) 255–267. DOI: 10.1080/09614524.2019.1701989 
Bennett, G, Jessani, N. The Knowledge Translation Toolkit Bridging the Know-Do Gap: A Resource 
for Researchers. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre; 2011. 
Best A, Terpstra JL, Moor G, Riley B, Norman CD, Glasgow RE. Building Knowledge Integration 
Systems for Evidence-Informed Decisions. Journal of Health Organization and Management. 2009; 
23 (6) 627–641. [PubMed: 20020596] 
Brennan SE, McKenzie JE, Turner T, Redman S, Makkar S, Williamson A, Green SE. Development 
and validation of SEER (Seeking, Engaging with and Evaluating Research): a measure of 
policymakers’ capacity to engage with and use research. Health Research Policy and Systems. 
2017; 15 (1) 1. doi: 10.1186/s12961-016-0162-8 [PubMed: 28095915] 
Campbell, S. EVIPNet Africa: Lessons Learned 2006-2012EUR. Luxembourg: Online; 2013. 
Creech, H, Ramji, A. Knowledge Networks: Guidelines for Assessment. Winnipeg, Manitoba: 
International Institute for Sustainable Development; 2004. 
Dobbins M, Traynor RL, Workentine S, Yousefi-Nooraie R, Yost J. Impact of an organization-wide 
knowledge translation strategy to support evidence-informed public health decision making. BMC 
Public Health. 2018; 18 (1) 1412 doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-6317-5 [PubMed: 30594155] 
Earl, S, Carden, F, Smutylo, T. Outcome Mapping: Building Learning and Reflection into 
Development Programs. Ottowa: International Development Research Centre; 2001. 
East African Community. Prospectus for Regional East African Community Health (REACH) Policy 
Initiative. Arusha, Tanzania: 2006. 
Van Eerd, D, Cole, D, Keown, K, Irvin, E, Kramer, D, Brenneman Gibson, J, Morassaei, S. Report on 
Knowledge Transfer and Exchange Practices: A Systematic Review of the Quality and Types of 
Instruments used to Assess KTE Implementation and Impact. Toronto, Ontario: Institute for Work 
& Health; 2011. 
Ekirapa-Kiracho E, Walugembe D, Tetui M, Kisakye A, Rutebemberwa E, Sengooba F, Kiwanuka 
SN. Evaluation of a health systems knowledge translation network for Africa (KTNET): a study 
protocol. Implementation Science. 2014; 9 (170) 
El-Jardali F, Bou-Karroum L, Fadlallah R. Amplifying the role of knowledge translation platforms in 
the COVID-19 pandemic response. Health Research Policy and Systems. 2020; 18 (1) 58. doi: 
10.1186/s12961-020-00576-y [PubMed: 32493339] 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 14
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Garforth, C, Ozor, N, Usher, R, Bell, A. Global Development Network Independent Evaluation. Final 
Report. New Delhi: Global Development Network; 2014. 
van de Goor I, Hamalainen RM, Syed A, Juel Lau C, Sandu P, Spitters H, consortium R. 
Determinants of evidence use in public health policy making: results from a study across six EU 
countries. Health Policy. 2017; 121 (3) 273–281. DOI: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2017.01.003 [PubMed: 
28139253] 
Green, A, Bennett, S. Sound Choices. Enhancing Capacity for Evidence-Informed Health Policy. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007. 
Grimshaw JM, Eccles MP, Lavis JN, Hill SJ, Squires JE. Knowledge translation of research findings. 
Implementation Science. 2012; 7 (50) 50. [PubMed: 22651257] 
Haby MM, Chapman E, Clark R, Barreto J, Reveiz L, Lavis JN. Designing a rapid response 
program to support evidence-informed decision-making in the Americas region: using the best 
available evidence and case studies. Implementation Science. 2016; 11 (1) 117 doi: 10.1186/
s13012-016-0472-9 [PubMed: 27538384] 
Hamid M, Bustamante-Manaog T, Dung TV , Akkhavong K, Fu H, Ma Y , Pang T. EVIPNet: 
translating the spirit of Mexico. The Lancet. 2005; 366 (9499) 1758–1760. DOI: 10.1016/
s0140-6736(05)67709-4 
Hanley, T, Gould, C, Harle, J, Nelson, K. International Network for the Availability of Scientific 
Publications. Programme for the Enhancement of Research Information Phase II External 
Evaluation 2008-22 Final Report. Oxford: International Network for the Availability of Scientific 
Publications; 2012. 
ESSENCE on Health Research. Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Research 
Capacity Strengthening. Geneva: Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR)/World Health Organization 
(WHO); 2016. 
Institute of Development Studies. Learning about Theories of Change for the Monitoring and 
Evaluation of Research Uptake. IDS Practice Paper in Brief, 14. 2013. 
Jones, H. A Guide to Monitoring and Evaluating Policy Influence. London: Overseas Development 
Institute; 2011. 
Lavis JN, Panisset U. EVIPNet Africa’s first series of policy briefs to support evidence-informed 
policymaking. International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care. 2010; 26 (2) 229–
232. DOI: 10.2760/374191 [PubMed: 20392332] 
Lavis JN, Robertson D, Woodside JM, McLeod CB, Abelson J, Group KTS. How can research 
organizations more effectively transfer research knowledge to decision makers? The Mäbank 
Quarterly. 2003; 81 (2) 221–248. DOI: 10.1111/1468-0009.t01-1-00052 
Lavis JN, Rottingen JA, Bosch-Capblanch X, Atun R, El-Jardali F, Gilson L, Haines A. Guidance 
for evidence-informed policies about health systems: linking guidance development to policy 
development. PLoS Medicine. 2012; 9 (3) Article e1001186 doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001186 
[PubMed: 22427746] 
Lavis JN, Wilson MG, Oxman AD, Grimshaw J, Lewin S, Fretheim A. SUPPORT Tools for evidence-
informed health Policymaking (STP) 5: using research evidence to frame options to address a 
problem. Health Research Policy and Systems. 2009; 7 (Suppl 1) S5. doi: 10.1186/1478-4505-7-
S1-S5 [PubMed: 20018112] 
Lester L, Haby MM, Chapman E, Kuchenmüller T. Evaluation of the performance and achievements 
of the WHO Evidence-informed Policy Network (EVIPNet) Europe. Health Research Policy and 
Systems. 2020; 18 (1) 109. doi: 10.1186/s12961-020-00612-x [PubMed: 32972421] 
Mair, D, Smillie, L, La Placa, G, Schwendinger, F, Raykovska, M, Pasztor, Z, van Bavel, R. 
Understanding our Political Nature: How to Put Knowledge and Reason at the Heart of Political 
Decision-making. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union; 2019. 
Marra M. A behavioral design to reform Italy’s Evaluation Policy. American Journal of Evaluation. 
2021; 42 (4) 371. doi: 10.1177/1098214020972791 
McLean, R, Tucker, J. Evaluation of CIHRs Knowledge Translation Funding Program. Ottawa: 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research; 2013. 
Mendizabal, E. Understanding Networks: The Functions of Research Policy Networks. London: 
Overseas Development Institute; 2006. 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 15
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Moat K, Lavis J, Abelson J. How contexts and issues influence the use of policy-relevant research 
syntheses: a critical interpretive synthesis. The Milbank Quarterly. 2013; 91 (3) 604–648. 
[PubMed: 24028700] 
Morton, J, Shaxson, L, Greenland, J. Executive Summary Process Evaluation of the International 
Initiative for Impact Evaluation (2008-22). London: Triple Line Consulting Ltd/Overseas 
Development Institute; 2012. 
Oliver K, Innvar S, Lorenc T, Woodman J, Thomas J. A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators 
of the use of evidence by policymakers. BMC Health Services Research. 2014; 24 (2) 
Ottoson JM, Green LW, Beery WL, Senter SK, Cahill CL, Pearson DC, Leviton L. Policy-contribution 
assessment and field-building analysis of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Active Living 
Research Program. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2009; 36 (2 Suppl) S34–S43. DOI: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2008.10.010 [PubMed: 19147055] 
Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoagwood K. Purposeful sampling for 
qualitative data collection and analysis in mixed method implementation research. Administration 
and Policy in Mental Health. 2015; 42 (5) 533–544. DOI: 10.1007/s10488-013-0528-y [PubMed: 
24193818] 
Perkin, E, Court, J. Networks and Policy Processes in International Development: A Literature Review. 
London: Overseas Development Institute; 2005. 
Ramalingam, B. Mind the Network Gaps. London: Overseas Development Institute; 2011. 
Salvador-Carulla L, Rosenberg S, Mendoza J, Tabatabaei-Jafari H. Rapid response to crisis: 
Health System Lessons from the active period of COVID-19: a framework for rapid response. 
Health Policy and Technology. 2020; 9 (4) 578–586. DOI: 10.1016/j.hlpt.2020.08.011 [PubMed: 
32874862] 
Scarlett J, Forsberg BC, Biermann O, Kuchenmüller T, El-Khatib Z. Indicators to evaluate 
organisational knowledge brokers: a scoping review. Health Research Policy and Systems. 2020; 
18 (1) 93. doi: 10.1186/s12961-020-00607-8 [PubMed: 32831095] 
Scarlett J, Kohler K, Reinap M, Ciobanu A, Tirdea M, Koikov V , Kuchenmüller T. Evidence-informed 
Policy Network (EVIPNet) Europe: success stories in knowledge translation. Public Health 
Panorama. 2018; 4 (2) 147–271. 
Shaxson, L, Datta, A, Tshangela, M, Matomela, B. Understanding the Organisational Context 
for Evidence-informed Policy-making. Pretoria/London: Department of Environmental Affairs/
Overseas Development Institute; 2016. 
Straus SE, Tetroe J, Graham I. Defining knowledge translation. CMAJ. 2009; 181 (3-4) 165–168. DOI: 
10.1503/cmaj.081229 [PubMed: 19620273] 
The CIPHER Investigators. Supporting Policy in Health with Research: an Intervention Trial 
(SPIRIT)-protocol for a stepped wedge trial. BMJ Open. 2014; 4 (7) Article e005293 doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2014-005293 
The Networks of Centres of Excellence Secretariat. Joint Results-based Management and 
Accountability Framework and Risk-Based Audit Framework for the Class Grant Networks of 
Centres of Excellence Program. Ottawa: The Networks of Centres of Excellence Secretariat; 2008. 
Tricco AC, Garritty CM, Boulos L, Lockwood C, Wilson M, McGowan J, Straus SE. Rapid review 
methods more challenging during COVID-19: commentary with a focus on 8 knowledge synthesis 
steps. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2020; 126: 177–183. DOI: 10.1016/jjdinepi.2020.06.029 
[PubMed: 32615209] 
Tsui, J, Simon, H, John, Y . Monitoring and Evaluation of Policy Influence and Advocacy. V ol. 395. 
London: Overseas Development Institute; 2014. 
Tudisca V , Valente A, Castellani T, Stahl T, Sandu P, Dulf D, Consortium R. Development 
of measurable indicators to enhance public health evidence-informed policy-making. Health 
Research Policy and Systems. 2018; 16 (1) 47. doi: 10.1186/s12961-018-0323-z [PubMed: 
29855328] 
Verboom B, Montgomery P, Bennett S. What factors affect evidence-informed policymaking in 
public health? Protocol for a systematic review of qualitative evidence using thematic synthesis. 
Systematic Reviews. 2016; 5: 61. doi: 10.1186/s13643-016-0240-6 [PubMed: 27080993] 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 16
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=17>>>
V ogel, I. Review of the Use of ‘Theory of Change’ in International Development. Review Report. 
London: Department for International Development; 2012. 
V ogel, I; Punton, M. Building Capacity to Use Research Evaluation (BCURE) realist evaluation: Stage 
2 Synthesis Report: ITAD. 2017. 
Weiss C. The Many meanings of research utilization. Public Administration Review. 1979; 39 (5) 
426–431. 
WHO Regional Office for Europe. EVIPNet Europe Strategic Plan 2013-17. Copenhagen: WHO 
Regional Office for Europe; 2015. 
WHO Regional Office for Europe. Action Plan to strengthen the Use of Evidence, Information and 
Research for Policy-making in the WHO European Region (EUR/RC66/12). Copenhagen: WHO 
Regional Office for Europe; 2016a. 
WHO Regional Office for Europe. Using Research Evidence for Policy-making. Copenhagen: WHO 
Regional Office for Europe; 2016b. 
WHO Regional Office for Europe. Conceptual Background and Case Studies – Introduction to 
EVIPNet Europe. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2017. 
WHO Regional Office for Europe. EVIPNet Europe Evidence-informed Policy-making: Lessons 
Learned. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2019. 
Willis CD, Riley BL, Best A, Ongolo-Zogo P. Strengthening health systems through networks: the 
need for measurement and feedback. Health Policy Plan. 2012; 27 (4) iv62–iv66. DOI: 10.1093/
heapol/czs089 [PubMed: 23014155] 
Woolf S. The meaning of translational research and why it matters. JAMA. 2008; 299 (2) 211–213. 
[PubMed: 18182604] 
World Health Organization. Strengthening Health Systems. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004. 
World Health Organization. Health and the Millennium Development Goals. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2005. 
World Health Organization. Monitoring, Evaluation and Review of National Health Strategies. A 
country-led Platform for Information and Accountability. Geneva: 2011. 
World Health Organization. EVIPNet in Action. Evidence-Informed Policy Network. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2016. 
World Health Organization/General Assembly. Resolution 70/1. Transforming our World: The 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. New York City: United Nations; 2015. 
Yazdizadeh B, Majdzadeh R, Alami A, Amrolalaei S. How can we establish more successful 
knowledge networks in developing countries? Lessons learnt from knowledge networks in Iran. 
Health Research Policy and Systems. 2014; 12 (63) 63. [PubMed: 25354533] 
Young, J, Shaxson, L, Jones, H, Hearn, S, Datta, A, Cassidy, C. ROMA: A Guide to Policy 
Engagement and Policy Influence. London: Overseas Development Institute; 2014. 
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 17
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Fig. 1. EVIPNet Europe – network structure.
Source: Adapted from Starkley 1997 in Ramalingam (2011).
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 18
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Fig. 2. Network life cycle.
Source: Based on Creech and Ramji (2004).
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 19
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Fig. 3. 
Development process for the EVIPNet Europe M&E framework. The user validation of the 
framework will be addressed in the next stage of the M&E framework development.
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 20
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Fig. 4. EVIPNet Europe Theory of Change.
Source: Adapted from Lester et al. (2020).
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 21
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 22
Table 1
EVIPNet Europe M&E Framework: WHO Secretariat level logic model.
Inputs Outputs Outcomes Impact
Short-term Intermediate
Structure 
Financial 
resources 
Human 
resources 
Effective 
management 
Technical 
assistance
KT capacity 
and skill 
building
Capacity building for 
country teams/KTPs: Skill-
building workshops were 
convened by the WHO 
Secretariat on 1) KT 
skills (searching, accessing, 
appraising, synthesizing and 
using evidence) and 2) 
training facilitation and 
training-the-trainer skills
Technical support for KT 
products and activities: 
Mentoring, coaching and 
reviews provided by the 
WHO Secretariat on 
situation analyses, EBPs, 
PDs and stakeholder 
meetings, rapid response 
services, clearinghouses, 
monitoring and evaluation 
and other KT activities 
at country level WHO 
technical documents, tools 
and resources: Guidance 
documents developed by the 
WHO Secretariat
Increased KT capacity 
among country teams/
KTPs through activities 
implemented by the 
WHO Secretariat: 1) 
KT skills (searching, 
accessing, appraising, 
synthesizing and using 
evidence) and 2) training 
facilitation and training-
the-trainer skills were 
gained through skill-
building workshops
Increased KT 
practice and production/
availability of KT 
products by country 
teams/KTPs: EBPs, PDs, 
etc. were produced at 
national and regional levels 
by applying skills gained 
through capacity building 
activities
Increased KT capacity 
among external 
stakeholders through 
activities implemented 
by country teams/KTPs 
(searching, accessing, 
appraising, synthesizing and 
using evidence)
Use of KT products 
by country teams/KTPs 
and external stakeholders: 
KT products created by 
workshop participants were 
used at national and regional 
levels
Systematic 
and routine 
use of 
evidence in 
policymaking 
Improved 
health system 
policies 
Improved 
health status 
and equity
Network 
(structure, 
governance 
and 
leadership)
Network membership: 
Incentives for joining the 
network created by the 
WHO Secretariat and 
network established at 
country level Strategic 
directions and activities: 
Strategy and a vision for the 
network developed by the 
WHO Secretariat, aligned 
with country needs
Network governance: 
Network/resource 
management and leadership 
mechanisms created by the 
WHO Secretariat
Network membership 
growth and 
strengthening: Network 
growth and stability
Internal and external 
visibility: EVIPNet Europe 
seen as an expert in the KT 
field, adding value
Country teams/KTPs 
established and 
operationalized: EVIPNet 
Europe established and KT 
work initiated
Network member 
satisfaction: Member 
countries satisfied with 
EVIPNet Europe and its 
activities
Demonstration of 
efficiency and effectiveness 
in KT: EVIPNet Europe 
showed to be efficient and 
effective through its KT 
activities
Institutionalization of 
sustainable KTPs: National 
and regional networks 
becoming self-sustaining
Mechanisms for exchange 
and networking: A system 
for sharing information and 
networking both internally 
and externally created by the 
WHO Secretariat
Strengthened collaboration and partnerships: EVIPNet 
Europe established collaborative projects, partnerships 
and networking opportunities, both network-internal and 
external
KT/EIP 
value and 
culture
Production and 
dissemination of and EIP 
action plan and promotion 
of KT values: Publication of 
an action plan to strengthen 
the use of evidence, 
information and research for 
policy-making in the WHO 
European Region
Increased commitment to 
KT: Heightened interest, 
political support, growth of 
KT field and climate
Increased evidence us 
by society and KT 
values: Evidence use 
increasingly mainstreamed 
through society
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Kuchenmüller et al. Page 23
Table 2
EVIPNet Europe M&E Framework: Country team/KTP level logic model.
Inputs Outputs Outcomes Impact
Short-term Intermediate
Structure 
Financial 
resources 
Human 
resources 
Effective 
management 
Technical 
assistance
KT capacity 
and skill 
building
Capacity building for 
country teams/Knowledge 
Translation Platforms 
(KTP) and external 
stakeholders convened by 
the Evidence-informed 
Policy Network (EVIPNet) 
Europe country teams/
KTPs:1) Skill-building 
workshops on knowledge 
translation (KT) and 
training facilitation skills 
attended by the country 
team/KTP and 2) KT 
skills building workshops 
for external national 
stakeholders organized by 
the country team/KTP
Increased KT capacity: 
Increased KT knowledge 
and skills of country teams/
Knowledge Translation 
Platforms (KTP) and 
external stakeholders 
to search/access/appraise/
synthesize/use research 
evidence
Increased use of KT 
products at national and 
Regional levels
Systematic and 
routine use of 
evidence in 
policymaking 
Improved 
health system 
policies 
Improved 
health status 
and equity
KT products and activities 
developed by country/
teams/KTP: Health policy 
topic issues prioritized; 
evidence briefs for policy 
(EBPs) on priority health 
issues developed; policy 
dialogues (PDs) organized
Increased production 
and visibility of KT 
products produced by KTP, 
searchable and discoverable
Monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) plan: Mechanism 
for regular M&E in place
Routine M&E by the 
country team/KTP
Improved country 
team/KTP performance: 
Lessons learnt and good 
practice used, applied 
and shared by KTP for 
improving KTP and overall 
network operationalization
Network 
(structure, 
governance 
and 
leadership)
Country team/KTP 
engaged with EVIPNet 
Europe: Situation analysis 
(SA) conducted, stakeholder 
meetings held
Country team/KTP 
structure developed: 
Resources, Governance 
structure put in place, 
management and leadership, 
A formal/informal country 
team/KTP is established
Operationalization of 
KTP: Country teams plan, 
implement, monitor and 
evaluate KT activities in 
support of EIP
Institutionalization of 
sustainable KTP: 
Regional and national 
networks are self-
sustainable and 
autonomous
Mechanisms for 
collaboration and peer-
exchange established
Production of collaborative activities and stakeholder 
engagement by the country team/KTP
KT/EIP 
value and 
culture
Promotion of EIP action 
plan and KT values: 
KT agenda setting and 
promotion through the EIP 
action plan
Increased commitment to 
KT: Heightened interest, 
growth of KT field and 
climate
Increased evidence us 
by society and KT 
values: Evidence use 
increasingly mainstreamed 
through society
Eval Program Plann. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 January 12.