<<<PAGE=1>>>
STUDY ON THE DEMAND FOR AND 
SUPPLY OF 
EVALUATION IN MALAWI
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) 
Graduate School of Public and Development Management, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 
 
Drafting team: Dr. Hannock Kumwenda (Country Consultant), Salim Latib (CLEAR-AA/Wits) 
Management Team: Stephen Porter, Osvaldo Feinstein, Salim Latib, Anne McLennan, David Rider Smith 
Reference Group: Michael Bamberger, Derek Poate, Zenda Ofir, Robert Picciotto, Nidhi Khattri, Howard 
White, Jessica Kitakule-Mukungu, Ian Goldman 
 
December, 2013 
 
Entire publication © Graduate School of Public and Development 
Management, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 
 
 
This report is an output funded by the UK Department for International 
Development (DFID) as a public good. The views expressed are not necessarily 
those of DFID.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY ON THE DEMAND AND SUPPLY OF 
EVALUATION IN MALAWI1 
  
                                                           
1For further information on this study please contact  CLEAR.AnglophoneAfrica@wits.ac.za. The content of this 
study is the responsibility of the team alone, and should not be ascribed to the University of the 
Witwatersrand, DFID, or any other organisation or individuals.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
ii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
This report provides a review of two dimensions of evaluation practice  in Malawi: (i) t he 
conditions under which demand for evidence is generated; and (ii) the areas in which supply 
can be strengthened to mee t and foster this demand. Th e review serves to highlight the 
prevalence of active, latent and potential demands for evaluation. The latent and potential 
demands are nested within requests for evidence from principals and government agents. 
This demand is n ot necessarily only conditioned by development partners, but results 
endogenously from government, based on articulated development objectives. Supply could 
in the short -term be strengthened through work with the main research centres of the 
Universities o f Malawi  (Centre for Social Research, Economics Department ) and  Lilongwe 
University of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 
The major thrust of the review is that, within Malawi, there is a stronger demand for 
evidence for policy contestation than there is for systematic evaluations. This demand  is 
circumscribed by politics of patronage, except on matters of common destiny or clearly 
science dominated fields like health . Evaluation studies are, in contrast to other forms of 
evidence, seen as a tool applied to  support accountability for management or politic al 
leadership and sometimes used to explore complex areas on performance, be it good or bad. 
On the whole, both evaluation supply and demand is very limited in the country.  
International consultants usually lead major evidence gathering or evaluation exercises , 
with local consultants playing a support role or taking the lead for smaller in -country 
assignments. As a result of which, for there to be a growth in systematic evaluations, as a 
useful tool for development, capacity enhancement efforts need to emphasise that 
evaluation can support learning that enables policy makers and programme implementation 
agents to understand how public investments could be improved. The limited supply of 
evaluative expertise shows some legitimate and good practice, and it is mostly linked to 
country-led demand  by government, local donors and non -governmental organisations . 
Within this context, there are some examples of evaluation being applied to inform policies 
and development strategies. 
There are a number of in dividual entry points for improving evaluation capacities in Malawi 
within the framework of the evolved  National Development Monitoring and Evaluation  
System (NDMES). The existence of functional sector working groups , involving a number of 
institutions both in demand and supply , is perceived to be a  resource that can be used to 
enhance the governance of evaluations  and its growth as a tool for development policy . 
Malawi’s central government uses a large array of donor-funded technical assistance to 
supply evaluative expertise. Some of the d emand is endogenous and there are cases where  
evidence does feed into decision -making, especially on matters where substantial donor 
funds are at stake . It is unlikely that if donors w ithdrew resources, Government would  
identify substantial internal resources to support evaluation activities beyond programmes 
that have little popular support. 
In undertaking evaluation capacity development (ECD) , the central identifiable challenge 
from t he review is the establishment of a coordinati ng framework or institutional 
mechanisms that would serve to foster evaluation capacity and be the target of genuine 
transfer of skills programs over the long term. These would strengthen the University Sector 
and other higher level technical institutions to deliver appropriate certified training in this 
field. The study bring s to the fore the importance of shaping supply to fit with capabilities
<<<PAGE=5>>>
iii 
within the demand space and the importance of enhanced coordinatio n in government and 
institutional development for evaluations within the wider society.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
iv 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................. II 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................................................................................................... IV 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................................... V 
1. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................................................................... 2 
2. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT ....................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY AND PLANNING ............................................................................................................ 5 
2.2POLITICAL ECONOMY OF MALAWI ........................................................................................................................... 7 
3. MAPPING OF EVALUATION IN MALAWI ............................................................................................. 9 
3.1 PRINCIPALS ................................................................................................................................................................. 9 
The Political Executive ..................................................................................................................................................... 9 
Legislative Structures .................................................................................................................................................... 10 
Development Partners................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Civil Society ........................................................................................................................................................................ 12 
3.2 GOVERNMENT AGENTS .......................................................................................................................................... 13 
Lead Ministry - Economic Planning and Development .................................................................................. 13 
Line Ministries ................................................................................................................................................................... 16 
National Statistical Office ............................................................................................................................................ 19 
3.3. SUPPLY OF EVIDENCE AND EVALUATION AGENTS ............................................................................................. 20 
Professional suppliers .................................................................................................................................................... 20 
Independent think tanks and research institutions ........................................................................................ 20 
Universities ......................................................................................................................................................................... 21 
Evaluators and evaluation associations ............................................................................................................... 22 
4. PATHWAYS, OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES ........................................................................ 24 
4.1 BUILDING THE DEMAND FOR EVALUATION ......................................................................................................... 25 
4.2 STRENGTHENING EVALUATION THROUGH GOVERNMENT AGENTS ................................................................. 26 
4.3 BUILDING THE WIDER SUPPLY SYSTEM ............................................................................................................... 27 
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................................... 28 
APPENDIX A: INTERVIEW LIST ................................................................................................................ 30
<<<PAGE=7>>>
v 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
AfDB African Development Bank MoAI Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 
CABS Common Approach to Budget 
Support  
MP Member of Parliament 
CARD Centre for Agriculture 
Research and Development 
MPRS Malawi Poverty Reduction Strategy  
CIHD Centre for International 
Health and Development 
MTEF Medium Term Expenditure Framework 
CLEAR-AA Regional Centre for Learning 
on Evaluation and Results for 
Anglophone Africa  
NCTP National Cash Transfer Programme 
CPAF Common Performance 
Assessment Framework 
NDMES National Development Monitoring and 
Evaluation System 
CSOs Civil Society Organisations NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations 
CSR Centre for Social Research NSO National Statistics Office 
CWIS Core Welfare Indicators 
Questionnaire Survey 
ODA Overseas Development Assistance 
DA District Assembly OPC Office of the President and Cabinet 
DHS Demographic Health Surveys OSSREA Organisation for Social Science Research 
in Eastern and Southern Africa 
DIFD UK Department for 
International Development  
PEFA Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability 
DPs Development Partners  PER Public Expenditure Reviews  
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo PETS Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys 
ECD Evaluation capacity 
development 
PFM Public Financial Management 
EU European Union PRU Policy Research Unit  
FISP Free Inputs Subsidy 
Programme 
PSIP Public Sector Investment Programme  
GoM Government of Malawi SDU Service Delivery Unit 
IHS Integrated Household Survey SP Starter Pack 
IMF  International Monetary Fund SWG Sector Working Groups 
M&E Monitoring and evaluation TBAs Traditional Birth Attendants 
MAMP Malawi Aid Management 
Platform 
TIP Targeted Inputs Program  
MASEDA Malawi Socio-Economic 
Database 
TWC Technical Working Committee  
MDGs Millennium Development 
Goals 
UN United Nations 
MDHS Malawi Demographic and 
Health Survey 
USD United States Dollars 
MEJN Malawi Economic Justice 
Network  
WB World Bank 
MEMP National Development 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Master Plan  
  
MEPD Ministry of Economic 
Planning and Development 
  
MGDS Malawi Growth and 
Development Strategy
<<<PAGE=8>>>
1 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1. This study provides an analytical mapping of the agents involved in evaluation practice 
and hence of the evaluation system in Malawi. It is inclusive of those agents involved in 
establishing demand for evaluation, the actors involved in connecting demand with 
supply, and those active in the supply of evaluations. The review and report has been 
undertaken to serve as a reference point for those engaged in supporting evaluation and 
evaluation capacity enhancement in the country . Consequently, the primary audience 
for this study is intended to be those interested in evaluatio n capacity development 
(ECD) in Malawi. The Regional Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results for 
Anglophone Africa (CLEAR -AA)2 conducted this study on evaluation/evaluative research 
for the UK Department for International Development (DFID) as one of  a set of cases 
covering five countries3. Fieldwork for this study took place from 17 to 21 June 2013.  
2. A secondary audience  for the report are individuals and stakeholders  who have an 
interest in the development of country-wide evaluation systems. The ana lysis in this 
report presents a range of opportunities for capacity development in relation to 
government agents (central and line departments), the evaluation agents (consultants, 
think tanks and universities), and principal agents (development partners, Parliament, 
the executive and civil society). In undertaking the mapping of the evaluation context 
the study has identified latent, potential and actual demand, the conditions under which 
demand is generated and potential sources of supply with in the evolving political 
economy of the country.  
3. This study refers to evaluation as covering both evaluation and evaluative research and 
therefore uses the terms interchangeably.  The primary objectives of the study are to 
explore:  
1) The conditions under which demand is generated for evaluation evidence; and 
2) The areas in which evaluation supply can be strengthened to meet and foster this 
demand. 
The guiding questions that interface with these objectives are:  
(i) On the demand side:  
a) What has been the actual demand for evaluation from principals?  
b) Where is there latent and potential demand for evaluation? 
c) How is evaluation demanded in the current organisational arrangements? 
(ii) On the supply side:  
a) What is the range and capacity of entities supplying evaluation services? 
b) How relevant are the managers and producers of evaluation to the actual 
demand for evaluation? 
(i) On matching evaluation supply and demand: 
c) Where can evaluation supply (actual, latent and potential) be 
strengthened so that it meets and fosters demand? 
 
4. This report finds that there is latent endogenous demand for evidence in Malawi. Supply 
is generally limited even though there are a number of local organisations which have 
                                                           
2CLEAR-AA is based at the Graduate School of Public and Development Management at the University of the 
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. CLEAR-AA aims to enhance development anchored in learning, evaluation and 
results. 
3Beyond Malawi, the other case countries are Ethiopia, Ghana, Rwanda and Zambia.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
2 
undertaken good evaluation practice. Development partners largely support evaluation 
exercises, but there is growing evidence that  Government is increasingly willing to 
support internally driven evidence gathering exercises. On the basis of the evidence, i t is 
concluded in this study that there is a stronger demand for policy related evidence, 
especially quantitative,  than there is for systematic evaluations. International rather 
than local  resources are the main  funding conduit  for evaluation studies, even where 
there is strong government ownership . Evaluation activities are  perceived to be  a tool 
for investigation on resource utilisation to support external accountability, rather than 
as a tool for internal policy construction and development priority setting . Malawi is 
perceived to be open to the conduct of any type of evaluation, seemingly as th ese 
exercises come with further aid flow. However, in all of these , the central challenge is in 
the uptake of results from evaluation . As a result  of this, it is widely concluded that for 
evaluation to be useful ECD efforts need to emphasise that evaluatio n promotes the 
identification of better policies to accelerate  development results, and also enables 
managers or other implementing agents to be constructively engaged with.  
5. The supply of expertise for quality evaluations is rather diffuse in the country , with 
several examples of legitimate and good practice  at the individual and corporate level . 
The institutional capacity of Universities is largely reflected in the work of individual 
academic and has generally been driven by  active resource related demands. Within 
these arrangements, there are examples of supply being successful at informing strategy 
and in some instances wider policy interventions.  
1.1 Methodology 
6. This study was carried out through a combination of desk review, including an analysis of 
existing evaluation  products, and direct semi -structured interviews with a selection of 
informants from across stakeholder groupings  identified as central for the study. The  
study methodology encompassed the following overlapping stages: i ) establishing study 
commitment and support from key stakeholders ; ii) collating and analysing primary and 
secondary data and information of the evaluation system (including available a cademic 
and popular literature);  iii) conducting a series of interviews with actors that fall within 
the space established through the broad concept ual map;  and iv) producing a draft 
paper. Each of these stages is discussed in more detail below. 
7. Establishing support from key stakeholders:  Given the nature of the study, an 
important initial ste p was to identify relevant national stakeholders  who would be 
engaged with prior to, during and after the collection of data. Whilst the study was  
conducted independently, it is helpful that there is some level of active buy -in from key 
stakeholders to sup port the use of the study . In Malawi, letters were sent to the 
Government via  the DFID Country Office  to ask for appointments with senior 
government officials, while the country researcher made additional contact with a range 
of stakeholders at the technical level. 
8. Collating and analysing secondary data and information:  The collation and analysis of 
secondary data covered policy, academic and grey literature  relating to the political 
context and the deman d and supply side of evaluation. Included in this w ere studies on 
evaluation initiatives within government and the supply that emanates from outside of 
government. Following the country research phase further primary and secondary
<<<PAGE=10>>>
3 
documentation was referred to in order to substantiate the claims of the inter views and 
further develop findings.  
9. Interviews with key informants:  A series of interviews were  arranged with key in -
country stakeholders.  The design of these  interviews drew upon the literature review. 
Issues of potential and latent demand and the abilit y of supply to invoke demand were 
explored through the interview process. Data collection took place through semi -
structured interviews  that allowed  people to narrate their story – with so me probing 
taking place based on the guiding questions.  The data fro m interviews was analysed 
during the field-work with emerging conclusions refined through synthesis.  
10. Production of a draft and final country report: Following the completion of the first 
draft of this study, the reference group  reviewed the study report i nternally and 
externally. During these processes adjustments were made to the report to aid the 
clarity and accuracy  of the core findings.  Table 1 details the representatives of 
stakeholders that were interviewed in Malawi. 
 
Table 1: Interview Respondents 
Government Agents  Evaluation Community Principals (representative) 
Ministry of Health Centre for Social Research Parliament –Budget and 
Finance/Public Accounts 
Committee 
National Statistical Office Centre for Agriculture 
Research and Development 
Malawi Economic Justice Network, 
PLAN Malawi, Water Aid, Tilitonse 
Program 
Ministry of Economic 
Planning and 
Development 
Private Consultants 
engaged in M&E 
Development Partners (DFID, 
Norwegian Embassy, African 
Development Bank) 
Ministry of Finance  Economics Department The Office of the President and 
Cabinet 
National Aids 
Commission 
 The United Nations Development 
Programme, UNICEF 
Source: Author 
 
11. This report is stru ctured as a product that stands alone from the overall research 
synthesis and four other cases 4. The findings of the country case of Malawi are 
presented in the following manner: First, the Malawian  development context is 
described in relation to evaluation; second, the state of the current evaluation demand 
and supply is mapped; third, illustrations of how the development context interacts with 
evaluation supply and demand  are detailed; and finally, pathways to improve the 
national evaluation context are suggested. 
  
                                                           
4 Those interested in a more detailed background, definitions of terms and the full methodological approach 
should read the Inception Report (22 April 2013).
<<<PAGE=11>>>
4 
2. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT 
12. Malawi is a landlocked country with a surface area of appro ximately 118,484 km 2. The 
estimated population of Malawi is 15.4 million (National Statistics Office, 2008). Over 80 
percent of the population live in rural areas depend ing on subsistence farming for their 
livelihood.  Even though the country is one of the least urbanised countries in the world, 
it has one of the highest urbanisation rates at 6 percent per annum (NSO, 2008).  
13. Malawi’s economy has grown steadily since 2006, by an a nnual average of 7 percent per 
annum (Malawi Government: Ministry of Economic Planning and Development,  2012). 
This growth is largely attributed to investment in agriculture  which accounts for nearly 
34 percent of GDP (Reserve Bank  of Malawi, 2012). The Free Inputs Subsidy Programme 
(FISP) was the main driver for ag ricultural growth . Mining, construction and 
manufacturing also grew strongly during this period of relative macro -economic stability. 
Since 2010, the economy slowed down with r eal GDP growth declining from 6. 5 percent 
in 2010 to 4.3 percent in 2011 and 1.9 percent in 2012, mainly reflecting a contraction in 
agricultural output  (Reserve Bank, 2012). Adverse weather conditions in parts of the 
country resulted in a decline in the output of mai ze (the main staple crop). Tobacco 
output, the main export earner, also contracted sh arply in 2012 reflecting poor price 
incentives associated with the period of marked overvaluation of the exchange rate. 
14. Malawi is one of the poorest countries in the world with a Human Development Index 
(HDI) ranking of 171 out of 187 countries ( United Nat ions Development Programme: 
Human Development Report, 2012 ). Poverty remains high, widespread and 
concentrated in rural areas. The poverty level is estimated at 50. 7 percent, only 
marginally down from the estimated 52. 4 percent  in 2005  (NSO, 2004 and 2010 ). 
Income remains very low and inequality has been increasing from 0.3 4 to 0.45 between 
2005 and 2010. Poverty in rural areas is estimated at 56.6 percent relative to 17.3 
percent in urban areas  (Reserve Bank  of Malawi , 2012). There are internal regional 
variations in the d istribution of poverty amongst the country’s three regions, with the 
country’s centre ranked richest and the south as poorest. 
15. Official development assistance (ODA) accounted for 40 percent of government revenue 
in the 201 0/11 fiscal year  and 19 percent of GDP ( International Monetary Fund, 2012). 
Prior to the more recent reforms, the budget policy implemented in 2010 and 2011 was 
expansionary, with a large budget deficit. In the 2011/12 fiscal year, the Government of 
Malawi ( GoM) instituted fiscal discipline measures  by increasing the tax level and 
domestic borrowing. The overall fiscal def icit widened from nearly 3 percent  of GDP in 
2010/2011 to an estimated 7 percent in 2011/12, with domestic financing rising from 1.7 
percent of GDP to 5.6 percent in respective years (IMF, 2012). Table I below reflects the 
general budget and donor contributions since the 2008-09 financial years.  
16.  Whilst the larger share of aid is delivered as direct project support, disbursement of 
budget support has grown substantively, from USD 67 million in 2004 to USD 164 million 
in 2009 (Resnick, 2012:6). Overall Overseas Development Assistance  (ODA) in 2010/11 
was estimated to be just under USD 800 million, with ODA accounting for more than 40 
percent of government expenditure. Principal donors include DfID, E uropean Union (EU), 
USAID, China, the World Bank (WB), African Development Bank (AfDB), Norway, Ireland, 
Germany and the United Nations ( UN). The Aid provided is concenntraed in areas of
<<<PAGE=12>>>
5 
basic services and infras tructure development.  Beyound some selected areas of pool 
funding, donors tend to concetrate in areas of choice.  
 
Table 1:  Trends in FDA (US$ Millions) 
 Year 
  
  
Domestic 
revenue 
  
Total 
expenditure 
  
Gap 
  
  
External assistance and 
loan Average 
exchange rate 
(USD/kwacha) External 
assistance 
Foreign 
Loan 
2008/9 950.4 1,751.8 801.4 539.0 92.2 0.0070 
2009/0 1,240.0 1,713.3 473.3 426.7 46.7 0.0067 
2010/1 1,333.3 1,897.4 564.1 403.8 70.5 0.0064 
2011/2 727.3 993.9 266.7 48.5 54.5 0.0030 
Source: IMF Country Report No. 12/221(2012) and No. 13/131 (2013). (Conversion into USD by authors)  
2.1 Development strategy and planning 
17. In 1999, the GoM (with assistance from UNDP and the World Bank) established Vision 
2020 as a long -term developmental plan for Malawi. This process was followed by the 
adoption of medium -term (three to five years) development strategies beginning with 
the Malawi Poverty Reduction Strategy (MPRS) covering the 2002 -05 period. Thereafter, 
Malawi’s second generat ion PRS was renamed the Malawi Growth and Development 
Strategy (MGDS) and covered the period 2006 to 2011. As of to date, the country has an 
MGDS II covering the period 2011-2016.  
18. The MGDSs are generally held to be more focussed on economic growth than th e MPRS 
and developed with a more results orientation. Targets and priorities are established 
within the framework with linkages to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The 
MGDS II is generally used for the purposes of budget allocation and hence serve s to 
shape donor contributions, as reflected in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework 
(MTEF).The MGDS contains a results matrix, detailing long -term as well as policy actions 
and medium term goals.  
19. Even though the MGDS serve s as the framework for shaping b udget allocation and 
donor contributions, there are been concerns about the  extent to which allocations 
reflect actual implementation across government  (Malawi Government: Ministry of 
Economic Planning and Development, 2009 ). In addition to gaps between co mmitment 
and actual contribution by government, adjustments often emerged because of revenue 
overestimations and the impact of the exchange rate. A notable feature of planning 
since the transition to democracy has been the multiplication of policy document s at the 
sectoral levels and absence of real implementation beyond the very short term  (Booth, 
D, Cammack, D, Harrigan, J,  Kanyongolo, E, Mataure and Ngwira, N (2006)). 
20. Malawi has a framework for monitoring and evaluation that has only been partially 
activated, in the sense that some coordinating institutions  and information systems  are 
not working as was anticipated during the planning and design process .  The system was 
designed in 2004 as part of the MPRS  implementation process and has its roots in the 
national planning and budgeting systems. The budget system still has its own monitoring 
system which has linkages to the national system.  Prior to this, national planning and
<<<PAGE=13>>>
6 
budget systems had their own standalone monitoring systems.  The national framework 
has no legal instrument to support implementation. 
21. At a formal level , and in response to PRSP requirements and some pressures from 
donors on improved reporting systems, the GoM has been working on the development 
of an overall M&E system since 2002. Pri or to 2002, M&E was not specifically engaged 
with in a n organised  manner (Chirwa  2004: 2). The National Development Monitoring 
and Evaluation Master Plan (MEMP) first appeared in 2002 and was finalised towards 
the end of 2004.The National M&E Framework is shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: National M&E Framework 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source:  Author based on the National Development Strategy Monitoring and Evaluation Master plan (2008).  
 
22. Progression towards the implementation of a  coherent framework for  M&E has been 
slow, although there have been periods of strong movement especially during MGDS 1. 
Figure 1 is a diagrammatic representation of the system, as it was meant to work, rather 
than what has in practice transpired. For example, the National Stake holders Forum has 
only been convened twice since the system was operationalised. Reporting to 
Parliament is , in practice,  not based on oral presentations , but unfold s through the 
NATIONAL 
STAKEHOLDERS 
FORUM 
NATIONAL CABINET 
 NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
PRINCIPAL SECRETARIES FORUM 
TECHNICAL WORKING COMMITTEE 
SECRETARIAT  
MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC PLANNING 
AND DEVELOPMENT  
SECTOR WORKING 
GROUPS (SWAP) 
LINE MINISTRIES 
 NATIONAL 
STATISTICS 
OFFICE 
DISTRICT 
EXECUTIVE 
COMMITTEE 
DISTRICT 
ASSEMBLIES 
CIVIL SOCIETY 
ORGANISATIONS 
COMMUNITIES 
MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
<<<PAGE=14>>>
7 
circulation of published annual reviews of the national development strategy and 
monitoring reports of individual programs. Sector Working Groups (SWGs) are a 
relatively new addition (except the Health Sector one) and have been adopted for all 
public sectors where development partners are active.  
23. The central and most consistent ou tputs of the NDMES have been regular annual 
reviews of the National Development Strategy , which is used to inform the planned 
budgets for the following year. It is generated on the basis of resources allocated by 
donors and government, for data collection on sector indicators , for the conduc ting of 
consultative workshops to review the results and to write up the annual reports. A 
further analytical output from the system is the generation of Public Sector Investment 
Program (PSIP) reports between 2006 and 2 008, the annual progress reports on MDGs, 
Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS) in the big Ministries of Education, Transport 
and Health.  These reports are not widely circulated but used by the principal agents in 
the respective Ministries and the Mi nistry of Finance in effecting budget and 
procurement changes, and for allocating the national budget. 
24. Figure 1 shows the framework for both monitoring and evaluation , but for the purposes 
of evaluative research not all it s components apply. L ower level in stitutions, covering 
districts and communities , are generally not seen as part of the overall evaluation 
system. This is not to say that evaluation does not involve these groups, but that its 
demand elements seem to be currently limited to the higher level s of line Ministries and 
other national level bodies, including NGOs. According to the Ministry of Economic 
Planning and Development  (MEPD), the evaluation dimension in M&E is largely 
underdeveloped and hardly goes beyond the Principal Secretaries and Nati onal 
Stakeholders Forum.  Beyond that, where executive power rests (President and 
Ministers) what matters most is simply to show evidence on the performance of policies 
and programs.  The line Ministries is where the Sector Working Groups are based and 
these form the most active hub for evaluative research in addition to routine monitoring.  
The Principal Secretaries Forum was only activated some six years ago but it has been 
inconsistent ever since, and the National Stakeholders Forum has only been held once in 
2008 (according to MEPD). 
2.2Political Economy of Malawi 
25. Malawi re-introduced multi-party democracy in 1993 . Malawi started off with multi -
party democracy at independence in 1964 but this was quickly suppressed by Dr 
Hastings Banda’s party within two years of winning elections. Malawi was ruled by a 
single party government lead by Dr Hastings Banda for 30 years. The period under Dr 
Banda is generally perceived as one with policy consistency and a high level of 
professionalism in the public service  (Booth et al  2006; Chirwa et al  2008). This is 
contrasted with the last few years of Dr Banda ’s rule  and the term of office of Bakili  
Muluzi (1994-2004). During this period there was no policy consistency reflected in rapid 
change and frequent clashes between government policy preferences and contrary 
donor approaches and perspectives (Harrigan 2003). 
26. It was during Mulu zi’s second term of office that Malawi adopted the Malawi Poverty 
Reduction Strategies (MPRS)  under the influence of  International Monetary Fund  
(IMF)/WB conditionality and the donor community. The adoption of the PRSP was a 
move towards greater policy coherence and the opening of spaces for evaluation and
<<<PAGE=15>>>
8 
research, but continuing patterns of patronage politics suggested  that evidence did not 
really matter in the policy and decision making process  (Booth et al, 2006). Whilst there 
was no open hostility to receiving evidence, there was reportedly little chance that the 
political leadership would learn from it and change established patterns of resou rce 
distribution.  During this period, the IMF described Malawi as willing to implement policy 
reforms but unable to implement them due to lack of political will and capacity 
constraints (IMF, 2004).  
27. The election of President Mutharika  in 2004 and the initial appointment of qualified 
individuals within his Cabinet , raised  hopes for the role of research, professional 
expertise in policy design and implementation. It was during this initial period that there 
were investments into systems for evidence -based p olicy making.  Furthermore, the 
surveys of the NSO became more regular and encompassing. An  M&E system was 
introduced in the central ministries and encompassed a framework to monitor and 
evaluate development progress.  
28. It is held by stakeholders that whils t the Muluzi regime did not care much for evidence, 
the Mutharika regime did care but tampered with t he results of surveys conducted . For 
example, Mutharika failed to release the complete results of the third Integrated 
Household Survey (IHS 3) by NSO. Outside of changes in political leadership,  the 
mentality of a single, dominant political party , and a centralisation of power continue s 
to be the norm. The value and relevance of evaluations and evidence for policy purposes 
is constrained by the realities of a political culture of patronage based decision -making, 
within which the focus is on the distribution of spoils, rather than informed policy 
construction and the functioning of formal state structures(Joala 2012: 62).  
29. The politics of making policies on th e podium 5 has generally been evident in all these 
regimes since the transition to multi -party democracy. One consequence of the deep 
patterns of patronage is the gap between formally articulated policy perspectives and 
actual implementation practices  (Booth et al  2006). Key initiatives are often adopted 
without any serious consideration of their viability and personality politics tend to 
prevent coordination. The general view is that politics embodied in patrimonial practices, 
disempower the civil service a nd progressively undermine the capacity to generate 
coherent technically grounded policy approaches.  
30. Since coming into power following the death of Mutharika in April 2012, Malawi’s new 
President Joyce Banda, has taken steps towards adjusting policies and opening the space 
for M&E and more open policy construction. She has strengthen ed monitoring and 
evaluation within the Office of the President and Cabinet by establishing a unit for 
performance management. However, there are many who hold that she is equa lly 
constrained by a deeply engrained culture of patronage. A key implication of the level of 
patronage politics is the loss of policy autonomy, reflected in an inability of public 
officials to carry out policies in accordance with public interest and to l earn evidence 
from analytical research and evaluation. Whilst there are some unfolding steps to 
enhance policy capacity within the Presidency, the extent to which this would serve to 
overcome an entrenched and diffused culture of patrimonialism is difficult to determine.  
31. Although patronage runs deep in the politics and policy process, actual patronage 
actions appear to be  limited to areas that satisfy the largely economic and power 
                                                           
5 On the trail of Presidential public meetings and events.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
9 
interests of the ruling party. The general incentives for patrimonial action are thought to 
be very low in some areas, such as health and education delivery.  In practice, there are 
also a number of competing patronage networks and which are amenable to the use of 
any evidence to discredit policies and practices.  This has happened in Parliament, where 
those in opposition have app ealed to findings from academic research to discredit the 
policies of those in power.  
3. MAPPING OF EVALUATION IN MALAWI 
32. This section  presents the mapping  of evaluation within Malawi for both supply and 
demand. Given the high level of ODA, nearly 40 percent of the budget in recent years, 
the demand for evaluation is p rimarily rooted in the work of Development Partners 
(DPs) and is evident in sector based interactions. Outside of a coordinat ed approach in 
practice, donors have initiated evaluations and related research for accountability 
purposes and as demanded by their own constituencies. Whilst some studies and 
evaluations are initiated in partnership with the GoM, generally these take place outside 
of a formalised process of feedback and generally unfold with the cooperation of 
individual public servants in a diffused system where larger buy -in and appreciation has 
not been fully established. 
33. The descriptive overview that follows seeks to provide a more d etailed analysis of the 
actors involved and their capacities for managing evaluations, conducting evaluations 
and using evaluations. The role and efficacy of stakeholders that express a demand for 
evaluation or have latent or potential demand capacity ( legislative structures, the 
political executive, development partners and civil society ) is explored in some detail . 
The areas of demand are then followed by an analytical overview of those institutions 
that are central to establishing a b ridge between supply  and demand - line Ministries 
and the National Statistical Office. Embodied within the linking structures is also the 
crucial role played by coordinating bodies. The final part focuses on those stakeholders 
active in the supply of evaluation ( think tanks, universities and non -governmental 
evaluation organisations). 
3.1 Principals 
34. Demand within the political system is diffused and largely embedded within joint 
programme implementation frameworks or within specific sector working group (SWG) 
based interaction  amongst donors and relevant government officials. Although the 
NDMES Master Plan suggest a level of coherence in approach and the basis for active 
demand, the evolving system reflects a combination of emergent and inconsistent 
central push, coupled with d iffused pulls based on energies, incentives and resources of 
different actors within the wider pool of stakeholders.  
The Political Executive 
35. Malawi has a presidential type  of political system, where Ministers , Heads and Deputy 
Heads of Ministries  are appo inted by the President  and are answerable to them. One 
consequence of this is that the survival of Ministers  and other senior government 
officials depends on ‘toeing the line’ any dissent to the President’s wishes may result in 
job loss.  Furthermore, the c entralised nature of political parties and party political 
contestations creates an environment where the party leader’s priorities become party
<<<PAGE=17>>>
10 
policies. This tendency has historically served as a major constraint on constructive 
criticism within the Exec utive and the willingness of Ministers  and top level offi cials to 
draw on evidence to change policies set by the ruling government .  Policy direction is 
very much centralised in the person of the President: any divergence from this scenario 
may be due to t he personality of the President rather than substantive positions.  The 
country’s Cabinet has not been recognis ed as a source of evaluation demand:  at most 
Ministers would encourage evaluations within the ir own portfolios as a means for 
demonstrating performance. 
Legislative Structures 
36. The role and value for evaluation in legislative structures must be seen in the context of 
past, current and future patterns on policy engagement within political parties. A recent 
study by Mpesi and Svasand (2012:20) demonstr ates that policies, ideology or 
ideological perspectives are not significant elements in the existence or formation of 
political parties. The party system is fragmented with individual s changing from one 
party to another without substantive polic y or ideol ogical justification. Generally, 
Malawian political parties remain entirely associated with the personalities of their party 
leaders and offer little differentiation on policy issues (Resnick 2012: 3).  
37. The fragmentation of party politics and the drive tow ards establishing parties for 
positioning purposes often renders the focus on policy issues weak. Individual members 
of parliament ( MPs) engage on issues that impact on their constituencies, but not on 
larger policy issues that affect the whole country. Th is weakness has been noted by 
numerous actors and has reduced the value of legislative structures for policy relevant 
evaluations and research. In some cases, this lack of appreciation is explained by limited 
education and policy exposure amongst some of the serving MPs.  
38. The National Assembly has historically relied on infrequent briefings by government and 
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) on the performance of development policies 
and their implementation.  In practice, the scrutiny of the government  budget, bills and 
other public sector policies by the legislature  has only been taken seriously when the 
ruling party is in the minority in the National Assembly, like, for example, during Muluzi’s 
and Mutharika’s first term. Th e lack of strong oversight by the National Assembly is 
attributed to the absence of research capacity,  limited information flows and 
inadequate sitting time. Until the more recent construction of a new Parliament building 
around 2008 , parliamentarians did not have a permanent place to convene (Resnick 
2012:7).  
39. In theory, there is an expectation that Parliament will engage with polices and be a 
source of demand , as it exercises oversight over implementation. Some level of 
engagement does take place on the budget, although indications are that the time given 
for debates is inadequate and would require changes in the manner in which the budget 
is constructed. Further, there are indications that the Public Accounts Committee of the 
Assembly engages periodically with information presented by Departments through the 
audit process. Generally, however  Parliament is considered weak with limited internal 
technical capacity for policy engagement. 
40. A number of donors have attempted to support the strengthening of Parliament, but the 
support has no t been consistent, in part due to the governance c hallenges between
<<<PAGE=18>>>
11 
2010 and 2012 6. Whilst there are indications of possible support to strengthen the role 
of Parliament in the oversight process and hence, by implication, on evaluations, the 
reality of limited funding flows and donor dependence establishe s a range of constraints 
like inability to conduct regular meetings, seek technical inputs, among others . As large 
portion of foreign aid comes  either in the form of grants or off -budget support, which 
does not require  Parliamentary approval , it becomes difficult for MPs to engage in 
pertinent evaluation processes.  
Development Partners 
41. DPs have historically been the main source of demand for evaluations and for evidence 
based policy making. However, in prac tice this demand is mediated either through the 
direct commissioning of studies for accountability purposes or through coordinative 
engagements within established sector level structures. Development partners have 
over the past decade initiated many indepe ndent studies on areas that they are 
supporting. In 2006, external partners listed 27 analytical reports on the Country 
Analytical Works website. As there is no repository for evaluations completed or 
analytical studies, there is no point of reference to d etermine the coverage, quality and 
number of studies completed.  Box 1 demonstrates donors’ role in evaluation studies. 
Box 1: National Cash Transfer Programme (NCTP) 
Donors have a strong role in influencing policy but they do not always commission studies  to 
suit only their accountabil ity or reporting requirements. The engagement of donors with 
government on research on the impact of the cash transfer programme demonstrates that 
the notion that ‘donor funding’ is equal to ‘donor driven’ may be too simplist ic in Malawi.  
Where it matters, government has the capacity to take strong ownership of a research study 
and decide which recommendations to take on board. 
Social cash transfers were positioned to become a major poverty reduction tool in Malawi’s 
National Social Protection Policy. It is generally seen as the central effort to respond to 
widespread poverty, vulnerability and the limited ability of households to deal with climate 
related shocks.  The NCTP started as a pilot program me in one district - Mchinji - in 2006 – 
and involved nearly 3,000 households (2008) then. The Programme has as of to date  spread 
to cover all of Mchinji District and to more than seven districts  benefitting about  24,000 
households.  
The Centre for International Health and Developme nt (CIHD) at Boston University School of 
Public Health, jointly with the Centre for Social Research in Malawi, conducted a series of  
rigorous evaluations in 2008. The evaluations looked at the impact of the programme on 
children, families and the community . Results from the CIHD’s impact evaluation revealed 
that cash transfer recipient families had fewer missed meals, lowe r rates of underweight 
children, fewer reported sicknesses, higher school enrolment, better access to medicines and 
health care, and a re duction in young children working to help support their families. The 
study also identified a number of weaknesses in the cash transfer program and made a 
number of recommendations.   
The findings from the CIHD’s evaluations were used by government to impr ove the 
programme’s operations and beneficiary identification policies, as well as informing plans 
developed for scale up to more districts in the country.  However, it has not been all the 
findings from the evaluation that were taken on board.  In some in stance, the 
                                                           
6 UNDP and Norway have been among such donors but they withdrew their support for various reasons.  It has 
been observed that Malawi’s MPs are often unable to critically analyse issues outside of Party parameters.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
12 
recommendations were considered unfeasible politically or because of the available 
infrastructure. In this instance, despite the fact that evaluation was funded by a donor, 
Government took strong ownership of the research results that despite d onor pressure they 
have chosen which recommendations to take on board in the expansion of the program.  
Donors though are still heavily involved in the funding of the program expansion. 
42. Whilst a relatively new development,  and with the influence of donors,  sector wide 
approaches (SWAps) or sector working groups ( SWGs) have been operationalis ed for a 
number of sector and programme areas. Generally, they bring together all the major 
stakeholders working within a particular sector:  government departments and 
institutions, development partners, civil society organisations, academia and community 
level groups. The SWGs create several sub -working groups among which there is always 
one that focuses on monitoring and evaluation.  T he lead Government Ministry for the 
SWG would initiate the establishment of an M&E unit or at minimum, would incorporate 
some element of M&E functionality to serve the purpose of collecting data and other 
information to feed the policy and programme formulation processes. 
43. SWGs are normally  chaired by a Principal Secretary and co -chaired by a donor. In 
practice, these are proving to be an important avenue for DPs to influence  government 
policies and act as a basis to identify research and evaluation opportunities. For example, 
the agriculture and water sector s have established regular periodic consultative 
meetings and one joint sector review held around November or January each year 
where policy based studies form part of the agenda . Functionality and pressures for 
evaluations vary between d ifferent sectors and are most often shaped by interest s 
established amongst key role players. Such structures seem to work on the basis of the 
energy of donor funded initiatives within Ministries.  
44. As a result of historical challenges on the flow of donor resources and participation 
within coordinati ng structures like SWGs , evaluative research and capacity  has been 
relatively diffused in the system. Whilst some sectors, such as health and education have 
developed their own systems and some advances have bee n made on collating studies 
completed, coordination levels have been low and there has not been a defined 
modality for exchange amongst donors, beyond the data that feeds into the Malawi Aid 
Management Platform (MAMP). There is wider appreciation for the MAMP and its utility 
in collating data and aping progress on aid but it does not incorporate, at present , 
information on evaluations that have been completed or that are underway. Indications 
are that this will be incorporated into future modules, but the p rimary focus of the 
stakeholders is on tracking disbursements and reporting on spending within priority 
sectors. 
Civil Society 
45. The Malawian civil society has demonstrated reasonable  capacity to engage with 
government and Parliament on policy issues, but it has not historically been a source of 
demand for evaluations. There are a number of  civil society organisations that  have 
been active in encouraging evaluations,  like the Malawi Economic Justice Network  
(MEJN), WaterAid, World Vision, but  the focus of their studies has largely been in the 
context of mobilising resources for advocacy work  or operational programming .  
Perhaps this is unavoidable given  the high levels of poverty experienced and their
<<<PAGE=20>>>
13 
general engagements with communities in the country.   MEJN uses local consultants to 
carry out regular budget reviews every year with support from donors. 
46. There are established networks and organised formations for civil society engagements 
and consultations, but the main channel for expressing evaluation demands has been 
the same as those utilised by DPs. Civil society organisations participate in the SWGs and 
District Executive Sub -Committee on M&E on the basis of their areas of interest.  Some 
of the civil society organisations (CSOs), like Plan Malawi, even serve as the Chairpersons 
of sub-committees of SWGs and where necessary have established networks to mobilise 
resources or influence policies. For example, CSOs have formed their own network in the 
water sector (Water Environment Sanitation (WES) Network) they are given the platform 
at the SWG forums to present their perspectives on the implementation and delivery of 
water services in the country.  
47. Given the nature of diffused resource flows from donors and the fact that many projects 
are initiated directly th rough non-governmental organisations, some CSOs are given the 
responsibility to chair sub -committees of the SWG. For example, Plan International 
chairs the Sanitation Sub -committee. CSOs also interact with the NSO in terms of 
improving data protocols, prov ision and dissemination.  WaterAid, for example, has 
been facilitating a national taskforce that is refining definitions of water and sanitation 
indicators used in the national surveys conducted by NSO. 
3.2 Government Agents 
48. Within the system of government , sector Ministries are crucial for establishing the link 
between supply and demand. Not only are they generally entrusted with the 
responsibility for collecting and collating information  for their sector , but they stand at 
the centre of providing the requ ired information to those who demand it and are also 
central to ensuring that evidence is generated for policy purposes. Even though they 
may often also be viewed as integral to establishing demand and supplying information, 
they are, in practice, primaril y involved in the exercise of linking supply with demand. 
Central to this process is also the role of the government established N ational Statistical 
Office. 
Lead Ministry - Economic Planning and Development 
49. A national M&E system was adopted in 2002 under the leadership of the Ministry of 
Economic Planning and Development. This system was relatively weak by the time the 
Mutharika administration took power in 2004. Under the Mutharika administration, in 
2007, the M&E system was extended to the district and c ommunity levels. Government 
also took a direct role in providing funding and paying district M&E officers.  It was also 
extended to other central Ministries which had no M&E Units . T hese included the 
Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Water, and the Ministry of Labour.  Within 
the framework of the M&E Master Plan, the Monitoring and Evaluation Division of the 
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development serve s as the Secretariat for the 
national M&E  system. It has the responsibility for coordina ting outcome and impact 
monitoring across all sectors and undertaking producing poverty analysis. The 
Secretariat is, furthermore, responsible for disseminating annual national development 
reviews.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
14 
50. The national M&E system envisaged the establishment of a representative Technical 
Working Committee (TWC) to guide the development and operationalisation of the 
monitoring and evaluation system throughout the public sector. As substantial resources 
would be required to implement such a  system, government and don ors established a 
programme – the Joint Program me Support for Monitoring and Evaluation  – to support 
the process of implementation . It was anticipated that this structure would consider 
technical reports and recommendations from the Secretariat which would  include 
progress reports f rom implementing institutions. However, the desired ambition that 
included drawing on external research centres , on a quarterly basis or when required , 
has not been rea lised. The TWC has had limited impact  because of funding and capacity 
constraints facing member institutions . External technical assistance was used in the 
early years when designing the system. This included producing manuals for training, 
forms for collecting data at various levels, and conducting training itself. This was phased 
out in 2007.  
51. The main consistent outputs of the National M&E System to date have been regular 
annual reviews of the national development strategy which is used to inform the 
national budget the following year. Use is made of both donor an d government funding 
to carry out data collection on the sector indicators and conduct consultative workshops 
to review the results and write up the annual reports. The other analytical reviews that 
emerged out of the initial attempts at coherence in M&E are as follows:  
a. Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) Reports : Between 2006 and 2008, a 
number of individual projects in the key sectors of the economy (water, transport, 
agriculture) were assessed in terms of implementation . Reports were written, 
published, circulated widely and prese nted to the National Assembly. One such 
report on the transport sector triggered debate in Parliament and led to 
corruption related investigations. 
b. Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS) :  Between 2008 and 2010, the sy stem 
was used to conduct public expenditure tracking in Ed ucation, Transport and 
Health. These reports were not widely circulated but were used by the Principal 
Secretaries in the respective Ministries , and the Ministry of Finance , in effecting 
budget and procurement changes, and for allocating the national budget.  
c. MDGs Annual Progress Reports : These have been produced on a consistent basis 
and continue to be generated with limited external assistance.  
52. The main persistent criticisms against the outputs of  the M&E systems , both at the 
national and sector level are twofold: the quality of data used and the quality of analysis. 
Firstly, on the quality of data used: the annual reviews do not have many quantitative 
indicators and as a result the reviews rely on  subject expert opinion. The data for 
quantitative indicators is also not updated on a regular basis. Secondly , the quality of 
analysis: the reports are not seen to have adequate analytical depth so as to inform 
national budget planning and other specific policy reforms. Issues of data and staff 
capacity seem to be at play here . Analytical skills are underdeveloped in many non -
research oriented institutions even if adequately qualified personnel are available. 
53. It was anticipated that the use of resources wo uld be monitored  through annual Public 
Expenditure Reviews (PER). This has however not unfolded as expected. Although line 
ministries provide financial reports to the Monitoring Section of the Ministry of Finance,
<<<PAGE=22>>>
15 
some Ministries do not comply and it has n ot proven possible to impose any form of 
sanction. Compliance is often waived due to political pressures (Chirwa 2004: 4). Box 2 
explores this challenge in more detail. 
54. One of the main tests for the sustainability of government’s efforts on evidence -based 
policy formulation and evaluation is the provision of an explicit budget line for these 
functions in the national budget. This has happened for the Ministry of Economic 
Planning and Development (MEPD), the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security, and the Office of the President and Cabinet.  MEPD also carries the 
extra burden of supervising  M&E Units in line Ministries. However, in none of these 
institutions is government funding adequ ate to carry out periodic field visits, collec t 
regular and reliable data without the support of donors. This constraint is what led 
UNDP to establish a multi-donor trust fund in 2006 to support the development of M&E 
functions in the public sector.   
Box 2:  Public finance management systems performance assessment 
The current budget system does not always allocate resources according to the priorities of 
the MGDS, and this problem has been outstanding even for earlier na tional development 
strategies. There is need to improve the public finance managem ent system for this to be 
achieved by making adjustments to the core structure for accounting ( Malawi Government: 
MEPD, 2008). This is an issue that requires implementation more than new studies to assess 
what is wrong , but government has remained receptiv e, perhaps to a fault, to persistent 
demands from donors to regularly assess the performance of the public sector financial 
management system.   
The Common Approach to Budget Support (CABS) donors has been providing budgetary 
support to Malawi on the basis  of the introduction of reforms to the government financial 
system.  A June 2005 public expenditure financial accountability (PEFA) assessment revealed 
that the new government, which came into power in May 2004, had inherited an economy in 
fiscal crisis with high interest payments on domestic debt and significant arrears throughout 
the Government.  Since that time, the new government showed political commitment to 
reverse the trend.  
Government made some attempts to improve transparency and accountability i n the 
management of public resources.  There were still outstanding issues government had to 
address: weak Parliamentary oversight; the lack of linkage between the Government’s 
Strategic Plan (Malawi Growth and Development Strategy) and the financial plann ing and 
budgeting systems; the complexity of budget documents; delays in preparation of financial 
accounts; the publication of Audit reports and follow -up of audit recommendations; and 
concerns over continuing weaknesses identified within the GoM’s interna l control systems.  
Government and donors agreed on the need for a new PEFA assessment to follow up on 
achievements on previous recommendations and identify any other new issues for 
consideration.  The new PEFA assessment was conducted in 2008.  
The main o bjective of the 2008 PEFA assessment was to take stock of the progress made in 
the public financial management (PFM) reform process since the previous exercise (May -
June 2006) and assist Government in determining i ts most urgent PFM priorities. The 
assessment results were expected to inform CABS donors on their support through 
budgetary support and technical assistance to PFM issues.  The study was carried out by a 
team made of only international consultants from Consortium POHL Consulting & Associates. 
The study involved evaluating the performance of the PFM system against a set of 28 high 
level performance indicators for the government , plus 3 additional indicators that measure
<<<PAGE=23>>>
16 
the performance of donors involved in the government’s budgetary processes.  Co nsultants 
interviewed government officials, donors, and private sector organisations. 
The completed assessment found that government maintained good fiscal discipline at the 
aggregate level in the last three years, but the credibility of the budget was und ermined by 
deviation from plans. Whilst the formulation of the MDGS outlined government’s priority 
areas, weaknesses in the planning system made it difficult to direct resources to those areas. 
In many significant areas the outcomes from the financial mana gement system could not be 
determined, resulting in ‘no -score’ because of the weaknesses in the data for monitoring 
areas, unreported government operations, procurement, and predictability of direct budget 
support. Thereby in an overall sense it was not po ssible to determine the impact of the 
financial systems on efficient service delivery.  
Government had already done its internal report on the matter and the results from this 
study were nothing new. Senior government officials in Treasury believe that don ors prefer 
reports from their own consultants in order to learn about what is happening.  They pointed 
out that some issues recommended in the study have been on the drawing board for many 
years, like the need to have a budget that has an appropriate polic y based classification 
structure to deliver on the MGDS programmes , and the capacity for the efficient delivery of 
services to ensure financial resources allocated for priori ty development interventions  are 
spent.   
The process on the assessment is reveali ng of the momentum that donors themselves 
establish with respect to analytical studies and evaluations. In this instance, donors were 
simply keen to have their own study or independent assessment. Relevant government 
officials were aware that the study is unlikely to reveal anything new, but that they felt it was 
difficult for donors to appreciate their position. The overall impact is that such initiatives 
generally undermine the ability to take a united position on resolving problems: it promotes 
a governm ent versus donors’ mentality. The logic of having two studies is party rooted in 
donor perspectives on the need for independence on evaluations studies. 
Line Ministries 
55. The NDME Master Plan envisages a substantive role for line ministries  even though the 
institutional framework remains relatively weak and much of the evaluative activities 
unfold on an ad -hoc basis. Some line Ministries  have M&E units that are off icially 
created and operational. However, most do not appear to have any established capacity 
for evaluation. A study conducted in 2004 (Chirwa, 2004) revealed that even where line 
ministries established M&E units, they do  not appear to have the legal or administrative 
foundations for collecting and collating dat a. A related  challenge is the lack of 
monitoring reports, even in the Ministries that have M&E units. Although some 
Ministries indicated that they produce monitoring and evaluation reports, these are 
often ad hoc  and mostly related to donor -funded projects. There is generally no 
evidence that the M&E units in various Ministries produce periodic and regular 
monitoring reports. 
56. Linkages among various Ministries with respect to the exchange of information are weak 
or non-existent. Many of the M&E units do not send their monitoring reports to MEPD 
or other line Ministries. It is generally held that the Monitoring and Evaluation Division 
of MEPD lacks the political power or leadership skills to coordinate the activities of line 
ministries and civil society organisations. For example, some of the line  ministries are 
developing their own monitoring and evaluation systems independent of the national
<<<PAGE=24>>>
17 
framework of poverty monitoring and evaluation – such as Department of Local 
Government, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Health.  
57. The capacity of M&E  Units in line Ministries is limited ( Arcadis Euroconsult 2004). There 
are no work plans for the M&E work and no separate budget for monitoring activities. 
Apart from funding problems, many M&E units do not have adequate human resources 
to discharge their duties effectively. Where M&E Units do not exist, for example , in the 
Ministry responsible for Climate Change, the monitoring activities are undertaken by 
planning officers who view monitoring as a secondary activity. Official estimates in the 
public sector for vacancy rates at the professional grades (first degree entry point ) are 
between 50 to 60 percent suggesting that there are capacity gaps in M&E Units. The lack 
of coordination also reflects the capacity in the number of staff and management skills 
in the M& E Division. As a result, many line Ministries do not seem to appreciate the 
central role MEPD plays in the coordination of monitor ing and evaluation activities. This 
view was expressed by MEPD itself and donors that support M&E work like UNDP, DFID 
and UNICEF. 
58. The case of traditional birth attendants reveals important lessons on the power and 
limitations of the Presidency to tamper with established policies in a field dominated by 
donor funding and vested interests of government officials (see Box 3) . The other 
lessons relate to the complexity of implementing policy based on evidence from other 
countries, the problems of tampering with research findings, the conflicts between 
bureaucrats and politicians in policy making, and the limitations of even go od research 
to provide unambiguous direction.  
Box 3: The role of Traditional Birth Attendants in the Health Sector 
Traditional birth attendants (TBAs) are mostly women who assist mothers to deliver outside 
the formal health system. They generally form an important link in the chain of health 
personnel that provide primary health care services in Malawi. Despite the establishment of 
many hospitals and health centres across the country, it is to the TBAs that the majority of 
women turn to in times of child-birth. Over 60 per cent of birth deliveries in the country take 
place in villages and generally outside of health care facilities or hospitals.  
Given the numbers of women that turn  to TBAs, successive governments regarded TBAs as 
an important component in the delivery of maternal health. The training of TBAs became an 
essential part of the Maternal and Child Health Services, and the Ministry of Health began 
registering those who had undergone training in 1976 . By the time the TBA policy was 
suspended in the late 1990s, there were over 5 000 TBAs out of which the Ministry of Health 
had managed to train just over 2000. According to the 2000 Malawi Demographic and Health 
Survey (MDHS), TBAs assisted in 10.5 percent of live births in urban areas and 24.4 percent 
of live births in the rural areas.  
By the year 2000 , many international organi sations changed their approach on TBAs and 
their role was redefined to, amongst others, assist in the birth planning, by arranging 
transport, by providing social and emotional su pport for the woman and to sensitis e the 
community on national strategies for skilled birth. The change in approac h was as a result of 
research findings based mostly on developed countries, which demonstrated lower maternal 
death rates for countries that did not use TBAs (Stanton, 2008).  At the same time, a growing 
body of research showed that for developing countries the TBAs should be retained in birth 
delivery especially where there was inadequate health infrastructure and shortage of skilled 
birth delivery personnel.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
18 
Malawi, through the Ministry of Health, quickly signed up to the new international position 
on TBAs and abandoned the support that had hitherto been offered to the development of 
TBAs. The Mulu zi Administration called government withdr awal from supporting TBAs a 
suspension of policy  and never bothered to publicise it.  In contrast to the international 
studies, local data showed that the maternal mo rtality doubled, from 620 to 1120 per 
100000 live births between 1992 and 2000. At pains to exp lain the situation, the Ministry of 
Health’s Reproductive Health Unit commissioned a study to investigate the impact of the 
suspended TBA support programme.  The study was conducted by Centre for Social Research 
(CSR) in 2003 but the study report was rejec ted by officials on the bases of methodologies 
utilised. Encouraged somewhat by donors, government continued with its policy and 
adopted laws that stopped TBAs from delivering babies and also prohibited w omen from 
giving birth at a TBA’s house.  
In 2010 Pr esident Mutharika lifted the ban on the TBAs, but there was a struggle to re -
implement TBA support efforts where most of the funds were provided by donors. Donors 
could not see the basis for this new expenditure and government could not entirely afford to 
shoulder it.  So confusion on TBAs ’ role resurfaced at the national level from 2010 until last 
year when there was a change of regime and the new President has reinstated the ban on 
TBAs.  The struggle to act on the basis of local evidence that contradicts  wider studies reflect 
the power that is exercised by donors and the reality that evidence based policy making is 
not only a challenge for the Malawi government, but also has bearing on DP who function on 
the basis of international policy templates.  
59. Given the centrality of the President in the policy process, during the Mutharika period, 
a Policy Research Unit (PRU), fully staffed and paid for by government was established in 
the Office of the President and Cabinet (OPC). Its overall mission was to improve  and 
standardise the formulation of policies across government institutions. There was no 
direct involvement of donors in setting up the Unit in 2005 and it was staffed by 
competent professional staff from a number of fields: economics, health, education a nd 
statistics.  Later, some limited donor support was identified for training and assistance 
with systems and procedures for evaluating policies before they are submitted to 
Cabinet.   
60. The PRU had immediate impact on the policy formulation process as a num ber of policy 
documents were referred back that did not meet set criteria on quality, content and 
implementation plans. The officials of the Unit were also assigned to attend numerous 
Cabinet committees that deliberated on policy.  However, within a short period of time 
after establishing PRU, the then President shifted towards a more dictatorial policy 
approach where the role of evidence was minimal. This was worsened by general budget 
constraints from 2010 and as a result the PRU lost its intended focus. 
61. High level consultations during this study indicate that the President and Ministers are 
beginning to place added emphasis on driving implementation and policy as a collective 
and hence are looking forward to more effective reporting on government’s 
performance. One purported indicator of this movement towards better information for 
policy is the establishment of a Service Delivery Unit (SDU) with the mandate to monitor 
and evaluate the delivery of public services.  Indications from within OPC are that the 
SDU is being established with external international support.  
62. The President has reportedly placed added emphasis on the importance of results -based 
monitoring. As a result of this, the SDU has conducted a number of service delivery
<<<PAGE=26>>>
19 
assessments where gover nment departments and public institutions explained the 
reasons for their performance. The growing and recognised challenge, however, is the 
absence of clear indicators for performance at the Ministry or department level and the 
lack of baseline data. With in the current system, with restrictive sector resource 
allocations and the continuing pressures for patronage, it is difficult to envisage how the 
Cabinet or the President could become a source of substantive demand for evaluation or 
independent research. 
National Statistical Office 
63. The National Statistical Office is the government department that is charged with the 
responsibility of collecting national data under the Statistical Act. The NSO was identified 
as a key player in the poverty monitoring system  with respect to the generation of 
outcome and impact indicators through periodic surveys. For example, within the MPRS, 
it was envisaged that the Core Welfare Indicators Survey (CWI S) would be carried out 
annually and that the Integrated Household Survey (IHS) and Demographic Health 
Survey (DHS) would be carried out every five years.  
64. Notable surveys that have been carried out by NSO since the launch of the first medium 
term national development strategy (MPRS) in 2002 include the Core CWIS and two IHS. 
The initial surveys were conducted on schedule but thereafter it has not been possible 
to maintain consistency in timing. The IHS, for example, has been carried out in 1998, 
2004 and 2010 which is not in line with the expected five year time periods in the 
NDMES. In order to improve the capacity of NSO in the collection of data, there are 
plans to have a statistical master plan. A needs assessment funded by DFID has been 
carried, but generally progress has been slow. 
65. NSO is also responsible for the Malawi Soc io-Economic Database (MASEDA), a computer 
based data base at District Assembly (DA) level that was designed to be key feature of 
the national poverty monitoring system. Under the system, output and impact indicators 
are expected to be captured at district level. The DAs are expected to send the up -dated 
information to NSO which in turn will integrate the district and line ministries 
information into one data base that will be provided to the M&E Division of MEPD (NSO, 
2004). Many officers in the DAs were tr ained in the operation and use of MASEDA, but 
not all the DAs have the application and requisite hardware. As a consequence,  the 
system is not fully institutionalised (GOM, 2004c). In addition, MASEDA has been 
confronted with a range of administrative probl ems since its establishment and has not 
really received the required support from line or sector Ministries.  
66. The role of research institutions , such as universities and other  key supply agents for 
evaluative research and other studies,  in the national poverty monitoring systems, have 
been articulated both under the M&E MP and MASEDA  but it has never been fully 
operationalised. Research institutions often conduct studies , both commissioned and 
non-commissioned, that may provide information on poverty outcom es and these 
should find a proper channel to  inform policy and decision makers on a regular basis . 
However, in the national poverty monitoring system research institutions and 
universities do not seem to play an active and dedicated role in poverty monitoring.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
20 
3.3. Supply of evidence and evaluation agents 
67. Many DPs have historically commissioned evaluations that cover the spectrum of the 
development assistance provided. These studies are largely directed at providing 
information for external accountability  purposes and are focused on the efficacy of 
interventions from the perspective of DPs, rather than from the perspective of 
Government. Recommendation s in many of the reports are primarily focused on 
changes that are needed within DP practices  as they interface with Government. Supply 
is spread across professional public and private suppliers, and embedded in the work of 
independent think-tanks, universities and professional associations.   
Professional suppliers 
68. There were many reports of evaluations done by Malawian institutions but given the 
time constraints for the study , it was not possible to access these, as are the reports 
commissioned by external institutions. This has to do with record keeping: many 
external institutions have websites hosting their  work but local ones  do not. Thus many 
of the evaluations reviewed during the study process were contracted to agents based in 
the North but completed in partnership with local consultants. The general view in 
Malawi, confirmed by UNDP and UNICEF during th e study,  is that there is substantive 
capacity in the country for the management and delivery of evaluation studies. The 
views of UNDP and UNICEF are very important on this matter, given that UNDP run the 
programme that recruited 40 M&E officers at the dis trict level and UNICEF was behind 
initial efforts to establish an evaluation association in Malawi plus many other activities 
related to M&E. There is, however, no real evidence of substantive capacity for delivery.  
Stakeholders point to the existence of  specific individuals and institutions outside of 
government carrying out evaluative research.  
69. It has not been possible  to make any authoritative judgment in this study on the wider 
capacity for supply of evaluative research within the country. Many indications incline 
towards the extensive use of foreign consulting firms who work in partnership with local 
providers. On the surface , and based on studies generated by local academics and 
consultants, there appears to be a high level of available capacity .  The challenge is that 
there is no source of infor mation on the number of professionally  trained evaluation 
specialists and it appears that many who enter the space do so on the basis of skills 
obtained in other areas of analytical work.  
Independent think tanks and research institutions 
70. The most prominently identified research institute established , as a Malawi -owned 
specific think-tank, is the Centre for Social Research (CSR).  CSR was established in 1992, 
initially as an exclusive Project Unit within the Uni versity of Malawi to evaluate the 
implementation of UNICEF’s nationwide water, sanitation and health programmes.   
UNICEF noticed a gap in local capacity to conduct technically grounded evaluations of its 
programs that required survey based methodologies, and teamed up with the University 
of Malawi to establish CSR for this purpose. 
71. CSR initially relied on staff in the Faculty of Social Science at Chancellor College, but the 
volume of work was such that it had to recruit its own fulltime staff without neces sarily 
cutting off the need to draw on relevant additional expertise , when needed, from the 
University.  Over the years, with a change in approach to monitoring and evaluation,
<<<PAGE=28>>>
21 
UNICEF facilitated the evolution of CSR into an independent research institutio n that 
could stand on its own and serve other clients.  CSR has grown and now has a staff 
compliment of 12, five of whom have PhDs and it still draws on staff in the University 
when needed.  
72. Malawi does not appear to have  other well established  independent research 
institutions. At  a minimum, professional bodies, such as the Law Society, Accountants 
Society, Economics Association, do position themselves as think tanks on occasion 
depending on the topical issues at hand and the capacity of the institution to  offer 
advice.  Capacity, funding or/and management problems appear to have crippled the 
performance of a number of locally -owned policy advocacy CSOs. The study did not find 
a single CSO  with a fully-fledged research or monitoring and evaluation unit. Many 
international CSOs work with the government  and invest into areas identified by 
government.  Plan Malawi and Water Aid engage in analysis in their areas of interest and 
do utilise statistical data on poverty and other indicators provided by NSO. Where thi ngs 
are not working well, they will share their findings with government in a non -
confrontational manner to seek resolution. 
73. The few available suppliers of analytical studies , work as individuals , and are generally 
based at the University of Malawi. It is held by some stakeholders that the capacity may 
not really exist in the country to conduct large -scale multi -disciplinary research or 
evaluation given the fragmented nature of its suppli ers. It is difficult to judge whether 
there is inadequate research or evaluation capacity in the country, and the use of 
external (to the country) consultants is perhaps more due to lack of corporatisation than 
availability. It is held by some of the stakeholders that the fragmentation might also be a 
manifestation of high d emand for r esearch and evaluation services.  Capable people do 
not see the need to work under  employment terms as is often the case with corporate 
entities. 
Universities 
74. Malawi has three publicly funded universities and seven privately funded Universities 
and colleges. The most prominent is the University of Malawi which started in 1965 with 
90 students. A study conducted by the Southern African Regional University Association 
reveals that there are approximately 890 academic and research staff at universities in 
Malawi. Of this number, approximately 90  percent are employed by the University of 
Malawi. The majority of qualifications are awarded at the undergraduate level. It is 
furthermore reported that the University of Malawi only produced one doctoral 
graduate in the 2009/2010 academic year (SARUA: 2012), the highest being seven in 
2008/09. Whilst there are plans underway to expand post graduate studies and numbers 
of students, available data paints a bleak picture on the production of the required 
research capabilities that the country would need for the future. Outside of the work 
undertaken by the Department of Economics at the University, there is very little to 
suggest that the universities are or will be, in the short -run, a source of adequate 
evaluation expertise.  
75. The Department of Economics has a professional staff compliment of 11, with 9at the 
PhD level.  Compared to other University Departments, it currently has the highest 
number of PhD holders. Given this reality, the academics are generally sou ght after for 
analytical and research work commissioned by donors. The work should be channelled
<<<PAGE=29>>>
22 
through the Consultancy Bureau of the University, but this strategy has not worked in 
practice and lecturers tend to engage in their own consultancy work . The demand i s 
seen to be high and lecturers have the opportunity to choose who to work for.  
76. The University of Malawi has a Centre for Agriculture Research and Development (CARD) 
based at  the Bunda College of Agriculture. This research based institute has full  time 
professional staff members who engage  in monitoring and evaluation of agriculture and 
natural resource based projects.  CARD has a smaller staff compliment than CSR: five 
professional staff of whom three have PhDs. CARD provides training on short cou rses on 
monitoring and evaluation, unlike the Department of Economics.  Two relatively new 
private Universities, the Catholic University and the University of St John the Baptist 
have introduced diploma level courses in monitoring and evaluation in 2013.   
Evaluators and evaluation associations 
77. It is not possible to establish the actual number of skilled evaluators within Malawi. 
However, during interactions with stakeholders, the individuals responsible for M&E 
within DP, government and local institutions characterised themselves as evaluators and 
generally held related titles. Given the general global growth in the area of M&E , a 
number of Malawian institutions have indicated that the y intend  appointing skilled 
individuals for M&E purposes for in the future.  
78. Given that evaluation has not really taken root as an area of professional specialisation, 
it is hence no t surprising that Malawi does not have a functional Evaluation Association. 
An attempt was made to launch such an association in 2012, but this ini tial momentum 
fizzled out. There are current efforts underway to re -establish a momentum for such an 
association and that it is likely that such a body will be established in the course of 2013  
or 2014.  
79. Besides the possibility of membership to the African  Evaluation Association, individuals 
engaged with during the study process expressed an eagerness for the establishment of 
the association in order to drive awareness on evaluation and research to guide policy 
making in the country. Many also asserted that  the association would provide a basis for 
enhancing local participation in evaluations undertaken and could be instrumental in 
promoting the development of relevant training and educational programmes.  
80. A common observation from the key informants is that  there is demand for evaluation 
services in the country and that existing suppliers, such as CSR, are unable to respond to 
the many requests. Whilst the sources of demand is still largely from within DP driven 
processes, the supply availability, at the lev el of corporate structures continues to be 
low, with the consequence that foreign organisation s commission and contract o ut to 
individual consultants. According  to the Department of Economics at the University of 
Malawi, the general perspective is that man y of the evaluations conducted tend to be 
descriptive analyses that do not provide adequate sense or lessons on the achievements 
of particular interventions, nor can the reports themselves meet the standards of quality 
for publication in peer reviewed publications or journals.  
81. Many evaluation interventions have no baseline data for identified indicators, rendering 
the exercise difficult to complete and of no real value . Data available from official 
statistical sources tends to be too general to be used in the context of narrowly defined 
interventions.  Stakeholders have expressed that there is need to increase the uptake of
<<<PAGE=30>>>
23 
evidence in both policy and practice.  There is also need for research results and findings 
to be robust, hence, raising the importance  of triangulation especially on sensitive or 
contentious issues.  These challenges and the opportunities for enhancing demand and 
supply are taken up in more detail In Box 4. 
Box 4:  Starter Packs/Targeted Input Programme 
The proliferation of SWGs may not be adequate to resolve the perennial problem that both 
government and donors can look at recommendations from studies differently.  For example, 
Malawi has become famous for the current Farm Inputs Subsidy Program (FISP) and the 
programme has been the subj ect of wider contestation and numerous studies by both 
government and donors.  This case largely demonstrates that both government and do nors 
cherry pick recommendations from research findings, for different reasons.  
The Starter Pack  (SP) program and its successor, the Targeted Inputs Program (TIP), were 
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI) for nearly five years. The 
main objective of the programme was to increase food security by giving smallholders in 
rural areas packs of fert iliser to grow adequate food to feed their families. Both Programs 
were funded by government and international donors - the World Bank, DFID and EU.   
A large-scale M&E exercise was initiated between 1999 and 2002. This included an initiative 
to assess the  impact of the programme. The research was commissioned by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security and funded by DFID at a cost of USD 1.3 million. It involved 13 
integrated modules – comprising nationwide surveys, participatory research exercises an d a 
set of case studies. Technical support and supervision was provided by the Statistical 
Services Centre, University of Reading and Calibre Consultants.  
The research found that provision of free inputs had positive impact on food security in 
Malawi, in particular dur ing SP1 and SP2 when there was universal  coverage. The 
Programme was capable of contributing an average of two to three 50 kg bags of mai ze per 
beneficiary household. In 2000, the additional maize produced (around 350,000 tonnes) was 
adequate to create a surplus at macro -level and keep mai ze prices low until the following 
harvest. The replacement of Starter Pack by TIP – with fewer beneficiaries and lower output 
per beneficiary – was a major contributing factor to the 2002 hunger crisis, when maize 
prices rose to roughly six times as high as the previous year. 
In 2002, Government adopted the research recommendation to return to a universal Starter 
Pack, hence the TIP (a precursor of the current FISP), providing a pack of free inputs for 
every r ural smallholder. In the 2002 -03 season Government, with support from DFID and 
Norway, distributed two million packs in time for the rains. Government tried to obtain 
funding for a further one million packs, but progress was slow and distribution of the 
additional packs was too  late for the planting season. Although government was keen to 
extend the programme on the basis of the positive evaluations, it generally ignored areas that 
did not contribute to building its wider popularity, such as crop diversification and the use of 
better quality seeds. On the donor side, including the World Bank, the UN agencies, the EU, 
DFID and USAID, indications were that there was an element of reluctance to discuss the 
research findings and their policy implications on aid flows. In particular, there was 
reluctance to appreciate, amongst others, the evidence on the effectiveness of free inputs as a 
transitional (medium -term) food security measure in the c ontext of agricultural 
liberalisation in an extremely poor country. 
Government easily adopted the  recommendation to return to a universal  Starter Pack and 
the reason was simply political imperative. The Starter Pack wa s highly popular in rural 
areas and probably contributed to the re -election of Mulu zi in 1999, as his governm ent was 
seen to be doing something about hunger. On the other hand, TIP – which involved scaling
<<<PAGE=31>>>
24 
down and targeting – was highly unpopular. Even those who received a pack under TIP 
thought that the programme was unfair and socially divisive.  After the 200 2 hunger crisis, 
continued targeting would have been political suicide. The reasons why government ignored 
the findings on sustainable agriculture are more complex and perhaps related to  a well -
funded inter national lobby organi sation promoting intensive cro pping of hybrid mai ze -
Saskawa.  
The donor community had its own share in ignoring research findings. Amongst others, 
donors stuck to their established perspectives on social interventions as key drivers for 
development and the general agendas developed by  donors themselves on what 
interventions were appropriate to addresses deepening poverty in the country. This 
experience point s to the importance of securing commitment to engage in the results of 
evaluations in an open and transparent manner.  
4. Pathways, opportunities and challenges 
82. This report sought to understand : (i) t he conditions under which demand is generated 
for evidence; and (ii) the areas in which supply can be strengthened to meet and foster 
this demand. This report has shown that there are cu rrently mainly latent and potential 
demands for evaluation in Malawi. The latent and potential demands are nested within 
the demands for evidence from principals and civil society in Malawi. At present, the 
demand is largely conditioned and driven by devel opment partners. Supply could in the 
short-term be strengthened through existing civil society based organisations and the 
University of Malawi. A range of pathways relating to these twin challenges is identified 
in response to the main research questions below. 
83. This study set out to understand the conditions under which demand is generated for 
evidence in policy and decision making and the areas in which supply can be 
strengthened to meet and foster this demand in Malawi. Demand has been weak and 
inconsistent largely due to a deeply rooted historical culture of p atronage and fluid 
policies. On a positive note, the current government has taken positive steps to 
introduce a system of performance assessments where the definition and collection of 
indicators for monitoring will take a prominent role.  Donors have become even more 
supportive in recent years, if the level of recent financial support the country has been 
receiving is anything to go by. Coupled with the positive space government is promoting 
on the use of evidence in management, the future for making use of research findings 
from evaluation seems promising. The main limitation that an  absence of collated 
information makes reasonable estimates on the capacity for evaluative research  difficult.  
84. The dr ive into the future has to be predicated on the reality that patrimonialism will 
continue to shape policy discourse, implementation and indeed the nature and 
responsiveness to evaluations and analytical studies. National systems designed nearly 
ten years a go are still nascent . Key stakeholder roles are not well defined, nor are 
linkages across key publ ic sector institutions strong. With a supportive policy 
environment, there is room in the future for the use of evaluative studies. Where 
evidence is provided  from objective and undisputable scientific research, especially in 
fields such as health, there is usually willingness to make use of them. The current 
government is rolling out a results -based management system and this has opened up 
more space and oppor tunities for the use of evidence. The senior bureaucrats are likely 
to sei ze the opportunity to encourage monitoring and the collection of credible
<<<PAGE=32>>>
25 
administrative data in their institutions so as to provide quantitative data for 
assessments. 
85. The clear area s for investment in order to promote evaluation capacity development in 
Malawi would have to involve investment in training and capacity building at the 
individual and institutional levels. Donors could, for example,  promote the introduction 
of University level training in this area, support institutional development for evaluative 
research outside the public sector like the establishment of an independent evaluators 
association or its equivalent, strengthen linkages and the role of civil society to 
contribute to uptake of evaluative research. 
4.1 Building the demand for evaluation 
86. Even though the demand for evidence primarily centres on the collation of evidence to 
shape the distribution of patronage, to contest election s and for constituency 
distribution p urposes, it provides a  latent opportunity for enhancing the overall 
evaluation system. In addition, civil society and development partners have active 
spaces for articulating their perspectives, thus opening many for enhancing demand for 
evaluations. These opportunities and the challenges they embody for the future are 
elaborated below.  
87. It is important that Malawian policy -makers and implementers own the research 
evidence needed for effective support and implementation. This is in contrast to the 
position where evidence is largely the property and domain of research providers, or 
sometimes lower level technocrats who try to introduce research findings in the system 
without much success.  Ownership of the best available evidence can enhance its use 
and facil itate well informed decisions.  In order to improve ownership and uptake of 
evidence, in both policy and practice, developing better, on -going interaction between 
evidence providers and evidence users is necessary and can be constructed on the basis 
of add ed engagement on establishing a common coordinative mechanism for 
evaluations that unfold on government programmes. 
88. Malawi does not have regular and vibrant policy dialogue forums. The M&E Master Plan 
envisaged engagements with stakeholders, but efforts in  this direction have been slow. 
Key informants observed that g overnment has historically avoided such forums on the 
ground that they tend towards being politicised and are used as opportunities to criticise 
the ruling government . It may well be possible to  introduce dialogue on the basis of 
substantive research and to establish such high level forums for simply sharing results of 
completed research of national value . There generally appear s to be a sense of 
openness to wider engagements and learning, but li mited investments are being made 
in efforts to foster dialogue on the basis of active research.  
89. A further challenge for the research community in Malawi is to make research findings 
usable for the policy -making community. Research studies are not easily a ccessible 
documents to the busy bureaucrats and policy makers. Evaluation studies tend to be 
generated as complex documents that few are able to engage with. Beyond the 
production of Executive Summaries, there needs to be engagement amongst all parties 
to facilitate greater capacity for the communication of findings in a manner that would 
facilitate media and policy attention. Given the absence of active coordinati ng efforts
<<<PAGE=33>>>
26 
and leadership in this terrain this has not been an element of expressed concern bu t a 
reality observed by many commentators. 
90. Malawi does face a key challenge on how to communicate evaluation research findings 
in order to influence policy and program design changes, despite the fact that some 
studies are commissioned by the institutions themselves – government, donors and civil 
society organisations alike. The strategies used to get research findings to their point of 
use involve both dissemination (providing information from the supplier outwards – 
using media, seminars ) and the provision of access (libraries, websites, and other 
repositories of information which research users can get hold of).  In some countries, 
institutional arrangements in the form of evaluation associations do help to serve as 
quick reference for locating suppliers and users of evaluation research. The 
apprehension at the higher levels to engage with complex research studies can be 
overcome if the studies are disseminated to fit in with the reality of existing capacity  
constraints. The fact that most policy makers wi ll not engage with complex documents 
may not be unique to Malawi but what is important is to arrange appropriate packaging 
to reach the intended audience.  
4.2 Strengthening evaluation through government agents 
91. Government agents are central to the establis hment of a workable and sustainable 
system for the evaluation of development interventions. The current system reflects a 
level of diffusion and unevenness in capability and commitment. Building the required 
capability for an integrated orientation takes t ime. Outside of the numerous challenges 
for enhanced capacity, there is system wide commitment for coordination, reflected in 
part by a growing interest with the establishment of centralised coordinative capacity 
and with the systems that have unfolded his torically. The opportunities and challenges 
embodied in this space are captured in the paragraphs that follow. 
92. There is need to distinguish people who are users of research -based evidence and those 
who are providers of research.  It is not necessary for pr ofessional decision-makers and 
practitioners to be competent executors of research, but it is both reasonable and 
necessary for such people to be able to understand and use research results in their 
professional practice. An increasingly necessary skill fo r professional policy -makers and 
practitioners is to know about the different kinds of relevant research studies available 
in their area of work; how to gain access to them and how to critically appraise them. 
Without such knowledge and understanding it is  difficult to see how a strong demand 
for research, let alone evaluative research, can be established and, hence, how to 
enhance its practical application. Joint training and professional development 
opportunities for policy-makers and analysts may be one way of taking this forward and 
for matching strong demand with a good supply of appropriate evidence. 
93. In light of the fact that most studies are commissioned or funded by DPs, Malawi needs 
to establish an active forum or institution base for identifying re search areas that would 
be important for the development of the country. This was somewhat envisaged within 
the M&E Master Plan but seems to not have been taken forward.  Robust research into 
this area would be of prime importance and needs to be establ ished by Malawians 
themselves. Good research will also require improving statistics at the National 
Statistical Office that are often seen as not regular, comprehensive and consistent.  The 
NSO is aware of its challenges in this regard, but it does believe it  is getting adequate
<<<PAGE=34>>>
27 
support from government and stakeholders to move in the right direction.  The only real 
autonomy the NSO has is when to release survey results, but even that can sometimes 
be compromised with a strong interventionist government.  The N SO also constantly 
confronted capacity problems as recruitments for replacements are beyond its control.  
A comprehensive up to date national statistical and administrative databank would 
reduce the costs of research in the country as time and resources fo r primary data 
collection would be reduced.   
4.3 Building the wider supply system 
94. Whilst there is some disconnect between supply and demand, there is general 
appreciation of capacities within civil society and on the need to enhance research 
capability across the country. Existing institutions and individual are overwhelmed with 
immediate demand, hence living little time for the building of institutions that could 
serve to enhance capacity at a wider level. Given th e potential level of demand for the 
limited supply, the opportunities for enhancing capacity i n this space is fairly wide and 
explored in the paragraphs that follow:  
95. Malawi has a clear shortage of certified monitoring and evaluation training programmes.  
The public sector is known for high vacan cy for professional staff, and is often as high as 
50 percent due to low wages.  The lack of quality training in M&E would also affect the 
quality of administrative data collected for implementing program and project 
interventions, and it is not surprising  that some observers indicated that it is nearly 
impossible in the public sector to carry out impact evaluations of specific projects due to 
lack of data or its poor quality.  
96. Although the MAMP would capture some of the information on completed studies, 
Malawi would benefit from a central repository of all types of research in the country, as 
long as it is of good quality, and these would be grouped into various fields of study in a 
databank.  Depending on the costs and demand, it can be explored whether ac cess 
would be free or not or a combination.  There might also be incentives provided for 
individual researchers to deposit their research studies in such an arrangement. National 
or educational institutions libraries can be linked to such a repository, or they can be 
brought together in an arrangement to oversee this 
97. There is a lack of professional or peer reviewed publications in the country.  This makes 
it difficult to follow through developments in the local research community.  The Malawi 
Journal of Soc ial Sciences, the only peer reviewed journal for the University of Malawi, 
has of late been irregular, dependant often on the person who is the editor at the time.  
There is need to invest in such publications and resolve challenges that limit their 
availability.
<<<PAGE=35>>>
28 
References 
Arcadis Euroconsult (2004) Developing Management and Information Systems for the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy: An Initial Assessment, Technical Report 21, GOM/EU 
Capacity Building Project for Economic Management and Policy Co -ordination, Ministry 
of economic Planning and Development 
Bergström, S and Goodburn, E (undated) The Role of Traditional Birth Attendants in the 
Reduction of Maternal Mortality.Staffan.Bergstrom@phs.ki.se. 
Booth, D, Cammack, D, Harrigan, J,  Kanyongolo, E, Mataure and Ngwira, N (2006) Drivers of 
Change and Development in Malawi. Working Paper 261 , Overseas Development 
Institute 
Chirwa, E (2004) Poverty Monitoring Systems in Malawi: An Analysis of Institutional 
Arrangements. University of Malawi: Zomba. 
Chirwa, E, Kumwenda, I, Jumbe, C, Chilonda, and Minde, I (2008). Agricultural Growth and 
Poverty Reduction in Malawi: Past Performance and Recent Trends , ReSAKSS Working 
Paper No.8,  South Africa. 
Fölscher, Alta and Mka ndawire, A and Faragher, R (2012) Evaluation of Public Financial 
Management Reform in Malawi 2001 –2010: Final Country Case Study 
Report.www.sida.se/publications 
Harrigan, J (2003) U -Turns and Full Circles: Tw o Decades of Agricultural Reform in Malawi 
1981-2000. World Development, 31 (5), 847-863 
International Monetary Fund (2012) IMF Country Report No. 12/221, www.imf.org  
Joala,R, ( 2012), The super-inflasion of the Presidency in Malawi, African Security Review, 21 
(4), pp.57-63.  
Kadzamira, E, Moran, D, Mulligan, J, Ndirenda, N, Nthara, K, Reed, B, Lea, N and Lucia (2009) 
Constraints to Growth in Malawi. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 5097 
Levy, S. (2002) Bridging Research and Policy: Starter Packs in Malawi.www.reading.ac.uk 
Malawi Government: Ministry of Economic Planning and Development (2012) Economic 
Report. 
Malawi Government: Ministry of Economic Planning and Developme nt (2008, 2009) Malawi 
Growth and Development Strategy Annual Review. 
Malawi Government (2006) National Monitoring and Evaluation) Master Plan. 
Miller, C., Tsoka, M and Reichert, K. (2008) Impact Evaluation Report: External Evaluation of 
the Mchinji Social  Cash Transfer Pilot . Center for International Health and Development 
(Boston University) and Centre for Social Research. 
Svåsand, Lars and Mpesi, Andrew, The Development and Functions of Electoral Manifestos 
in Malawi: The Impact of Weak Parties and Exces sive Presidentialism (2012). APSA 2012 
Annual Meeting Paper. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2108047 
National Statistical Office (2004) Integrated household Survey, www.nsomalawi.mw  
National Statistical Office (2010) Integrated Household Survey, www.nsomalawi.mw  
National Statistical Office (2008) Population Projections Malawi, www.nsomalawi.mw  
Oduro, K, Quist, R and Steen, G (2008)  Public Finance Management Assessment for Malawi 
based on PEFA. Consortium Pohl Consulting & Associates: Final PEFA Report 
Rakner, L and Mukubvu, L Ngwira, N and Smiddy, K. (undated, approx 2004) The budget as 
theatre – the formal and informal institutional makings of the budget process in Malawi.  
Reserve Bank of Malawi (2012) 4th Quarterly Economic Review, www.rbm.mw  
Resnick, D (2012), Two steps Foreward, One Step B ack: the limits of Foreign Aid on Malawi’s 
Democratic Transition, Working paper. Helsinki: United Nations University.
<<<PAGE=36>>>
29 
Rose, P (2004) Malawi: Study of Non-State Providers of Basic Services.www.idd.bham.ac.uk 
Saasa, O and Atema, J (2010) Final Report: Review of the Malawi Growth and Development 
Strategy, UNDP Malawi. 
Southern African Regional Universities Association (SARUA( (2012), A Profile of Higher 
Education in Southern Africa, SARUA: South Africa.  
Savage, K and  Umar, E (2006) Independent Evaluation of Oxfam GB Malawi’s Cash -Transfer 
Programme, Overseas Development Institute. 
Scott, C (2005) Measuring Up to the Measurement Problem: The role of statistics in 
evidence-based policy-making. London: London School of Economics. 
Stanton. C (2008) Steps towards achieving skilled attendance at birth, Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization, 86 (4) pages. 
United Nations Development Programme (2012) Human Development Report.
<<<PAGE=37>>>
30 
 
Appendix A: Interview list 
No Name Position Organisation 
 Mr Williams Samute Deputy Chief Secretary Office of the President and 
Cabinet 
2 MrLuckieSikwese Principal Secretary,  
Public Sector Reforms 
Office of the President and 
Cabinet 
3 Mr Cliff Chiunda Director, Public Sector Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
Office of the President and 
Cabinet 
4 Mr Francis Zhuwao Acting Director, Economic Affairs Office of the President and 
Cabinet 
5 MrTwaibu Ali Deputy Director, Debt and Aid 
Management 
Ministry of Finance 
6 Ms Kate Msukwa Principal Economist Ministry of Finance 
7 MsTiyamikeKanthambe Debt and Aid Officer Ministry of Finance 
8 Mr Jimmy Kawaye Program Manager, Joint Program 
Support for Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Ministry of Economic Planning 
and Development 
9 Hon. Abbie Shaba M.P., Budget and Finance 
Committee 
Malawi Parliament 
10 Ms Naomi Kitahara Deputy Resident Representative United Nations Development 
Programme 
14 Mr Ernest Misomali Assistant Resident Representative United Nations Development 
Programme 
16 Mr Peter Kulemeka M&E Trust Fund Manager United Nations Development 
Programme 
17 Mr Patrick Kamwendo MDGs Advisor United Nations Development 
Programme 
18 Dr A. Mwaba Country Representative African Development Bank 
19 Mr Benson Nkhoma Principal Water and Sanitation 
Specialist 
African Development Bank 
21 MrNysonChizani M & E Specialist UNICEF 
22 MrAshish Shah Evaluation and Results Advisor DFID 
23 Mr Stein TerjeVikan Program Manager, Support to 
National Statistical Office 
Norwegian Embassy 
24 MrDalisoKubalasa Executive Director Malawi Economic Justice 
Network 
25 Mrs Matilda Palamuleni Director of Programmes Ministry of Health 
26 MrHeatherwickNjati Director of Planning National Aids Commission 
27 Mr Davie Kalomba Director of Planning WaterAid 
28 Mr Boyce Nyirenda Acting Country Program Manager Plan International 
(KalondolondoPrg) 
29 MrSiphoJale Quality Effectiveness and 
Learning Specialist 
Plan International 
(KalondolondoPrg) 
30 Mr C. Machinjili Commissioner  National Statistical Office 
31 Mrs Mercy Kanyuka Deputy Commissioner National Statistical Office 
32 Dr A. Munthali Director  Centre for Social Research, 
University of Malawi 
33 DrMussa The Head Economics Department, 
University of Malawi 
34 Prof Ephraim Chirwa Managing Consultant WADONDA Consult 
35 Mr Allan Chimtedza Program Manager Tilitonse Program