<<<PAGE=1>>>
104 
   Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation Volume 21, Issue 50, 2025 
 ISSN 1556-8180 http://www.jmde.com 
The Road Toward Institutionalizing Evaluation in Developing Countries: Following the Path of Ray Rist  Robert Lahey REL Solutions Inc.    Background: This paper traces Ray Rist’s many and varied contributions to evaluation capacity development (ECD) through the 2000s so as to provide a global perspective on his contribution toward institutionalizing evaluation in developing countries.   Purpose: The intent is to not only acknowledge the various ways that Ray Rist has supported countries in their institutionalizing of evaluation, but to also reflect on the various dimensions associated with building an effective and sustainable national monitoring and evaluation system (NMES), and, in so doing, draw lessons for new and emerging evaluators from the Ray Rist experience.   Setting: The early 2000s saw a major change in international development evaluation, as a new paradigm was emerging based on country ownership of evaluation and evaluation capacity linked to the national vision of the country, accountability, and good governance. This would require a new evaluation architecture centered around institutionalizing evaluation, and a different approach to ECD.  Intervention: Not applicable.  Research Design: The framework used in examining the various contributions of Ray Rist recognizes four broad   
building blocks to support countries in developing and institutionalizing their NMES—vision of leadership, enabling environment, technical capacity to supply monitoring and evaluation (M&E) information, and capacity to demand and use M&E information. All influence how far and how fast institutionalization of evaluation occurs at a country level (UNEG, 2012; Lahey, 2013, 2015).   Data Collection and Analysis: Data and information has been drawn from a review of documents, literature, formal interviews, and consultations with former colleagues and key collaborators of Ray Rist, as well as firsthand experience of the author with ECD and NMES capacity development in a number of countries across the globe over the period in question.  Findings: Ray Rist was a catalytic force on his own career path, intersecting with and influencing the paths of others along the way, and all helping countries accelerate their own journeys toward country-owned and institutionalized NMES. Notable points are depicted along a nonlinear path that included challenges and opportunities that Ray, collaborating with others, took advantage of to gain greater momentum.   
Keywords: evaluation capacity development (ECD); national monitoring and evaluation system (NMES); institutionalizing evaluation; International Program for Development Evaluation Training (IPDET); International Development Evaluation Association (IDEAS)
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation  105 
A key part of Ray Rist’s legacy is his contribution to 
training and learning of evaluation in a 
development context. Several articles in this 
volume speak to specific areas where Ray’s efforts 
contributed to evaluation capacity development 
(ECD). This paper addresses Ray’s many and varied 
contributions from a more global perspective, 
following Ray’s path across his various activities 
associated with development evaluation through 
the 2000s: formal training, such as IPDET; 
building and supporting country and regional 
evaluation networks; partnering and hands -on 
country-level development; and leading, 
developing, and promoting a global network, 
conferences, and publications, all aimed at 
furthering the understanding of evaluation practice 
and its use and importance to countries across the 
globe. 
 It is contended that what emerged over time 
from Ray’s notable efforts and various activities was 
a state where the whole became greater than the 
sum of the parts, insofar as his overall impact on 
aiding countries in their institutionalization of 
country-owned evaluation is concerned.  
 Ray was a catalytic force on his own career 
path, intersecting with and influencing the paths of 
others along the way, and all helping countries 
accelerate their own journeys toward country -
owned and institutionalized national monitoring 
and evaluation systems (NMES). 
 The path of Ray Rist’s career depicted in this 
paper draws from documents, literature, 
consultations with key collaborators, and personal 
experience from an association with Ray over 
nearly 25 years. Out of this, an attempt has also 
been made to draw less ons learned about 
promoting, positioning, and using evaluation that 
could have application for emerging evaluators. 
The Changing Paradigm of National 
Evaluation Capacity Development 
The early 2000s saw a major change in 
international development evaluation, as a new 
paradigm was emerging centered on country 
ownership of evaluation and evaluation capacity 
that is linked to the national vision of the country, 
accountability, and good go vernance (Menon, 
2010). It would require “a new evaluation 
architecture … to be erected so as to give a 
privileged role to country -based evaluations with 
developing countries in the driver’s seat” (Picciotto 
2007, p. 520). 
 For this to happen, recognition needed to be 
given to the broad set of players within a country 
required in developing an NMES. Institutionalizing 
evaluation would imply a capability within 
government to both generate as well as use 
evaluation information.  
 Historically, the focus had been on the supply 
side; i.e., the technical capacity to measure 
performance and provide credible information in a 
timely way. While that remained critical, the new 
paradigm put additional focus on developing 
capacity within a country to demand and use 
evaluation information — key users being 
government institutions, ministries, civil society, 
the media, and other stakeholders. It all highlighted 
the importance of political will for change, as well 
as an enabling environment withi n the country, 
both of which would impact the pace of 
development, effectiveness, and sustainability of an 
NMES (UNEG, 2012). 
 These new ideas about ECD and 
institutionalizing evaluation proved to be fortuitous 
timing for Ray Rist, as he was in the process of 
putting more focus on ECD while working in the 
World Bank’s Operations Evaluation department 
(which would later become the  Independent 
Evaluation Group, IEG)  
An Overview of the Path Toward 
Institutionalizing Evaluation 
Figure 1 depicts the path that Ray traced out over 
the 2000s that would help developing countries 
move closer to institutionalizing country -owned 
evaluation. Notable points along the way that had 
impact on progress toward that goal are identified. 
It must be noted that the path was not linear. There 
were challenges and opportunities that Ray took 
advantage of to gain greater momentum. 
 One can think of a country’s journey to 
institutionalization of evaluation as being rather 
organic. There is no one standard approach that 
would be appropriate for every country — no one -
size-fits-all. There would be a sense of planning, but 
some other fact ors— country context, political and 
global considerations, and recognizing and taking 
advantage of opportunities that come along— would 
likely greatly influence how far and how fast 
institutionalization of evaluation would occur at a 
country level (UNEG, 201 2; Lahey, 2013, 2015). 
This would be an environment well-suited to Ray’s 
personality and leadership style and approach to 
ECD.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Figure 1. The Road towards Institutionalizing Evaluation in Developing Countries – Following the Path of Ray Rist 
106 Lahey
<<<PAGE=4>>>
107 
Early Days and Critical Learning 
Joining the World Bank in 2000 was really the start 
of the Ray Rist path that focused on facilitating the 
institutionalization of evaluation in developing 
countries. 
 The first part of Ray’s career had been spent 
largely in an academic environment, where 
research and publication play a significant role. He 
then spent more than a decade in the U.S. General 
Accounting Office (GAO), including within the 
Program Evaluation  and Methodology Division 
(PEMD). This served to bring Ray closer to a public-
sector environment and the reality of the 
importance that politics and leadership play in 
influencing decisions in government.  
 The GAO environment, with its bent on 
accountability, also brought out the importance of 
the practical side of evaluation practice, focusing on 
questions that matter, and timely and relevant 
information to satisfy the needs of senior leadership 
and the political level. This would influence Rist’s 
approach to supporting institutionalization 
throughout his career (Barrados, this volume). 
An Enabling Environment to Help 
Launch the Journey 
The World Bank provided Ray an enabling 
environment to launch what would prove to be 
notable milestones along his career path to helping 
countries institutionalize evaluation. In some ways, 
it represented a perfect storm to enable action. 
 The new paradigm for development evaluation, 
noted above, served as an important backdrop, as 
did the support of Bob Picciotto, director general of 
evaluation at the World Bank. There was a wealth 
of country -level information being developed via 
the ECB working paper series launched in 1998 by 
Keith Mackay of the IEG (Mackay, 2007).  
 Two products codeveloped by Ray in the early 
2000s served as significant foundation pieces for 
international ECD, and as springboards playing key 
roles in institutionalization across the globe: in 
2001, with Linda Morra- Imas, the International 
Program for  Development Evaluation Training 
(IPDET); and, in 2004, with Jody Kusek, Ten Steps 
to a Results -Based Monitoring and Evaluation 
System: A Handbook for Development 
Practitioners. They were two different vehicles—
IPDET a hands -on training program offered in an 
innovative way (Morra-Imas & Rist, 2023); and the 
Ten Steps  handbook an easy- to-follow guide for 
developing a new country- owned public 
management tool that emphasized results -based 
M&E (Kusek & Rist, 2004). 
 These two initiatives reflected many of the 
hallmarks of Ray’s approach and style: They were 
both developed in partnership with others; both 
innovative; both high -profile, yet blessed by the 
World Bank and introduced without undue delay; 
both emphasize a practical approach to M&E and 
the importance of country context; and both have 
proven to be highly successful, still used some 20 
years later. They both also employ crossover 
vehicles to further enhance the training and 
messaging— a workshop was designed to be used in 
conjunction with the Ten Steps  handbook, and a 
2009 textbook, The Road to Results, was published 
to provide more in-depth learning than the 2-to-4-
week IPDET training, and to reach a wider audience 
(Morra-Imas & Rist, 2009). 
 The formula proved effective as, for example, 
the Ten Steps handbook, supplemented by a series 
of training sessions conducted for Colombia’s 
National Planning Department over 2004 –2005, 
was recognized as having assisted officials in 
strengthening the Sistema Nacional de Evaluation 
de Gestión y Resultados (SINERGIA). 
 The technical tools and approach were 
essentially being marketed to an audience that went 
beyond evaluators, in addition to aspiring 
evaluators. Ray was very adept at communicating 
with senior government officials and those who 
could influence the politica l level. This was a key 
part of his forte. Appealing to a country’s senior 
leadership would be important in order to make 
inroads for developing and sustaining an effective 
NMES. It in effect represented ECD on the demand 
side, an area traditionally overlooked. 
 I saw this firsthand in both Botswana and 
Guyana in the early 2000s, where Rist was 
advocating for evaluation and ECD to the Office of 
the President (Botswana) and the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF; Guyana). In the process, he 
developed lasting relationships w ith key senior 
government officials who would become 
champions for country-owned evaluation. 
Broadening the Network and Reach—
On the Road with IPDET 
Over the 16 years (2001 –16) that Rist and Morra -
Imas were codirectors of IPDET, the program 
trained 4,000+ participants from 80+ countries 
through its Carleton University base. Deemed 
highly successful, an independent impact 
evaluation also found that IPDET helped build local 
capacity and an appetite for development 
evaluation in home countries (Cousins et al., 2010). 
Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Lahey 108 
 IPDET’s success created demand for in-country 
versions of the training program. Generally led by 
Rist and Morra- Imas, this could take on different 
forms: specialized training in a particular country 
(Beijing, China, 2006), a partnership with the 
Shanghai International Program for Development 
Evaluation (SHIPDET), offered twice a year¾once 
for Chinese participants and once for persons from 
some 26 countries across Asia; regional mini -
IPDET training cosponsored by IPDET and an 
international agency (such as t he Geneva 
International Centre for Humanitarian De-Mining, 
GICHD); and country -requested mini -IPDETs 
(such as occurred in Botswana and Guyana over the 
years). 
 Needless to say, this would demand a fair 
amount of administration, business acumen, and 
energy to make it happen smoothly. Much of this 
fell on the shoulders of the IPDET codirectors, Rist 
and Morra-Imas, an amazing feat since IPDET was 
essentially operating on a cost-recovery basis. 
Targeted Country Support 
Not only were the country -based mini -IPDETs 
broadening the network and reach of the messaging 
around ECD and institutionalizing evaluation; they 
also provided opportunities for more direct contact 
with country officials and leadership, an area where 
Ray would excel. 
 Taking the two examples of Botswana and 
Guyana noted above, Ray used this opportunity to 
facilitate ECD and institutionalization even further, 
following an approach that supported a country’s 
goal of a country -owned institutionalized and 
sustainable NMES. Having built trust and support 
with senior country officials, Ray drew from his vast 
network to help identify other experts who could be 
brought in by the country to work with their 
evaluation champions and other officials, many of 
whom had received IPDET training. This would 
involve assisting country officials with the more 
detailed follow-up work of institutionalization in a 
practical and timely way. For Botswana, I have been 
actively engaged over the last 15 years, working with 
country officials in help ing develop a strategy and 
action plan for a country-owned NMES and related 
infrastructure development (Lahey, 2013, 2016).  
 In Guyana, a similar pattern was followed, 
though a broader- based team under Frederic 
Martin led (and, to this day, continues) the majority 
of the fieldwork in support of the Ministry of 
Finance efforts to institutionalize a country-owned 
NMES. Indeed, between 2011, when Ray 
introduced the first mini-IPDET to Guyana’s senior 
officials (Ministers and PS), and 2024, a total of 41 
5-day sessions, involving 1,700 participants, 
had
been delivered. MOF officials acknowledge that this
has raised awareness by gove rnment decision
makers and professionals about the value-added of
M&E. Some modest demonstration evaluations of
practical issues, conducted by Ray, helped officials
to start to see the value in evaluation.
These are but two of several examples where 
Ray’s influence impacted the pace of development 
of country-owned NMES. 
Sustainable Learning 
Early on, Rist and Morra decided to establish an 
IPDET participant listserv to maintain the network 
that was being created during the on- site IPDET 
training. It would help keep participants current on 
issues in evaluation, job opportunities, and 
evaluation events. This simple idea was to have 
greater-than-expected impact on continued cross -
fertilization and growing the network, as most 
participants (some 4,000+) registered on the 
listserv (Morra-Imas & Rist, 2023). This took on 
even larger dimensions, as IP DET graduates, 
through a partnering agreement arranged by Ray 
and Linda, were automatically being offered 
membership in IDEAS, the International 
Development Evaluation Association founded in 
2002. This proved to be yet another opportunity 
that supported EC D and NMES development, as 
the growing evaluation community in the Global 
South and North could discuss and debate practical 
topics such as the ideal organizational placement 
for a new evaluation unit (Morra -Imas & Rist, 
2023). 
Ray took on the role of IDEAS president in 
2008 (and Linda became secretary general a year 
later), bringing more international exposure to the 
association, largely due to Ray’s leadership style 
and his championing the work of international 
development evaluators who were contributing to 
the institutionalization of country- owned 
evaluation across the globe.  
Through his knowledge and experience with 
the publication process, and an ability to muster 
people toward a common goal, the biennial IDEAS 
Global Assemblies took on more prominence. Over 
his period as president, following a Global 
Assembly, Ray would lead a team to draw from the 
various presentations, addressing a key and timely 
theme associated with ECB and 
institutionalization. This led to the following World 
Bank publications: Influencing Change: Building 
Evaluation Capacity to Strengthen Governance  
(Rist et al., 2011); Development Evaluation in 
Times of Turbulence: Dealing with Crises That
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation  109 
Endanger Our Future  (Rist et al., 2013); and 
Poverty, Inequality and Evaluation: Changing 
Perspectives (Rist et al., 2016). Through this 
mechanism, the sharing and retention of 
knowledge and “lessons” would be strengthened. 
Conclusions and Lessons 
In tracing the path of Ray Rist, as depicted in 
Figure 1, some critical elements come into view that 
new and emerging evaluators might learn from 
Ray’s experience— indeed, lessons that have 
relevance for the global evaluation community in 
looking ahead to the uncertainties of the remaining 
2020s. 
 Ray’s professional and results -oriented 
approach, collaborative nature, and ability to 
identify and then take advantage of opportunities 
all contributed to his influence in helping countries 
move forward toward institutionalizing country-
owned evaluation. 
 More than this, as noted by many colleagues 
consulted, it has been Ray’s connectivity with 
people that has worked to instill interest and 
support in an agenda among widely diverse groups 
of people. 
Connectivity Between Activities and with 
People 
A key learning from the Ray Rist journey in support 
of institutionalizing evaluation is the importance of 
connectivity between activities. It is not necessarily 
a well -thought-out plan but really an organic 
process that recognizes opportunities and takes 
advantage of those opportunities to make progress 
toward the goal of institutionalization. It helps 
ensure momentum and, in the long run, 
sustainability. But it also recognizes the importance 
of creating a reliable network and partnership that 
may be needed in order to maintain momentum. 
Continuous and Lifelong Learning 
From a training/learning perspective, Ray’s 
journey also emphasizes that we learn not just 
during periods of formal education (such as the 2 -
to-4-week IPDET course), but also even when we 
don’t know we are learning. For new evaluators, 
that should be consi dered a key part of their 
development. 
Turning Challenges into Opportunities and 
Being Nimble to Take Full Advantage of the 
Opportunities 
Following Ray’s path, it is clear that challenges 
didn’t deter him (nor Linda); indeed, they 
represented opportunities to be innovative. 
Possessing a passion for his field, for people, and for 
achieving results, this also required a willingness to 
connect with others and be nimble in finding 
workable solutions to problems (Hagel, 2021). In a 
post-COVID world, this is critical for the global 
evaluation community. 
The Importance of Effective Communication 
and Leadership Skills  
A key competency of evaluators that needs to be 
reflected in training and development is 
communication and interpersonal skills ¾for 
example, as Ray so ably demonstrated, the ability to 
relate to and understand the needs of senior 
officials and nontechnical audiences. Improving 
one’s emotional intelligence (EI) skills could be an 
important component and long-term development 
objective, helping equip evaluators with a better 
understanding of how to best interact with 
individuals, collaborate, and build strong er 
relationships. It also reflects a leadership style that 
calls for more than an ability to analyze, control, 
and command (Hamalainen & Saarinen, 2007). In 
terms of leadership, it could help create a collective 
energy and sense of urgency toward a goal. A s 
observed at various points along the Ray Rist path, 
Ray’s mantra, “Work hard ¾play hard,” which 
musters a business -like attitude alongside a spirit 
of collegiality and playfulness, has led groups of 
professionals from diverse backgrounds toward 
common goals in a timely and results -oriented 
fashion  
References 
Cousins, J. B., Elliott, C. E., & Gilbert, N. (2010). 
International Program for Development 
Evaluation Training (IPDET): Evaluation of 
program impact . IED, World Bank, and 
Carleton University. 
Hagel, J., III. (2021, October 11). What motivates 
lifelong learners. Harvard Business Review. 
Hamalainen, R., & Saarinen, E. (2007). Systems 
intelligence in leadership and everyday life.  
Systems Analysis Laboratory, Helsinki 
University of Technology.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Lahey 110 
Kusek, J., & Rist, R. C. (2004). Ten steps to a 
results-based monitoring and evaluation 
system: A handbook for development 
practitioners. World Bank. 
Lahey, R. (2013). National performance reporting 
as a driver for national M&E development. In 
R. C. Rist, M. -H. Boily, & F.  R. Martin (Eds.),
Development evaluation in times of
turbulence: Dealing with crises that endanger
our future. World Bank.
Lahey, R. (2015). Devising an appropriate strategy 
for capacity building of a national Monitoring 
and Evaluation system: Lessons from selected 
African countries. World Bank. 
Lahey, R. (2016). Why developing monitoring and 
evaluation capacity is critical to understanding 
and addressing issues of poverty and 
inequality. In R.  C. Rist, F.  P. Martin, & A.  M. 
Fernandez (Eds.), Poverty, inequality, and 
evaluation: Changing perspectives . World 
Bank. 
Mackay, K. (2007). How to build M&E systems to 
support better government. World Bank. 
Menon, S. (2010). A perspective from the United 
Nations on national ownership and capacity in 
evaluation. In M. Segone (Ed.), From policies 
to results: Developing capacities for country 
monitoring and evaluation systems, UNICEF. 
Morra-Imas, L., & Rist, R. C. (2023). What we can 
learn from the International Program for 
Development Evaluation Training (IPDET). 
New Directions for Evaluation, 177, 57–64. 
Morra-Imas, L., & Rist, R. C. (2009). The road to 
results: Designing and conducting effective 
development evaluations. World Bank. 
Picciotto, R., (2007). The new environment for 
development evaluation. American Journal of 
Evaluation, 28(4), 509–21. 
Rist, R. C., Boily, M. -H., & Martin, F. (2011). 
Influencing change: Building evaluation 
capacity to strengthen governance. World 
Bank Training Series. 
Rist, R. C., Boily, M.-H., & Martin, F. (Eds.). (2013). 
Development evaluation in turbulent times: 
Dealing with crises that endanger our future . 
World Bank. 
Rist, R. C., Martin, F., & Fernandez, A. (2016). 
Poverty, inequality, and evaluation: Changing 
Perspectives. World Bank. 
United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG). (2012). 
National evaluation capacity development: 
Practical tips on how to strengthen national 
evaluation systems: A report for the United 
Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) task force 
on national evaluation capacity development.