<<<PAGE=1>>>
Devising an Appropriate Strategy 
for Capacity Building of a National 
Monitoring and Evaluation System: 
Lessons from Selected African Countries
Robert Lahey 
In recent years, emphasis is shifting to a new paradigm 
regarding national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
capacity development—from a historical pattern of 
M&E being carried out primarily in the context of 
cooperation and development aid, to a new concept 
centered around national ownership and M&E capac-
ity that is linked to the national vision of the country, 
accountability, and good governance (see, for example, 
Picciotto [2007] and Menon [2010]). As the frame 
of reference for national monitoring and evaluation 
system (NMES) development changes, the nature of 
the capacity-building strategy, including the support 
that may be given by the international community to 
NMES development, will need to be revisited. NMES 
development, including M&E capacity gaps, needs to be 
considered in a broader context and built around more 
than simply traditional training initiatives. T o work 
toward the goal of a sustainable, effective, national, 
and country-owned NMES, key foundation pieces such 
as infrastructure and supporting institutions need to 
be developed, along with training of country officials.
This note1 examines NMES capacity building in 
the broader context of the new paradigm, examining 
the state of NMES development in five countries in 
Africa—Benin, Botswana, Ethiopia, Mauritania, and 
Senegal—to explore and identify patterns and lessons 
that could help inform future NMES capacity develop-
ment in general.  
Background: A Framework 
for Developing an NMES
If an M&E system is to be owned by a country, it needs 
to be linked to the national development plan of the 
country and integrated into the operations and culture 
of government institutions. T o be sustainable though, 
governments must believe in the utility of the NMES 
and understand its benefits to them. And, to do that, 
they must own the system. In other words, national 
ownership implies a particular cultural, social, and 
political context (Segone 2010).
With a broad goal of good governance as a driver 
behind developing an NMES, its development could be 
This note examines key stages of national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems’ development in different country 
contexts and argues for tailored approaches to building M&E capacities. The development of national monitoring and 
evaluation systems (NMESs) rests on four building blocks—vision of leadership, an enabling environment, capacity to 
supply and analyze M&E information, and capacity to demand and use M&E information. Developing countries can 
differ significantly in their performance along these four dimensions—some have virtually no NMES, while others are at a 
much more advanced stage where reliable and timely M&E information is generated and used. Most developing countries 
likely fall in between. Using the example of five African countries, this note discusses the differences and similarities in 
capacity-building needs for countries at different levels of NMES development.
April 2015
 Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2
thought of as resting on two overarching influences: (i) the 
political will for change within a country and (ii) technical 
factors that will influence the pace of M&E infrastructure 
development. Upon these two foundation pieces sit four 
essential building blocks (figure 1; Lahey 2013).
i. vision of the leadership within the country;
ii. an enabling environment for an M&E system to develop 
and function;
iii. the capacity to supply and analyze M&E information—
the technical capacity to measure and analyze perfor-
mance and provide credible and timely information; 
and
iv. the capacity within the system to demand and use 
M&E information—key users include government 
institutions, ministries, citizens, media, and other 
stakeholders.
Political support is an essential driver to launch and 
fund the NMES exercise; lead the change in organiza-
tional culture that may be needed; provide the NMES 
champion(s); ensure an enabling environment; deflect 
resistance to M&E and the changes it might imply; and help 
ensure long-term sustainability of the NMES.
However, the successful development of an NMES 
takes more than political will. Even with a resource com-
mitment to invest in M&E development, there may be 
technical hurdles that require a lengthy process to put in 
place and develop credible data systems. In addition, it 
takes time to train M&E specialists and educate managers 
throughout the system on how and where M&E informa-
tion will be used. This is generally a lengthy and iterative 
process, as the experiences of most countries using M&E 
systems confirm, and one where allowance for continuous 
learning and improvement through oversight mechanisms 
is particularly beneficial to the improvement of the NMES.
Historically, efforts in many countries have been 
directed at improving the supply of M&E information, 
though most often in the context of individual projects 
or priority sectors such as health or education, but gener -
ally not in a comprehensive fashion inherent in an NMES. 
Further, the demand for or use of M&E information has 
often been linked primarily to funding or reporting require-
ments from donors or international agencies—for example, 
requirements of Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) 
funding or Millennium Development Goal (MDG) prog-
ress reporting. In other words, M&E systems, where they 
exist, are often piecemeal and not necessarily aligned with 
the broad set of the country’s national development goals. 
Additionally, the NMESs quite likely are missing many key 
institutional components and the infrastructure needed to 
make them both national in scope and sustainable.
While each country is unique and faces its own chal-
lenges in “growing” its NMES, implicit in the framework 
of figure 1 are some important considerations for NMES 
development:
•	 A broad set of players needs to be involved in NMES 
development for it to be both effective and sustainable.
•	 The goal is not simply to create an M&E capability, but 
to use performance information to improve public sec-
tor management and governance. As such, a capability 
within government is being created to both generate 
(that is, supply) performance information as well as 
to use performance information in decision making 
by government managers.
•	 The use of (or demand for) M&E information will 
function if there are effective incentives built into 
the system.
•	 Training and development is required for both tech-
nical analysts as well as nontechnical managers in 
government—these are the eventual users of the M&E 
information who will need to understand how and 
where M&E information can help them in the man-
agement of their programs and policies. Senior and 
political officials need sufficient M&E knowledge so 
that they grasp the importance of the NMES to achiev-
ing the high-order goals of accountability, results-based 
management, and sound governance for the country.
The Importance of Understanding 
Current Level of NMES 
Development in a Country
The four building blocks of figure 1 represent the founda-
tion pieces of a country’s NMES. Countries  are at different 
stages/levels of development of what might be considered 
their national M&E system—everything from essentially 
no NMES to a point of having an effective and sustainable 
Figure 1. Four Essential Building Blocks for an 
Effective NMES
Vision of  
Leadership
Enabling  
Environment
Political Will for Change
Capacity to Supply 
and Analyze M&E 
Information
Capacity to  
Demand and Use 
M&E Information
Pace of Development of  
M&E Infrastructure
Source: Author’s illustration.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3
NMES (regardless of what it looks like), and everything in 
between. 
International experience has shown that national 
M&E capacity development is an iterative process, gener-
ally developed incrementally, sometimes in a piecemeal 
manner, and, not uncommonly, with false starts (Mackay 
2007). For illustrative purposes, figure 2 shows what 
might be considered a continuum in the development of 
the four building blocks that comprise a nationally owned 
M&E system. In broad (and simplistic) terms, figure 2 
shows five levels of NMES development. In between the 
two end states—that is, level 1 with no or low M&E, and 
level 5 with a “mature state”—there could be even more 
than three levels or stages of NMES development. And, as 
noted above, movement along the continuum, from one 
level to another, is not necessarily linear. It is still useful 
though to adopt a framework to assess where a country 
might be situated in terms of its NMES development and, 
from the perspective of the international community, 
consider what this might imply in terms of developing 
Level 1:  
No/low M&E 
•	Little/no	 
commitment 
to M&E—not a 
priority
•	Minimal	M&E	
capacity and 
experience 
•	Any	existing	
M&E focused on 
accountability to 
donors
•	Little/no	training	
or M&E capacity 
building 
Level 5: 
Mature state
•	Political will 
translates into 
commitment to 
fund M&E to 
needed levels
•	Country-owned	
NMES providing 
needed results 
measurement 
and reporting
•	Credible,	 
reliable,	and	
timely informa-
tion generated 
from country 
systems,	includ-
ing at subna-
tional level
•	Evaluation	a	
key part of the 
NMES
•	Self-sustaining
•	M&E	part	of	the	
policy,	planning,	
and budgetary 
cycle
•	Focus	on	 
accountability,	
good gover-
nance,	and	
transparency
Level 4: 
Growing M&E 
system
• Political will and 
commitment to 
M&E and perfor-
mance manage-
ment 
•	Funding	and	
detailed plan to 
develop	country-
owned NMES 
•	Institutional	
structures,	poli-
cies,	and	opera-
tional guidelines 
in place
•	Capacity-build-
ing strategy for 
human resourc-
es and data 
development
•	Evaluation	
recognized as 
important part of 
M&E	system,	but	
still underutilized
•	Capacity	gaps	
in implementa-
tion	and	use,	but	
plan in place to 
deal with these
Level 3: 
Committed  
development
•	Apparent po-
litical will to build 
results-oriented	
national M&E  
system
•	Increased	
commitment to 
country owner-
ship and use of 
M&E beyond 
international ac-
countability 
•	Institutional	
structures being 
established
•	Limited	 
evaluation
•	Some	M&E	 
capacity build-
ing,	but	contin-
ued capacity 
gaps,	particularly	
in implementa-
tion and use
Level 2: Early 
initiatives
•	Apparent  
political	will,	but	
no resource  
commitment
•	Some	(lim-
ited) initiatives 
by country to 
develop M&E 
structures 
•	M&E	focused	
largely on moni-
toring imple-
mentation rather 
than measuring 
results
•	Little/no	 
evaluation
•	Some,	but	lim-
ited M&E training 
and capacity 
building
Current M&E Capacity in Country
Country M&E Readiness
Low High
Figure 2. Key Stages and Drivers to Reach Mature NMES Status
High
Source: Author’s illustration.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4
or supporting an appropriate NMES capacity-building 
strategy and action plan. 
While each country is unique in how far and how fast 
it may roll out a national M&E capability (and indeed, how 
that may be institutionalized), under the new paradigm, 
countries do share the broad goal of developing an effective 
and sustainable NMES, centered around national owner -
ship and M&E that is linked to the national vision of the 
country, accountability, and good governance. It is impor-
tant, however, to recognize that a country with a weak basis 
for an NMES (as determined through an M&E Diagnostic) 
likely needs a capacity-building strategy somewhat different 
than a country with a much stronger NMES capacity, that 
is, a country further along the continuum. The framework 
can help in devising a more comprehensive and country-
specific strategy for NMES development than a generic 
strategy that focuses primarily on training country officials, 
in the absence of institutional changes and infrastructure 
development.  
NMES Development in Selected 
African Countries
The framework of figure 1 and 2 was applied to five Af-
rican countries: Benin, Botswana, Ethiopia, Mauritania, 
and Senegal.
2 
Figure 3 shows where each country is situated on 
the NMES development continuum, based on assess-
ment of the development of each of the four NMES 
building blocks for each country. While the assignment 
of countries to a particular level is not an exact science, 
the relative placement of the five countries in relation to 
each other is likely close to an accurate depiction. A sixth 
African country, South Africa, is included in figure 3 
for comparative purposes. While South Africa was not a 
part of this study, there is considerable documented and 
public information about the state and development of 
South Africa’s NMES from which to determine its rela-
tive placement along the continuum (see, for example, 
Goldman et al. [2012]).
An assessment of M&E capacity and identification of 
capacity gaps was conducted for each country and examined 
specific factors aligned with each of the four NMES building 
blocks.  CLEAR (2013) provides a detailed discussion of the 
assessment’s findings for Benin, Mauritania, and Senegal.
3
In examining the NMES building blocks and sub-
factors,  a pattern of development emerges, both within 
individual countries and across countries. 
It would seem apparent that NMES development must 
start with the vision of country leadership, which provides 
not only adequate space to allow development of the NMES, 
but also demonstrates commitment to fund and develop 
a national M&E system. With this commitment, and of-
ten with the support or encouragement of  international 
development partners, the focus quickly turns to training 
country officials to build capacity to supply M&E informa-
tion. The capacity-building process may slow down or take 
considerably longer than anticipated by senior officials 
though, largely because of the need to clarify and establish 
the institutional arrangements, roles, and responsibilities 
of the various actors within the system. Institutionalizing 
M&E may indeed require some form of public sector 
reform, including national planning and budget decision 
making. In all level 3 countries examined, establishing the 
appropriate institutional arrangements so that generation 
of M&E information is a normal course of doing business 
has proven to be a lengthy exercise—and one that likely does 
not get enough attention.
Another important area of NMES development that 
clearly gets too little attention is developing the capacity to 
No/low	 
elements of 
M&E
Essentially 
donor driven
M&E system
Effective,	 
sustainable,	but	
not static
Institutional  
elements
Implementation
Challenges: 
M&E	use,	data,	
and others
Institutional  
elements for 
M&E
Limited  
implementation
Some elements 
of M&E
Some NMES 
efforts
(1) (5)(4)(3)(2)
Mauritania
South Africa
Benin
Ethiopia
Botswana
Senegal
Figure 3. Selected African Countries on the NMES Development Continuum
Source: Author’s illustration.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5
use the M&E information within the particular country. 
The experience of the five selected countries suggests that 
this may be due to several factors: 
•	 Less attention is focused on information use, including 
how to build the necessary incentives into the system to 
encourage/force use of M&E information in planning, 
management, and decision making in government.
•	 The vision for using M&E information is often narrow 
in scope and may derive largely from the historical need 
to satisfy accountability and reporting requirements 
of international agencies (for purposes of PRSP , MDG 
progress, and so forth), a valuable use but insufficient 
to support the broad needs of good governance and 
results-based management (RBM).
•	 In the five selected countries, there are problems with 
the quality of information currently generated by the 
M&E systems. These problems derive in part from 
fundamental problems with data in general and the 
need for national data development plans.
•	 There may be potential roadblocks arising from histori-
cal perceptions of M&E in general and evaluation in 
particular as being a threatening control-type function 
that serves largely to criticize. In other words, officials 
are not appreciating the knowledge-generating and 
learning aspects associated with evaluation as a tool 
of the NMES. 
The other development aspect shown in figure 1 relates 
to various  institutional elements that help enable NMES 
success and sustainability in a country—such factors as the 
existence of a national statistics agency (NSA), a systematic 
planning function in government, oversight bodies such as 
parliament and a national audit office (NAO), and others. 
Their development  may be on a separate track from NMES 
development, due to, for example, the various initiatives to 
develop and improve the NSA in each of the level 3 coun-
tries examined. NSA (and data) development needs to be 
linked to development of the NMES. It must quickly be 
emphasized though that they are not the same thing,
4 but 
there is a correlation between the two—if a high priority is 
being given to NMES development, priority also needs to 
be given to data development, along with associated sta-
tistical and analytical expertise. Similarly, the relationship 
between NMES development and other enablers needs to 
be recognized and fostered.
M&E Capacity Gaps/Challenges: 
Countries at Different Levels 
of NMES Development
In examining NMES development in the five selected 
countries, it should not be surprising that in level 1 and 
2 countries there are fundamental needs and M&E chal-
lenges across all four building blocks. But what is perhaps 
surprising is that, even for countries well along the NMES 
continuum (countries at level 3 in this analysis), there are 
fundamental elements of the NMES development process 
that still represent challenges and capacity gaps. For the three 
level 3 performers in the sample though, the nature of the 
M&E issues and challenges is more subtle. In other words, 
it should not be assumed that some of the fundamental 
capacity building—for example, raising awareness and un-
derstanding of M&E among senior officials—is less impor -
tant for these countries. Despite being at different levels of 
NMES development, there are still common M&E capacity 
challenges that each country in this sample faces. Where 
they likely differ is in the intensity of the challenge and ap-
propriate intervention—given that, in some countries, there 
is a virtual absence or limited acceptance of M&E, while in 
other countries, M&E capacity development (in some form 
or other) has been ongoing for some period of time. 
Listed below are key M&E issues/challenges observed 
to be common to all five countries examined:
i. Awareness and understanding of M&E roles and uses
•	 Need to raise awareness/understanding of the 
various roles and uses of an NMES to improve 
governance and management decision making
•	 Clarifying what is meant by a national M&E sys-
tem to increase understanding and buy-in at both 
the political and institutional level
•	 Weak culture and understanding of evaluation 
and its importance to an NMES
 ii. Institutional arrangements for M&E
•	 Where M&E units exist, key capacity challenges 
also exist—such as inadequate resources and not 
enough trained staff
•	 Lack of clarity regarding roles and responsibilities 
and limited harmonization/coordination of vari-
ous M&E efforts
•	 Little/no institutionalization of evaluation—no 
systematic evaluation of government programs 
and policies
iii. Human resource expertise
•	 Not enough officials trained in M&E; high turn-
over; and lack of evaluation expertise
•	 Little or no local training in M&E
•	 T oo little practical M&E training and common 
understanding of M&E tools and methods 
iv. Data issues
•	 Need to improve reliability, quality, completeness, 
and accessibility of data
•	 Sector data not always consistent with central 
data sources
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6
•	 Not enough and high turnover of data experts 
and analysts
v. Use of M&E within government
•	 Potential for increasing the use of M&E in minis-
tries and centrally, but many challenges
•	 No evaluation of programs or policies and no link 
to policy/program development (exceptions may 
be internationally funded projects)
vi. Performance measurement and reporting
•	 Not enough focus on results (outputs and 
outcomes)
•	 Common problems—no data to populate indica-
tors; inappropriate indicators; poor quality data; 
too little analysis; timely release of reports
vii. Functions/institutions that help enable NMES 
development
•	 NSAs—challenges include not enough trained 
staff; data reliability; inadequate analysis; and 
processing, storing, accessing, and harmonization 
of data collection
•	 Planning functions—M&E not always well linked 
to or integrated into planning
•	 Oversight agencies (for example, the NAOs)—
key focus of oversight bodies often on audit, 
control, and fight against corruption, which can 
negatively influence the perception of M&E and 
performance management
•	 Civil society organizations (CSOs)—not always 
clear who speaks for civil society or what influence 
they may have.
It should be noted that this set of common M&E issues 
and capacity gaps observed  across the five selected countries 
cover all four NMES building blocks. Where they tend to 
differ from one country to another is in intensity level, and 
therefore the appropriate responses will differ by country. In 
general terms, observations from the five countries suggest 
that a distinction needs to be made between level 1/level 2 
countries and level 3 countries. This is particularly impor-
tant when examining appropriate strategies and potential 
initiatives to support NMES capacity building.
Implications for Devising an 
Appropriate NMES Capacity-
Building Strategy
Potential initiatives to be built into the strategy to support 
NMES capacity building in countries at each of the three 
levels examined are discussed below according to four broad 
categories, each with a variety of specific activities:
i. training and human resource development;
ii. advising/facilitating the institutionalization of NMES;
iii. supporting evaluation capacity building; and
iv. supporting the development of key enablers of the 
NMES.
This section examines each category briefly, and, draw-
ing on the sample of five countries, illustrates similarities 
and differences across the three levels of NMES develop-
ment in terms of the nature/focus of the capacity-building 
initiative identified as most appropriate for the specific 
country.
5
(i) Training and human resource (HR) development
For all countries, regardless of level of NMES development, 
•	 It is important to recognize the various audiences for 
M&E training/orientation: political and senior officials; 
officials needing more technical knowledge on generat-
ing M&E information; managers whose programs will 
be monitored; and the potential users of M&E informa-
tion, both centrally and within ministries. 
•	 The nature of training/orientation clearly differs across 
different audiences, with nontechnical M&E orienta-
tion designed for political and senior officials. 
•	 Awareness/appreciation of the importance of evalua-
tion (the “E”) as a critical tool in the NMES needs to 
be increased. For example, officials need to understand 
that RBM needs to be supported by both “M” and “E”—
“M” on its own is not enough.
For the level 1 and level 2 countries examined,
•	 Limited formal exposure to M&E would indicate that 
the priority is to raise awareness and understanding 
(advocacy) at the political and senior levels regarding 
the role and various potential ways that a nation-
ally owned, results-based M&E system can be used to 
improve public sector governance and management 
decision making. There needs to be a better under -
standing of RBM/performance management and its/
their important link to M&E to help enable necessary 
public sector reforms, including national planning and 
budget decision making.
•	 Clarify with public sector leaders, as well as M&E 
champions, what is meant by an NMES, to increase 
understanding and buy-in at both the political and 
institutional level.
•	 M&E training areas need to be identified and a multi-
year training strategy developed, including provision 
for introductory M&E training. 
For the level 3 countries examined,
•	 The concepts of M&E and RBM are not new, and 
various efforts, some more successful than others, 
have been underway for some time to try to improve 
national M&E capacity. In this environment, expecta-
tions—particularly among senior officials—are likely
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7
considerably higher than for level 1 and 2 performers. 
Not only is there a need to address existing M&E ca-
pacity gaps and challenges, but also a need to manage 
expectations—officials need to understand that NMES 
capacity building is long term and iterative. There is 
no quick fix.
•	 In the three countries examined, NMES efforts to 
date have been fairly narrowly focused (for example, 
progress reporting on the national plan), suggesting 
a need to broaden officials’ understanding of the 
various ways that an NMES can support good gover-
nance, accountability, and improved management 
practices—in other words, the various roles and uses 
of M&E in general, and evaluation in particular, that 
could be built into the government’s management 
framework.
•	 As NMES becomes institutionalized, the HR capacity 
gap grows and training needs become more immediate. 
Short-term technical needs likely require the intro-
duction of more practical and applied M&E training 
incorporated into targeted NMES development. With 
too few in-country M&E specialists, international M&E 
experts are still required, though a mentoring compo-
nent should be built into all contracts that include 
international M&E experts.
•	 An intermediate and longer-term training strategy 
and multiyear training plan should be developed that 
move beyond traditional in-class M&E training to 
also incorporate a plan to develop in-country training 
capacity via “train the trainer” and eventual develop-
ment of M&E curricula in local and regional training 
institutions.
(ii) Advising and facilitating the institutionalization  
of NMES
For all countries, regardless of level of NMES development, 
•	 Recognize the need for a plan for overall NMES devel-
opment and a strong central player/agency within the 
country to serve as the M&E champion to help develop, 
operationalize, and drive the NMES.
•	 Adopt a phased approach to NMES development, 
piloting the introduction of new elements so as to 
learn, review, and make the necessary adjustments—
as opposed to an immediate, whole-of-government 
rollout all at once. Capacity gaps typically rule out 
the latter.
For the level 1 and level 2 countries examined,
•	 With no or limited institutionalization of an NMES, 
high-level discussions would be needed, as well as the 
establishment of a steering and/or consultative com-
mittee. These could be initiated with the support of 
development partners or the efforts of a lead central 
agency in the country. These could also serve as a 
follow-on to the M&E training/orientation of politi-
cal and senior country officials, which are intended to 
explore the concept of institutionalizing M&E within 
the public sector. What this training might include: 
how best to introduce organizational and operational 
changes that may be needed, possible resource implica-
tions, pace of implementation, and more.
•	 Efforts should be made to help ensure all stakeholders 
are brought to the table—civil society, private sector, 
M&E partners, training institutes, M&E champions, 
and others.
•	 NMES institutionalization could be linked to ongoing 
or planned public sector reforms, as appropriate, as a 
means of clarifying the initiative and gaining broader 
stakeholder support. 
•	 With the support of senior country officials, plans 
could be launched to create a central M&E unit to drive 
future NMES development efforts, and, eventually, 
the development of an appropriate multiyear NMES 
action plan.
For the level 3 countries examined,
•	 Analysis of all level 3 countries confirms that their 
respective NMESs are “still under construction”—the 
appropriate institutional arrangements for M&E are 
often not well established or resourced and there is a 
need to clarify roles, relationships, and accountabili-
ties of the various actors implicated in the NMES. As 
noted above, establishing the appropriate institutional 
arrangements so that the generation of M&E informa-
tion is a normal course of doing business has proven to 
be a lengthy exercise
6—and one that likely has received 
too little attention in the past.
•	 This implies a need to work with senior officials to 
articulate how the current M&E system may need to be 
modified, both structurally and in its implementation, 
so as to improve its effectiveness in supporting results-
based public sector management. This likely includes 
addressing issues such as: increasing the use of M&E 
information across government; expanding the role of 
evaluation; linking M&E results to the policy, planning, 
and budgetary cycle; improving the measurement, 
monitoring, analysis, and reporting of results; as well 
as potential structural and resource implications for 
central agencies or ministries.
•	 Many of the capacity-building efforts need to be aimed 
at implementation/operationalization challenges for 
the NMES, that is, moving from theory to reality and 
gaining full value from the NMES. International good 
practices are useful to assist this exercise and to arrive 
at an identification of possible modifications to the 
current NMES.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8
•	 Key agencies need to be implicated in the develop-
ment and roll out of any NMES enhancements and 
institutional changes, either through participation 
in a high-level coordinating committee or via regular 
communications and updates from senior country 
officials.
•	 Once a high-level consensus is achieved, an appropri-
ate NMES action plan is needed for the way ahead, 
with specific goals and milestones to be monitored. 
The central M&E unit needs to have the author -
ity to proactively lead and champion this NMES 
development.
(iii) Supporting evaluation capacity building
For all countries, regardless of level of NMES development, 
•	 Formal acknowledgement of “evaluation” in the 
NMES strategy as a tool to measure and analyze 
results-oriented performance of government pro-
grams and policies critical to RBM—in effect, moving 
the thinking of “E” beyond a control- or audit-type 
function to a tool that assesses effectiveness as well as 
accountability and, in doing so, generates knowledge 
for decision makers.
•	 Use of log frame (logic model/results chain) approach 
to developing results-oriented performance indicators 
and cost-effective measurement strategies.
•	 Incorporating evaluation as a key component of the 
curriculum for the long-term M&E training and de-
velopment strategy.
For the level 1 and level 2 countries examined,
•	 Incorporate into M&E training an awareness of profes-
sional standards of practice and methods commonly 
employed in various types of evaluation.
•	 Introduce key elements associated with developing 
terms of reference and managing an evaluation.
For the level 3 countries examined,
•	 While having more experience and understanding 
of the NMES, level 3 countries still had considerable 
difficulty in measuring results—for a variety of reasons, 
one of which was the paucity of evaluations conducted 
(aside from internationally funded projects). 
•	 Incorporate into NMES strategy specific actions in-
tended to institutionalize evaluation as a tool of the 
NMES. This would include development of an evalu-
ation policy, standards, and guidelines that outline ex-
pectations, roles, and responsibilities for the systematic 
use of evaluation in the NMES. 
•	 The policy and guidelines would also include a clear 
expectation that evaluation is a part of the mandate of 
the central M&E function of government (conducting 
high-level and priority evaluations), and that it should 
be integrated into ministry-level programming, where 
key programs of government would, over time, be 
evaluated for their effectiveness. 
•	 Introduce, on a pilot basis, an evaluation of a pri-
ority area/topic for government. This should be 
conducted to serve as both a demonstration of the 
benefits that evaluation brings to the NMES as well 
as a learning experience, where country officials are 
actively engaged/mentored by international M&E 
experts.
•	 Identify a senior-level committee that would serve as 
a key forum for identifying priority topics for evalua-
tion; tabling evaluation findings; and ensuring follow-
through of evaluation recommendations.
(iv) Supporting the development of key enablers  
of the NMES 
NSAs—data development
•	 Data challenges are common across all countries and 
they need to recognize the importance of investing 
in data development. But, in the case of NMESs, 
the need to resolve data issues is more immediate 
and pressing for level 3 countries, given the positive 
correlation between NMES development and data 
development. 
•	 In the context of NMES development, data develop-
ment should not simply be left to the NSA—there 
should be coordination among the key central agencies. 
Ministry roles also need to be clarified and integrated 
with the broader (national) data development.
Evaluation associations—national, regional,  
international
•	 For all countries, development of a national evaluation 
association can help promote an M&E network and 
community of practice, as well as support professional 
development.
•	 Linking to Web sites and networks of regional and 
international evaluation associations is a cost-effective 
method of information sharing regarding M&E prac-
tices, as well as for identifying potential developmental 
opportunities.
Oversight bodies—monitoring the implementation  
of the NMES
•	 Some form of oversight over NMES development 
and implementation is critical for all countries. 
Regularly reviewing progress against the plan enables 
continuous learning and strategy adjustment. It is 
therefore important to ensure that there are clear 
accountabilities for various components of NMES 
development.
•	 For level 1 and 2 countries, oversight could be assisted 
by development partners working with a lead central
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9
agency. For level 3 countries, the central M&E unit (in 
a strong central agency), a high-level committee, or the 
NAO could play this role. For most NAOs, this would 
be a new role, thus requiring appropriate training or 
orientation.
Conclusion
Regardless of where a count ry may lie on the NMES 
continuum, it needs a strategy and action plan for NMES 
development if improvements are to be made—one that 
clearly articulates and assigns roles, responsibilities, and 
accountabilities along with milestones that establish ex -
pectations in terms of the pace and level of improvement. 
Monitoring its development and implementation in effect 
amounts to applying the concepts of 
M&E —both the learn-
ing and accountability aspects—to help grow and improve 
the NMES. Indeed, this is good practice at all levels of NMES 
development.
As an NMES matures, this level of oversight—ad -
dressing capacity gaps and identifying an appropriate 
strategy for building, enhancing, and modifying the 
NMES—implies being able to objectively assess the state, 
acceptance, and utilization of the current version of the 
NMES. This in itself could be threatening to officials 
aligned with NMES efforts. Without this knowledge 
though, of what is working and what is not (and why 
not), an appropriate capacity-building strategy will not 
be well informed or address any issues critical to NMES 
effectiveness and sustainability.
Finally, it should be noted that the NMES capacity-
building initiatives presented in this note are not intended 
to be comprehensive—only illustrative of the differences 
(and similarities) observed across countries at different 
levels of NMES development. These observations rein-
force the importance of conducting an M&E Diagnostic 
as a prerequisite to determining an appropriate M&E 
capacity-building strategy (Shepherd 2011). But even 
more, this note underscores the importance of addressing 
the fundamental issues of NMES development, even for 
countries that may appear to be further along the NMES 
continuum. 
About the Author
Robert Lahey was the founding head of the TBS Centre of 
Excellence for Evaluation, the Canadian government’s evalu-
ation policy center. He has headed evaluation units in a 
number of departments and agencies over a 32-year career 
in the Canadian public service. Since establishing his own 
consulting firm in 2004, he has advised many countries and 
organizations around the world on building M&E capacity 
appropriate to their circumstances. He has written and 
presented extensively to the international M&E community 
and is a member of Canada’s Evalution Credentialing Board. 
Lahey has been recognized by the Canadian Evaluation 
Society for his contribution to the theory and practice of 
evaluation in Canada. 
Notes
1. The NMES framework is further elaborated in Lahey 
(2013) and Lahey (2014).  
2. Robert Lahey assisted the World Bank’s CLEAR M&E 
Center serving Francophone Africa in Senegal in the study 
of Benin, Senegal and Mauritania, conducted over 2012–13 
(CLEAR 2013). He led a formal M&E Readiness Assess-
ment for Botswana’s National Strategy Office and the World 
Bank in 2013. In 2014, Lahey led an M&E Diagnostic for 
Ethiopia’s National Planning Commission and the African 
Development Bank.
3. The M&E Diagnostic reports conducted for Botswana 
and Ethiopia are not currently available. In developing this 
report, however, analysis has shown strong similarities in 
terms of NMES development and capacity gaps between 
each of these two countries and Benin, deemed to be a level 
3 performer, as discussed in CLEAR (2013).
4. While data serve as a critical element/input to enable 
an NMES, it needs to be emphasized that the NMES is 
not simply a mechanism to generate data. The NMES 
links information sets together and within a particular 
context to provide analysis, knowledge, and advice that 
facilitate critical thinking and evidence-based decision 
making.
5. A more complete discussion of potential initiatives to 
include in capacity-building strategies for countries at each 
of three levels is provided in CLEAR (2013).
6. In all countries, the adjustments needed to institutional-
ize M&E (on both the demand and supply side) may be cul-
tural as well as organizational, and international experience 
has shown that this requires considerable time to evolve.
References
CLEAR. 2013. An Assessment of Demand for Monitoring, Evalu-
ation and Performance Management Information and Services. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. (http://www.theclearinitiative.
org/clear_pubs.html)
Goldman, Ian, Ronette Engala, Ismail Akhalwaya, Nolwazi Gasa, 
Bernadette Leon, Hassen Mohamed, and Sean Phillips. 2012. 
“Establishing a National M&E System in South Africa.” Special 
Series on the Nuts & Bolts of M&E Systems Number 21, World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
Lahey, Robert. 2013. “National Performance Reporting as a Driver 
for National M&E Development.” In Development Evaluation 
in Times of Turbulence, ed. Ray C. Rist et al. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
10
_____. 2014. “National Evaluation (or M&E) Capacity Develop-
ment: A Framework for Assessing M&E Needs.” In Moving 
beyond the Conversation about Poverty:  Shifting the Focus to 
Inequality, ed. Ray C. Rist et al. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mackay, Keith. 2007. How to Build M&E Systems to Support Better 
Government. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Menon, Saraswathi. 2010. “ A Perspective from the United Nations 
on National Ownership and Capacity in Evaluation.” In From 
Policies to Results: Developing Capacities for Country Monitoring 
and Evaluation Systems, ed. Marco Segone. Geneva: UNICEF.
This note is sponsored by the Poverty Global Practice of the World Bank Group. The views expressed in this note are those of the author and do not 
necessarily reflect the position of the World Bank Group. Additional publications and information can be found at www.worldbank.org/poverty.
Picciotto, Robert. 2007. “The New Environment for Development 
Evaluation.” American Journal of Evaluation 28 (4): 509–21.
Segone, Marco. 2010. “Moving from Policies to Results by Devel-
oping National Capacities for Country-Led Monitoring and 
Evaluation Systems.” In From Policies to Results: Developing 
Capacities for Country Monitoring and Evaluation Systems, ed. 
Marco Segone. Geneva: UNICEF.
Shepherd, Geoffrey. 2011. “Conducting Diagnoses of M&E Sys-
tems and Capacities.” Special Series on the Nuts & Bolts of M&E 
Systems Number 16, World Bank, Washington, DC.