<<<PAGE=1>>>
https://doi.org/10.1177/13563890231166981
Evaluation
2023, Vol. 29(2) 161 –167
© The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:  
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/13563890231166981
journals.sagepub.com/home/evi
Strengthening evaluation 
capacity in Government:  
Why institutionalisation  
matters and why it is  
not sufficient
*
Daniele Lamarque
European Evaluation Society; European Court of Auditors, France
If we are interested in promoting and strengthening evaluation in a country, we know that the 
extent to which evaluation is institutionalised is key. Investigating the strengths and weak-
nesses of institutional factors and identifying their limits help us understand under which 
conditions these factors will make a difference – and what is still needed. I will be drawing on 
several studies and reports – as well as my own experience – that address the issue of how 
evaluation is institutionalised internationally. While all these sources confirm the positive 
influence of institutional arrangements, they also show that evaluation develops unevenly and 
slowly and these developments are often difficult to specify or measure.
Assessing how far evaluation is institutionalised
The International Atlas of Evaluation (Furubo et al., 2002) provided the first systematic com-
parative overview of evaluation culture and practice across 21 OECD (Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) countries. This overview was updated 10 years 
later for 19 countries (Jacob et al., 2015). This update concentrated on nine indicators also 
used in the first Atlas to measure the maturity of evaluation in a country and compare different 
national evaluation cultures. These indicators give a good overview of what it means when we 
say evaluation is institutionalised:
*This is an edited version of a Keynote address delivered to a Workshop on the ‘Institutionalisation of Public Policy in 
Portugal’ organised in Lisbon by PlanAPP and OECD in November 2022.
Corresponding author:
Daniele Lamarque, European Court of Auditors, Paris, France.
Email: daniele.lamarque@orange.fr
1166981EVI0010.1177/13563890231166981EvaluationLamarque: Why institutionalisation matters
research-article2023
Speech
<<<PAGE=2>>>
162 Evaluation 29(2)
– Evaluation takes place in many policy domains – there are regular evaluation activities 
across various policy fields;
– There is a supply of evaluators specialising in different disciplines – evaluators from 
different academic disciplines have mastered different evaluation methods and provide 
advice over evaluations;
– Discussions and debates fuel a national evaluation discourse;
– A national evaluation society exists – evaluators have their own societies, networks or 
frequently attend meetings of international societies that discuss evaluation standards 
or ethics;
– Institutional arrangements exist in government for conducting evaluations and dis-
seminating their results to decision-makers;
– There are institutional arrangements in Parliament for conducting and disseminating 
evaluations to decision-makers;
– There is evaluation pluralism within each policy domain: different people or agencies 
commission and perform evaluations;
– Evaluation activities occur within the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) – and these 
SAIs either conduct evaluation activities themselves or oversee conditions for under -
taking evaluations within the public sector: maybe even carrying out different forms of 
meta-evaluation;
– Evaluations focus on outcomes as well as inputs/outputs; public sector evaluations 
need to demonstrate that public interventions actually have impacts on the problems 
they were intended to solve.
The results reported in the updated Atlas were broadly positive. It showed that in the interven-
ing years, the majority of countries had improved their practices and achieved a higher degree 
of maturity of evaluation culture.
More recently, other studies and reports have also addressed evaluation capacity from an 
institutional perspective. These studies and reports have shown that there continues to be 
discernible, if uneven, progress in many countries. For example, Stockmann et al. (2020) 
include reviews of the institutionalisation of evaluation in 16 countries plus the European 
Union (EU) and also provide an extensive bibliography on the topic. Systematic informa-
tion and comparisons can also be found in various OECD reports (see, for example, OECD, 
2020).
Evaluation in the executive branch: A prominent but 
compromised role
Most studies highlight the prominent role of the executive branch – what OECD calls the 
Centre of Government (COG) – in promoting the institutionalisation of evaluation. This 
indeed is the focus of the 2022 Recommendation of the OECD Council on public policy 
evaluation (OECD, 2022).
Having the primary initiative of designing and implementing policies, the government 
holds several instruments for facilitating the development of evaluation. It can lay down regu-
lations or guidelines on evaluation, insert evaluation clauses in new regulations, issue ex ante 
assessments, develop performance measurement in budgetary documents, ensure coordina-
tion, develop training and introduce quality assessment systems.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Lamarque: Why institutionalisation matters 163
Although ex ante evaluation and regulatory impact assessment (RIA) are not defined as 
evaluation as such, they can play a significant role in enhancing the overall evaluation cycle. 
The EU Commission experience shows how they can contribute to designing the intervention 
logic, identifying policy options and their relative impacts, and preparing for future monitor -
ing and evaluation. RIAs can also determine what indicators should be used, who will be 
responsible for gathering which data, against what benchmarks of success or failure, and when 
an evaluation should take place. The key components of RIAs for preparing future evaluations 
are: problem definition and use of evaluation, objectives and intervention logic, impacts, 
future monitoring and evaluation.
However, although two-thirds of countries surveyed by OECD have adopted some kind of 
legal framework and three-quarters have adopted evaluation guidelines, the institutionalisa-
tion of evaluations as part of the responsibility of the government remains difficult to achieve. 
A wide range of explanations of this limited progress have been put forward:
•• If not internalised or incorporated into the culture of administrations, legal obligations may 
be neglected or implemented in a formal way that does not influence decision-making.
•• Embedding evaluation in the budgetary process is key for the development of sound 
management. It is necessary to increase efficiency and accountability and usually 
requires the involvement of Parliament and civil servants in the process. However, the 
OECD, among others, has noted limited progress in such ‘embedding’. Explanations 
offered include different timescales – evaluations are rarely conducted on an annual 
basis – and irrelevant performance indicators – not sufficiently related to outcomes.
•• Varone and Jacob (2004) analyse different contextual and institutional factors that may 
have an impact on the institutionalisation of evaluation, and consequently on its culture. 
They found that ‘New Public Management’ reforms that prioritise efficiency and ration-
alisation may weaken evaluation. For example, addressing budgetary deficits leads to 
using evaluation as a tool for justifying cuts.
•• Embedding evaluation in the decision-making process and fostering evaluation feed-
back have to be connected to a strong evidence-informed policy system and centres of 
expertise – which are not always present.
•• Sectoral evaluation systems facilitate professionalisation (e.g. in development aid, 
education or other domains) but may lead to evaluator-capture conducting ritual 
evaluations or sometimes self-appraisals.
The ‘whole-of-government approach’ recommended by OECD allows a more comprehensive 
framework for evaluation, able to encompass a series of interlinked policies and to address the 
systemic challenge of complexity. It should be noted, however, that this framework, and most 
studies on institutionalisation, does not take into account subnational levels (or do so only mar-
ginally). This gap is particularly damaging considering that the great majority of public policies 
are implemented at different levels of government, with a strong involvement of local entities.
Institutionalising evaluation depends on a complex partnership
Although governments play a significant role, evaluation cannot be only dependent on their 
sole action. Developing evaluation capacities involves a complex partnership of different 
institutions or stakeholders acting collectively or at least interacting with each other.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
164 Evaluation 29(2)
Parliaments, as key partners of the executive for policy-making and part of the democratic 
process, are often cited as potential strong actors in evaluation. However, it must be noted that 
parliaments play a rather weak role in evaluation in Europe (with the exception of Switzerland).
This situation is far from being satisfactory because of the parliamentary dual function in 
the legislative process and for the control of the executive. Parliaments should help to improve 
the law-making process, foster public performance, and hold the government to account. They 
can work with the support of the SAI or academia.
The main reason of this weakness probably lies in the lack of time and expertise, as well as 
the absence of real political will.
SAIs are encouraged to perform evaluations (INTOSAI GOV 9400, 2016), and a number of 
SAIs have extended their performance audit activities into the evaluation sphere. They can be 
active players in this domain, provided that they clarify their intentions, distinguishing, for 
example, between evaluation and compliance or performance audit. They also need to adopt 
relevant organisational and methodological arrangements. SAIs can contribute both by per -
forming evaluations on their own initiative or at the request of Parliament and by checking 
how evaluation works within the government (as suggested by OECD).
There is no evidence that strengthening institutionalisation of evaluation necessarily leads 
to improvements in result utilisation and quality. Regulations may help, but formal obligations 
to evaluate cannot replace both individual and collective commitment to adopt an ethic of 
effectiveness in public administration. This of course requires that administrations abandon 
what is often a legalistic rather than an effectiveness culture. We have learned that all institu-
tional actors implicated in the framing and delivery of evaluation have to work in cooperation 
with each other, if they are to ensure a sound and sustainable development of evaluation in the 
public sector.
Institutionalisation affects all the objectives that evaluation sets 
out to achieve
I have suggested that the institutional framework of evaluation is made up of several actors, 
public and private, vested with different responsibilities and functions throughout all policy 
processes that underpin public action. The institutional framework therefore has to be ana-
lysed as an ecosystem where interrelations are at least as important as individual roles, and 
institutional culture is as crucial as institutional responsibility. I have also argued that any 
institutional framework needs to be supported by a political will and a common awareness of 
performance issues. All actors have their limits and weaknesses, but they are stronger when 
they cooperate.
This issue can be more deeply understood in relation to the key objectives of evaluation, 
objectives that are continuously presented as pivotal although scarcely achieved.
•• The contribution of evaluation to improving the decision-making process cannot be 
achieved without a strong connection between relevant actors be they political or 
administrative, fulfilling responsibilities of policy design, adoption and implementa-
tion. This raises the sensitive question of the role of expertise and knowledge to inform 
both decision-makers and evaluators, and facilitate evidence-informed policy-making. 
The role of academia, the contribution of different disciplines, the balance between 
quantitative and qualitative approaches, and their relevance to the problems to assess
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Lamarque: Why institutionalisation matters 165
are all relevant here. However, it is also essential to bear in mind that policy objectives 
are per se ambiguous and multiple, and that power resists most attempts to be rational-
ised or disciplined (Gilbert and Verrier, 2016).
•• The quality of evaluations, a condition for their credibility and acceptation, and their 
capacity to build a strong culture and practice, appears to be a weak point in most coun-
tries (OECD, 2022). This shortcoming refers to the capacity of experts to enter the field 
of meta-evaluation; trigger debates between academia, practitioners and other partners; 
and promote ethical and professional evaluation standards. The role of networks, public 
debates, training and academic courses, events held by national evaluation societies, 
should not be minimised. International and national networks are crucial.
•• The role of evaluation in strengthening democracy is universally espoused but still 
difficult to define and fulfil. Experience and studies confirm the weak contribution of 
civil society promoting the emergence and the use of evaluations, despite the fact that 
participatory approaches are a prominent part of evaluation activities and research.
•• Evaluation is expected to reinforce cultural change in government and address the 
growing complexity of public policies. The presentation of the institutional framework 
gives the impression of a rational and well-organised landscape with clear roles devoted 
to each actor. The contribution of evaluation to encouraging cultural change is limited 
partly because the reality of evaluation’s institutional framework is not as rational or 
well-organised as we would like it to be.
Part of the explanation of why evaluation does not consistently meet its objectives stems 
from the discrepancies between the espoused discourse and observed practice among most 
institutional actors in the evaluation space. It would certainly be difficult to find any actor in 
any country that would not claim that public action should be result-oriented, open to public 
consultation and regularly measured. However, practices often diverge from this consensual 
affirmation. Many administrations remain focused on regulations, and auditors prefer com-
pliance audit to performance audit, since the former is easier to perform, more familiar and 
more attractive for the media. Politicians recommend evaluation, but are more reluctant when 
it comes to evaluating their own decisions, and remain convinced that the most appropriate 
evaluation is the election.
The discourse about evaluation as such (its methods, its merits, its standards) remains 
mainly concentrated within specialised networks, evaluation societies, academia or sympo-
sia. Many civil servants are able to speak of performance and adapt their management accord-
ingly while still ignoring evaluation. Evaluation issues are rarely visible to the general public, 
through either traditional media or social networks. And when such issues are discussed, 
evaluation is perceived as a technocratic activity, or as a scientific approach that can be con-
tradicted (which is normal), or, which is worse, as non-reliable given the complexity of real-
world policy-making and implementation.
The importance of multi-level governance including the local level
Among the most urgent of these real-world complexities is the evaluation of shared or multi-
level policies. These remain a grey area. Most assessments of the institutional framework of 
evaluation applies primarily to central government and does not take into account subnational 
entities present in federal states or decentralised countries. This gap should be bridged if
<<<PAGE=6>>>
166 Evaluation 29(2)
evaluators want to respond to emerging issues, such as the specificities of territories and the 
different and often contradicting expectations of citizens towards public policies – like environ-
ment, mobility or agriculture, for example. Similarly, the evaluation of European programmes 
is too often undertaken by specialised units linked to the Commission, while such evaluations 
can be quite disconnected from other national, regional or local policy evaluations.
It appears increasingly necessary that evaluations address local issues, notwithstanding the 
legal and institutional constraints. Three main categories of evaluations serving local needs 
can be identified:
•• Local actors need to evaluate their development projects and strategies;
•• They need to know about the effects that interventions planned and implemented by 
central actors produce on their territory;
•• They need to address the challenge of coordination, as we know from studies of 
multi-level governance, that many local problems involve actors with overlapping 
responsibilities that intersect at the local level.
Conclusion
Despite definite but uneven progress, limited institutionalisation continues to hold back evalu-
ation culture and practice. Changes in the way the executive arm of government organises 
evaluation are not enough. Many more partners have to engage. Evaluators have, more than 
ever, to encourage the development of evaluation within governments, Parliaments and SAIs. 
Evaluation societies play a key role and deserve more resources and active support from their 
members and from academic communities. The public debate about how evaluations are con-
ducted and utilised must go on.
However, new challenges are arising, involving actors, strategies, territories or sectors of 
society, which require specific approaches – all of this at a time when a revolution in the 
data on which evaluators depend is well underway. Key questions raised by the studies on 
institutionalisation should inspire national models taking into account historical, political 
and cultural characteristics, at different levels of our multi-level governance systems. These 
need to be tailored to national specificities although working with common institutional 
frameworks so as to maintain comparability between national systems.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or 
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
References
Furubo JE, Rist RC and Sandahl R (eds) (2002) International Atlas of Evaluation. New Brunswick, NJ; 
London: Transaction Publishers.
Gibert P and Verrier PÉ (2016) Peut-on discipliner le pouvoir? Étude sur le contrôle de la rationalité 
managériale par le juge dans trois innovations législatives françaises. Politiques et Management 
Public 33(3–4): 165–96.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Lamarque: Why institutionalisation matters 167
INTOSAI GOV 9400 (2016) Guidelines on the evaluation of public policies. Available at: https://
www.eca.europa.eu/sites/evaluation-public-policies-programmes/en/Documents/INTOSAI%20
GOV%209400%20-%20Guidelines%20on%20the%20Evaluation%20of%20public%20policies  
%20-%20Benjamin%20Negre.pdf
Jacob S, Speer S and Furubo JE (2015) The institutionalization of evaluation matters: Updating the 
International Atlas of Evaluation 10 years later. Evaluation 21(1): 6–31.
OECD (2020) OECD Public Governance Reviews: Improving Governance With Policy Evaluation – 
Lessons From Country Experiences. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2022) Recommendation of the Council on public policy evaluation (OECD/LEGAL/0478). 
Available at: https://strata.gov.lt/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Recommendation-on-Public-Policy-
Evaluation.pdf
Stockmann R, Meyer W and Taube L (eds) (2020) The Institutionalisation of Evaluation in Europe. 
Palgrave Macmillan, Switzerland.
Varone F and Jacob S (2004) Institutionnalisation de l’évaluation et nouvelle gestion publique: Un état 
des lieux comparatif. Revue Internationale De Politique Comparée 11(2): 271–92.
Daniele Lamarque is Past President of the European Evaluation Society and was between 2014 and 2019 
a member of Cour des comptes européenne (European Court of Auditors). She was a member of the 
French Court of Auditors (1984–2013) and chair of two Regional Audit Chambers (1997–2005 and 
2011–2013) and participated in several institutional systems set up after 1990 for the development of 
public policy evaluation in France.