<<<PAGE=1>>>
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting ResearchEuropean Psychologist 2007; Vol. 12(4):290–300© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
New Developments in
and Directions for
Goal-Setting Research
Gary P. Latham1 and Edwin A. Locke2
1University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada,1University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
Abstract. Goal setting is an “open” theory built on inductive findings from empirical research. The present paper briefly summarizes
this theory. Emphasis is then given to findings that have been obtained in the present millennium with regard to (1) the high performance
cycle, (2) the role of goals as mediators of personality effects on performance, (3) personality variables as moderators of goal effects on
performance, the effect of (4) distal, (5) proximal, and (6) learning goals on performance on tasks that are complex for people, (7) the
ways in which priming affects the impact of a goal, (8) the interrelationship between goal setting and affect, and (9) the results of goal
setting by teams. Potential directions for research on goal setting in the workplace are suggested with regard to goal abandonment,
perfectionism, an employee’s age, subconscious goals, and the relationship between goals and knowledge.
Keywords: goal setting, high performance cycle, affect, teams
From the end of the 19th century through the first 60 years
of the 20th century, goal setting was used sporadically as
an intervention in “one-shot” atheoretical studies. For ex-
ample, Bryan and Hartner (1897) found that the perfor-
mance of telegraph operators improved when they were
working toward a specific task goal. Taylor (1911) advo-
cated giving each employee a task, a specific, difficult
amount of work to complete, to a certain quality, on the
basis of time and motion study. Wyatt, Frost, and Stock
(1934) found that boredom was reduced by giving factory
workers “definite aims” to complete a certain number of
units in a given period of time. Mace (1935) conducted a
series of laboratory experiments where he showed that the
standard that was set affected a person’s performance, but
only when the person’s ability had developed to the point
where there was a reasonable expectation by the individ-
ual that the standard could be reached. Otherwise, urging
people to do their best led to the highest performance. Ry-
an (1947, 1970) argued the importance of intentions to
anticipate future obligations or to avoid them. Meyer, Kay,
and French (1965) showed the importance of including
goal setting as an essential aspect of a performance ap-
praisal.
These studies were ad hoc in that they were conducted
without building on the findings of those that preceded
them. There was no theoretical framework to guide these
studies, nor was one built from these studies. There was
no attempt to discover where or why goal setting affects
performance and satisfaction.
The quality and quantity of studies on goal setting in-
creased dramatically in the latter half of the 20th century
with the emergence of Locke and Latham’s (1990a, 2002)
goal-setting theory. By the dawn of the 21st century, the
theory had generated more than 1,000 studies (Mitchell
& Daniels, 2003). Hence, the motivational benefits are
now well known to practitioners as well as scientists
(Borgogni & Petitta, 2004; Latham, 2004). Yet the theo-
ry’s content continues to be developed inductively to the
present day.
The genesis of the theory, over 40 years ago, eschewed
formal deductive propositions to be tested one by one.
Rather, the empirical research on this theory began with
one specific question: Does goal setting affect one’s per-
formance on a task (e.g., Locke, 1968). With the discov-
ery that the answer is yes, research was conducted to an-
swer further questions but this was not done in any par-
ticular order. The question of external validity was
examined by determining whether goal setting affects
performance positively on different tasks in sundry situ-
ations (e.g., Latham & Locke, 1975). In this time period,
lateral integration was successfully explored by looking
at the relationship between specific challenging goals
and related concepts at the same level of abstraction,
namely, feedback, participation in setting a goal, incen-
tives, satisfaction, and a person’s self-efficacy (e.g.,
Latham & Yukl, 1975; Latham, Mitchell, & Dossett,
1978; Locke, Cartledge, & Koeppel, 1968). Similarly,
there were attempts at vertical integration. Goal setting
was investigated with regard to individual differences re-
garding values and personality (e.g., Yukl & Latham,
DOI 10.1027/1016-9040.12.4.290
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
<<<PAGE=2>>>
1978). The theory was also elaborated upon in terms of
identification of the mediators that explain why goal set-
ting increases performance (e.g., Locke & Bryan, 1969;
Terborg, 1976). Finally, the boundary conditions of goal
setting were explored (e.g., Wood, Mento, & Locke,
1987). The results of these studies have been summarized
elsewhere (Locke & Latham, 1990a; Locke & Latham,
2002; Latham, 2007). Suffice it to state here that goal
setting affects performance in laboratory, simulated, and
organizational settings regardless of whether the individ-
ual, group, or (small) organization (or an organizational
unit) is the level of analysis (e.g., Locke & Latham, 2002;
Weldon, Jehn, & Pradhem, 1991). Holding goal difficulty
constant, a goal increases performance regardless of
whether it is assigned, self-set, or set participatively
(Latham, Erez, & Locke, 1988; Latham & Frayne, 1989;
Latham, Steele, & Saari, 1982). Moreover, goals affect
performance in time spans ranging from one minute to
25 years (Locke, 1982; Latham & Baldes, 1975; Howard
& Bray, 1988). These findings have been obtained in
Asia, Australia, Europe, and North America (Locke &
Latham, 2002).
The purpose of the present paper is three-fold. First,
the theory of goal setting, based on the above data, is
explained. Second, new findings in the present millenni-
um are reviewed with regard to the high performance cy-
cle, personality, learning goals, framing of goals, affect,
and group goals. These findings are not presented in any
particular order because there is no logical basis for doing
so. Third, future directions for goal-setting research in
the workplace are suggested regarding goal abandon-
ment, perfectionism, an employee’s age, subconscious
goals, and the relationship between goals and knowledge.
Goal Setting Theory
The theory of goal setting states that there is a positive
linear relationship between a specific high goal and task
performance. Thus, the theory makes explicit that a spe-
cific high goal leads to even higher performance than urg-
ing people to do their best. A goal also affects satisfaction
in that it serves as the standard for evaluating one’s own
performance. A higher goal requires higher performance
for a person to experience positive affect than does com-
mitment to a lower goal. Two factors affect the goals that
a person chooses: the importance of the goal to the indi-
vidual and self-efficacy, namely, self-confidence that the
goal for a specific task is, indeed, attainable. The media-
tors of goal setting are choice, effort, persistence, and
strategy. Goals are moderated by ability, goal commit-
ment, feedback in relation to goal pursuit, the complexity
of the task for an individual or group, and situational fac-
tors (e.g., presence of needed resources). Goal concepts
have been integrated into a longitudinal high performance
cycle (HPC; Locke & Latham, 1990a,b).
New Developments
The High Performance Cycle
The HPC shown in Figure 1 provides a framework for un-
derstanding motivation in the workplace based on goal the-
ory and, in addition, provides a basis for making interven-
tions (Latham, 2007). In brief, the HPC states that an em-
ployee’s motivation is affected by specific challenges and
demands such as high goals. Goal moderators were noted
above. For example, people with low self-efficacy are un-
likely to choose or commit to a high goal whereas the op-
posite is true for those individuals with high self-efficacy.
Indeed, people with high self-efficacy not only commit to
high goals, they typically set even higher ones upon goal
attainment.
The mean effect size for goals is larger for simple than
complex tasks, but this difference disappears when people
with complex tasks possess the requisite knowledge and
skills to perform them (e.g., Latham et al., 1978). Goal ef-
fects work through the mechanisms (mediators) noted
above.
The HPC resolves the century-old debate regarding the
relationship between job satisfaction and performance. For
example, the HPC does not posit that job satisfaction leads
directly to job performance. Rather, job satisfaction affects
an employee’s commitment to the employing organization,
which in turn leads to employee commitment to future
challenges. Hence, the recursive nature of the HPC shown
in Figure 1.
An enumerative review of the literature provided strong
support for the individual facets of the HPC (Latham,
Locke & Fassina, 2002). Only one study has attempted to
test the HPC empirically. Because that study was missed in
the enumerative review, it is reported here. Using LISREL,
Selden and Brewer (2000) analyzed the US Office of Per-
sonnel Management’s (OPM) survey of federal govern-
ment employees where the sample size consisted of 2,474
civil servants. Since the OPM survey was not constructed
specifically for testing the HPC, Selden and Brewer fo-
cused on items, based as best they could, on the concepts’
descriptions provided  by Locke  and  Latham  (1990a,
1990b). Thus, in many cases they had to use approximate
measures to represent goal concepts. For example, an indi-
vidual’s performance consisted of that person’s most recent
performance appraisal. Contingent rewards were assessed
through two questions that probed an employee’s percep-
tion of the administration of performance-based pay.
Consistent with the HPC, high demands (e.g., “my job
is challenging,” “people in my workgroup are expected to
work hard”) were shown to have a significant positive ef-
fect on an employee’s performance. Higher levels of com-
mitment led to higher performance. Supervisory support,
which is a means of gaining commitment, showed the
strongest relationship to performance. This was a key find-
ing of Ronan, Latham, and Kinne’s (1973) study of loggers.
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research 291
© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300
<<<PAGE=3>>>
In addition, the authors found that employees who believed
that they could accomplish something worthwhile (which
implies goal importance) consistently outperformed their
colleagues who thought otherwise. Self-efficacy was also
positively linked to performance. Employees with tasks
that were complex, defined in their study as tasks with con-
flicting work assignments, where the appropriate course of
action was unknown and, hence, needed to be identified,
had lower performance ratings than their counterparts who
had less complex tasks.
With regard to contingent rewards, people who per-
formed well perceived that they received larger monetary
rewards than their peers who did not perform well. More-
over, there was a positive relationship between perceptions
of contingent rewards and job satisfaction. Employees with
higher levels of job satisfaction were also the people who
were more committed to their organization.
With regard to practical significance, the authors con-
cluded that the HPC and the empirical findings derived
from it “have important implications for policy makers and
public managers” (Selden & Brewer, 2000, p. 545). How-
ever, because the data were cross-sectional rather than lon-
gitudinal, and the data consisted solely of self-reports, the
results must be viewed with caution. To study a causal mo-
tivational cycle requires a longitudinal design, preferably
one that allows for the collection of data from multiple
sources. Finally, as noted, Selden and Brewer did not have
available ideal measures of the concepts they used (King
& King, 1990).
Indirect support for the recursive aspect of the HPC can
be found in the study by Ilies and Judge (2005). Positive
affect, which was likely associated with self-efficacy, me-
diated a significant proportion of the relationship between
feedback and future goals that were set. After meeting or
exceeding their goals, people did not decrease their effort
so as to minimize the positive discrepancy between their
performance and their goals. Rather they set higher goals
to attain even higher performance. Although this is gener-
ally the case, individual differences with regard to person-
ality need to be taken into account.
Personality
Missing from the HPC is an emphasis on personality. This
is because, until the final decade of the 20th century, theo-
ries of work motivation, whether they focused primarily on
behavior or cognition, downplayed the importance of per-
sonality (e.g., Mitchell, 1979). In their review of the liter-
ature, Locke, Shaw, Saari, and Latham (1981) concluded
that the only consistent finding regarding personality traits
and goal setting effects on performance was inconsistency.
In the present millennium, this is no longer the case.
One trait that has received considerable attention is goal
orientation. Dweck’s (1999, p. 1040) goal-orientation the-
ory states that “adaptive motivational patterns are those
that promote the establishment, maintenance, and attain-
ment of personally challenging and personally valued
Figure 1.The high performance cycle.
292 G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
<<<PAGE=4>>>
achievement goals. Maladaptive patterns, then, are associ-
ated with a failure to establish reasonable, valued goals, to
maintain effective striving toward those goals, or ultimate-
ly, to attain valued goals that are potentially within one’s
reach.” People with a learning goal orientation focus on
mastering new tasks. Errors are viewed by them as inherent
in the learning process. Those with a performance goal ori-
entation choose tasks that are likely to allow them to look
good in the eyes of others; they avoid those where they are
unlikely to do well (VandeWalle, Cron, & Slocum, 2001).
As was the case in the Ilies and Judge study, Donovan
and Williams (2003) also examined the goal revision pro-
cess. In general, college athletes were found to set their
distal goals for the season considerably higher than their
best performance during the previous year. Goal orienta-
tion was a moderator. Those with a performance goal ori-
entation, who believed that one’s ability is fixed, lowered
their end-of-season goals when the performance discrepan-
cy with their mid-season goal was negative.
Brett and VandeWalle (1999) found that goal orientation
did not affect performance directly; rather it was mediated
by the goals that are set. Those people with a learning goal
orientation tend to select a learning goal while those with
a performance goal disposition tend to select a performance
goal that they believe is attainable.
Adler and Weiss (1988), however, argued that setting a
specific, challenging goal creates a strong situation that at-
tenuates the effect of personality on a person’s behavior.
Hence, goal orientation researchers seldom include the set-
ting of a specific high goal (a state) in their experiments.
To remove this gap in the literature, Seijts, Latham, Tasa,
and Latham (2004) investigated both goal setting and goal
orientation on the same task.
As is the case with a performance goal, Seijts et al.
(2004) found that setting a specific high learning goal also
creates a strong situation. Using a complex business simu-
lation of the US cellular phone industry, the authors found,
consistent with Dweck’s theory, that both a “prove” and an
“avoid” performance goal orientation correlated negatively
with a person’s performance in the “do your best,” a weak
condition. A learning goal orientation correlated positively
with performance when people were urged to do their best.
However, setting a specific, high, learning goal, a state, led
to significantly higher performance than either a specific,
high, performance goal or a vague goal to “do your best”
regardless of a person’s goal orientation. However, the ef-
fect of learning goals on performance was enhanced for
people with a learning goal orientation. Self-efficacy and
information search, which were reciprocally related, medi-
ated the effect of specific, high, learning goals.
Judge, Locke, and Durham (1997) developed a theory
of traits that they labeled core self-evaluations (CSE). This
is because the four traits are based on a person’s appraisals
of people, events, and things in relation to the individual.
The core self-evaluations are an aggregate measure of (1)
self-esteem, (2) locus of control, (3) neuroticism, and (4)
overall confidence in one’s ability to deal with a variety of
situations in one’s life. Erez and Judge (2001) found that
these core evaluations together predict motivation and per-
formance, whereas when used as individual variables, each
of them does so less consistently. Specifically Erez and
Judge found that the CSE predicted goal setting, which, in
turn, influenced strategies that affected an employee’s sales
performance.
Locke (2001) as well as Baum, Locke, and Smith (2001)
found that the relationship between personality and perfor-
mance is mediated by situationally specific goals and self-
efficacy. Baum and Locke (2004) conducted a 6-year fol-
low-up study of entrepreneurs. They found that personality
traits have an indirect rather than a direct effect on perfor-
mance through a superordinate goal or vision, goal setting,
and self-efficacy.
Proximal and Distal Learning and
Performance Goals
Fundamental to goal-setting theory is the assertion, stated
earlier, of a positive motivational effect of a specific high
goal on performance. A challenge to that assertion came
from a study by Kanfer and Ackerman (1989). They
showed that in the early stages of learning, contrary to the
theory, urging people to do their best leads to higher per-
formance than a specific high goal. Sheer effort and persis-
tence to attain a specific level of performance taxes the
limited cognitive resources necessary for task mastery. At
least two factors appear to mitigate this finding.
First, proximal goals can be set so as to facilitate what
Frese and Zapf (1994) term error management. For exam-
ple, Latham and Seijts (1999) showed the importance in
highly dynamic settings of actively seeking feedback and
reacting quickly to it when pursuing an outcome goal. After
replicating Kanfer and Ackerman’s finding of the superi-
ority of a vague “do best” goal relative to those with a dis-
tal, specific, high goal regarding earnings, they found that
people, who were paid on a piece-rate basis to make toys
under conditions where the amount of money paid per toy
changed continuously without warning, had the highest
performance when proximal goals were set. Feedback from
a proximal goal provides information on whether a per-
son’s picture of reality is congruent with distal goal attain-
ment. There is an increase in information feedback when
proximal goals are set in addition to a distal goal.
When the knowledge or skill for attaining a goal is un-
known, a second approach to mitigating the findings of
Kanfer and Ackerman is to set a learning goal. The primary
distinction between a performance and a learning goal is
the framing of the instructions. The emphasis of a perfor-
mance goal is on the performance outcome to be obtained
(e.g., a score of 95 or more on an exam, increase revenue
by 20%, reduce costs by 15%). A search for information to
enable goal attainment is not emphasized because the req-
uisite knowledge, skills, and ability are treated as a given.
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research 293
© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Choice, effort, persistence, and ability, that is, extant
knowledge and skill, are all that is required. A performance
goal cues an individual to recall the appropriate strategies
and/or skills (Locke et al., 1981).
A learning goal, in contrast to a performance goal,
changes one’s focus when the strategy or strategies to attain
the goal is not known. Hence, the instructions are framed
so that attention is given to the discovery of the strategies,
processes, or procedures necessary to perform a task effec-
tively (Seijts & Latham, 2005). A person’s unitary atten-
tional pool of resources, consistent with Kanfer and Acker-
man’s (1989) cognitive resource allocation theory, is ex-
plicitly directed to learning/mastering the task rather than
worrying about the performance outcome.
Latham, Seijts, and Crim (2006) showed that on a task
that is complex for people, the higher the learning goal the
higher their performance. Cognitive ability and goal com-
mitment affected strategy development, which in turn af-
fected performance. Contrary to previous findings on per-
formance goals (e.g., Locke, 1965), the performance of
those lower in cognitive ability was more positively affect-
ed by the setting of increasingly difficult learning goals
than was the case for people higher in cognitive ability. As
the results in Figure 2 indicate, a specific high learning goal
and cognitive ability appear to compensate for one another
to some degree. People with lower cognitive ability who
were assigned a high learning goal approached the perfor-
mance of those with higher cognitive ability who were as-
signed a specific low learning goal.
As cited earlier, Seijts et al. (2004) found that assigning
a specific high learning goal, as is the case with an assigned
performance outcome goal (Adler & Weiss, 1988; Yukl &
Latham, 1978), masks individual differences in personality.
As is the case with a performance goal, task complexity
also appears to moderate the effect of a learning goal on
performance. On a task that was straightforward for people,
Winters and Latham (1996) found no significant differenc-
es in performance between those with a learning goal rel-
ative to those in the “do your best” condition. People with
a specific high performance goal had the highest perfor-
mance. Only when the task was complex for people did a
learning goal lead to higher performance than the other two
conditions. Consistent with Kanfer and Ackerman’s
(1989)results, the instruction to “do your best” led to higher
performance than the setting of a distal performance goal.
Drach-Zahavy and Erez (2002) replicated this finding.
People who were given a specific high learning goal re-
garding the discovery of appropriate strategies had higher
performance than those who were assigned either a specific
performance or a general “do best” goal. Taken together,
these studies suggest that learning goals, although different
conceptually in their emphasis from performance goals,
share similar theoretical and empirical properties.
Using a complex simulation, Noel and Latham (2006)
examined entrepreneurial behavior in starting up and main-
taining a business. Those who used a learning goal were
able to keep their simulated firms running longer than those
using a performance outcome goal. Strategy and self-effi-
cacy had a reciprocal mediating effect on performance.
Seijts and Latham (2001) examined the effect of setting
proximal goals in conjunction with a distal learning or a
distal outcome goal on a complex task that was stable rather
than dynamic. Again, those who were urged to do their best
performed better than those with a specific high perfor-
mance goal and, once again, their performance was signif-
icantly lower than those with a specific high learning goal.
Goal commitment was significantly higher to the learning
goal than it was to the performance goal. Moreover, self-
efficacy increased across conditions in the learning-goal
condition and decreased in the performance-goal condi-
tion. Mediation analyses revealed that strategies had a di-
rect effect on self-efficacy and an indirect effect on perfor-
mance. Although proximal goals had no direct effect on
performance, those individuals with proximal goals had a
significantly greater number of strategies than those with
only a distal goal. On a dynamic task there would likely be
a direct effect. Research is needed to test this hypothesis.
When people lack the knowledge to attain a goal, but the
appropriate behaviors are known by subject-matter experts,
a learning goal is neither necessary nor appropriate. Brown
and Latham (2002) found that behavioral goals, identified
through a job analysis, led to higher performance than the
setting of a learning goal or urging people to do their best.
Both Noel (1997) and Masuda (2006), working indepen-
dently, investigated the effect of setting learning and per-
formance goals simultaneously on a task that was complex
for people. Consistent with cognitive resource allocation
theory, Noel found that the addition of a performance goal
hurt, rather than helped, the performance of groups relative
to those with only a learning goal.
Masuda provided participants with strategies that had to
be learned. Her findings, contrary to Noel’s (1997), showed
that if either learning or performance goals were high, or
if both were high for an individual, performance was high
as compared to other goal combinations. The number of
strategies learned was highly correlated with performance.
Low High
Goal Level
Per
formance High CA
Moderate CA
Low CA
Figure 2. Graphic depiction of the goal difficulty level ×
cognitive ability interaction on performance.
294 G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
<<<PAGE=6>>>
This study differs from the Noel as well as the Seijts and
Latham (2001) study, in that the requisite strategies in the
latter two studies had to be discovered “from scratch” after
the learning goal was set. Her study also differs from both
the Brown and Latham (2002), and Earley and Perry (1987)
studies in that the participants in these two studies were told
what strategies/behaviors to use. No additional learning
was required. Hence, Masada’s experimental design, in
which strategies were named but still had to be learned, is
halfway between that of the Noel, and Seijts and Latham
studies, on the one hand, and that of the Earley and Perry,
and Brown and Latham studies on the other.
More research is needed on if, when, and/or how to com-
bine learning goals, performance goals, and knowledge.
Seijts and Latham (2005) argued that once the necessary
knowledge or skill has been acquired, a learning goal is no
longer of value; a specific high performance goal should
be set. However, there are tasks that require continuous
learning, because the task or task environment is dynamic,
and the requisite knowledge has yet to be discovered. On
such tasks, learning goals alone might always result in op-
timum performance. However, at General Electric Jack
Welch is alleged to have demanded continuous learning
and yet he also imposed high performance goals on his top
business managers. So how should learning and perfor-
mance goals be used or combined in a dynamic organiza-
tional setting: learning goals alone, performance goals
alone, learning goals followed by performance goals, both
types of goal together or some changing combination of
these? This is another issue that is ripe for future research.
Framing
The effects of framing have been examined regarding the
positive vs. negative aspects of goal setting. Drach-Zahavy
and Erez (2002) studied goal setting in relation to the stress
that it can cause. When the goal for performance on a com-
plex task was framed positively, namely something a per-
son can learn to perform well, people had significantly
higher performance than was the case for those where the
goal was framed negatively, as something they might have
difficulty mastering. Using a different type of framing, Ro-
ney, Griggs, and Shanks (2003) found that a negatively
framed goal (“Try not to miss answering more than 3 of
these 15 anagrams”) led to significantly worse performance
than either a positively framed goal (“Try to solve at least
12 of these anagrams”) or a vague goal to do one’s best.
Errors are bound to occur in the pursuit of a difficult
performance or learning goal. Frese’s (2005) research
shows that they can be framed positively (e.g., “the more
errors you make, the more you learn”). His studies have
shown that (1) allowing people opportunities to make er-
rors and (2) explicitly encouraging them to learn from their
errors improves their subsequent performance. A modera-
tor, once again, is task complexity; this framing has little
or no effect on tasks that are straightforward for people.
However, on a complex task, Keith and Frese (2005) found
that error training creates a sufficiently strong situation to
mask the effect of a person’s goal orientation. Hence, they
rejected their initial hypothesis that people with a high
learning-goal orientation should benefit more from error
training than people with a performance-goal orientation.
Research is now needed on the main and interaction effects
of learning goals as a state with error training that frames
errors as beneficial to the learning process. In addition to
performance, there is likely to be a significant increase in
a person’s affect.
Affect
Goal setting not only affects a person’s performance, it af-
fects a person’s subjective well-being. A meta-analysis re-
vealed that goal attainment is associated with increases in
positive affect and decreases in negative affect (Koestner,
Lekes, Powers, & Chicoine, 2002). In an enumerative re-
view of the self-regulation literature, Sonnentag (2002)
reached a similar conclusion. In addition to a person’s per-
formance, goal setting, feedback, and self-efficacy were
shown to play a crucial role in fostering a person’s subjec-
tive well-being.
Consistent with goal-setting theory, which posits that
higher goals lead to higher satisfaction than lower goals,
Wiese and Freund (2005), in a study conducted in Ger-
many, found that only those people who perceived that
their goal had been difficult to attain reported a signifi-
cant increase in positive and a decrease in negative affect,
an increase in job satisfaction, and perceptions of occu-
pational success over a 3-year timeframe. Goal progress
was a strong predictor of self-reports of occupational suc-
cess. This was not the case, however, when their goal was
perceived by them to have been relatively easy. There
was no data to suggest that those who had higher goals
experienced feelings of exhaustion. An unexpected find-
ing was that lack of goal attainment in one’s personal life
was related to higher degrees of subjective well-being
when the person experienced goal progress on the job.
The authors concluded that compensatory switching en-
abled people to concentrate emotion regulation in their
work domain.
Latham and Brown (2006) examined the relative effect
of learning versus performance goals of students on their
subsequent satisfaction with their MBA program. They
found that people who set learning goals were more sat-
isfied than those who set a performance goal.
Using Weiss and Cropanzano’s (1996) affective events
theory as a framework, Ilies and Judge (2005) found that
goal regulation explains in part the links among emotion,
intentional behavior, and action. Performance feedback
influenced an individual’s affective state, and through the
goals that the person subsequently set, the person’s be-
havior.
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research 295
© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Teams
Wegge and Haslam (2005) found, in line with previous
studies of groups, that specific, challenging, group (team)
goals led to better performance than “do best” goals on a
brainstorming task. In addition, they found that assigned
group goals, participatively set group goals, and participa-
tively set group goals combined with individually set goals
all worked equally well, as goal difficulty level was equal-
ized across conditions.
The dynamics within a team (e.g., communication),
however, often introduce complexities not found when a
goal is set by or for an individual. For example, the shar-
ing of knowledge and information is essential for a team
to become and remain effective. Quigley, Tesluk, Locke,
and Bartol (in press) found that the greater the knowledge
sharing between members of two person teams on a com-
plex business simulation, the higher their performance.
Moreover, knowledge sharing interacted with self-set
goal level to further improve performance.
There can be conflict between an individual’s and a
team’s goals. Seijts and Latham (2000) found that a social
dilemma is a boundary condition for the positive effect
on performance typically obtained from goal setting. On-
ly when a person’s goal is compatible with the team’s
goal is the team’s performance enhanced. When money
is involved, people choose to pursue their personal goal
even though doing so is detrimental to their team’s per-
formance. This was especially likely to occur in seven-
person teams than it was in the smaller three-person
teams.
Similarly, Stanne, Johnson, and Johnson (1999) re-
ported that when people view goal attainment as compet-
itive, that is, they perceive that the attainment of other
people’s goals decreases the probability of them attaining
their goal, they are likely to withhold information and
ideas. They may even obstruct the goal pursuit of others.
The pursuit of self-interest does not necessarily pre-
vent collaboration; in fact, it can sometimes promote col-
laboration. Here again, framing and perception are im-
portant. Cooperation is likely to occur if two or more peo-
ple perceive the attainment of their respective goals as
correlated positively. That is, as others reach their goals,
a person also attains his or her goal. Latham (2004) ar-
gued that this is likely to occur if people within a team
share a superordinate goal or vision. Wong, Tjosvold, and
Zi Yu (2005) provided empirical support for this asser-
tion. Working with companies and their suppliers in Chi-
na, they found that the relationship between a high level
of a shared vision among employees and low levels of
taking unfair advantage of others was mediated partially
by cooperative goal setting. “Indeed partners who are
committed to pursuing their self interests and recognize
that these interests are cooperatively related may engage
in minimal opportunism and, more generally, may be pre-
pared to make their partnerships highly effective” (Wong
et al., 2005, p. 789).
New Directions
To date, goal-setting researchers, consistent with goal-set-
ting theory, have emphasized the importance of goal com-
mitment. Little, if anything, is known with regard to when
and how to encourage goal abandonment. Disengagement
from a goal that is not attainable or is no longer appropriate
is an adaptive strategy because it frees up resources that
can be invested in appropriate and attainable goals, and
minimizes feelings experienced from accumulated failures
(Latham, 2007). Schönpflug (1986), for example, has ar-
gued that goal setting and stress are likely to be interrelated
when resources, a moderator variable included in goal-set-
ting theory, are low and unanticipated problems appear.
Related to the above subject matter is the issue of per-
fectionism (Latham, 2007). Some people set performance-
outcome goals that are truly impossible for them to attain,
or make progress toward. They may, nevertheless, persist
in pursuing such goals because their self-worth (self-es-
teem) is contingent upon goal attainment (Latham &
Locke, 2006). The methodology of Brown and Beck (2002)
could be investigated as a way to minimize the dysfunc-
tional consequences of perfectionism in the workplace.
Because of the increasingly aging workforce in the
West, research on life span should be taken into account in
the context of goal setting. For example, socioemotional
selectivity theory (Carstensen & Mikels, 2005) states that
self-set goals are set in temporal contexts. Younger people,
because they typically see their time horizon as expansive,
usually set goals that involve the acquisition of informa-
tion. Hence, they are more likely than their older counter-
parts in the workforce to seek assignments that challenge
their skills and eventually enhance their performance. Old-
er workers, who perceive boundaries on their time, often
commit to goals for emotionally meaningful aspects of
their life, especially in regard to feeling socially intercon-
nected. The dependent variables for evaluating the perfor-
mance of these two demographically different populations
of workers may need to be reconsidered (Kanfer & Acker-
man, 2004). Moreover, older people tend to focus on pos-
itive material to the exclusion of the negative. They may
rely more on affect than cognition for making decisions.
Carstensen and Mikels (2005) pointed out that this can en-
hance their subjective well-being if their goals can be at-
tained, yet lead to poorly thought-out decisions because the
goal was not in their best interest. Ways to prevent such
decisions await further research (Latham, 2007).
Related to this issue, Borgogni and Petitta (2003) have
pointed to the need to take into account the dynamics
within a team that enhance or reduce a team’s collective
efficacy regarding goal attainment. The age mix of a
team’s members are likely to be an important moderator
296 G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
<<<PAGE=8>>>
variable. In addition, these authors stressed the need for
research on the interpersonal relationships among team
members and between team members and their boss. Re-
lational aspects are a likely moderator of the effect of
feedback on a team’s goal attainment.
The type of goal that should be set may also be affect-
ed by an employee’s age. Akerman (2000) found a strong
positive relationship between adult age (up to 60 years)
and knowledge level. A gradual decline in cognitive abil-
ity is likely compensated by this increase in job knowl-
edge. Drawing upon Kanfer’s (1987) adaptation of ex-
pectancy theory regarding (1) effort – performance, (2)
performance utility, and (3) effort utility, Kanfer and
Ackerman (2004) suggested several research paths rele-
vant to the application of goal setting in the workplace.
Extrapolating from their suggestions, we hypothesize
that an employee’s age may be a moderator of when to
use performance-outcome goals versus learning goals
versus behavioral goals. For example, when sheer effort
and persistence will lead to goal attainment (e.g., number
of sales calls), a performance-outcome goal may be op-
timum relative to the other two for young employees.
Midlife employees who have acquired a great deal of
knowledge and/or experience may also benefit from the
setting of high performance goals. Their acquisition of
knowledge likely lessens the demand for sheer effort
(e.g., revenue generated). The physical and psychologi-
cal demands inherent in a high performance-outcome
goal may lead older workers to engage in, what Brockner
and Higgins (2001) have labeled, a prevention focus,
namely, ways to minimize errors–ways to “play it safe”.
For senior level people, setting learning goals may be op-
timal for maintaining, if not increasing their perfor-
mance, as they are exposed to increasing environmental
and task complexities (e.g., ways to increase market
share). For employees nearing an age where they are able
to retire, behavioral goals may be more optimal for such
tasks as mentoring others. In short, research is needed to
determine the benefits, if any, of tailoring goal setting to
the age-related capacities of an employee.
Implementation intentions and subconscious goals
need to be investigated within the work force. Among the
most intriguing paths forward in goal-setting research is
the study of implementation intentions and subconscious
goals (Latham & Pinder, 2005). Gollwitzer and his col-
leagues (e.g., Brandstätter, Lengfelder, & Gollwitzer,
2001) found that implementation intentions on tasks that
are complex for people lead to a higher rate of goal at-
tainment than goal commitment only. An implementation
intention is a mental link that is created between a spe-
cific situation and an intended goal-directed response. It
specifies when, where, and how behavior is likely to lead
to goal attainment once an appropriate situation is en-
countered. Once an implementation intention is formed,
people switch from conscious, effortful control of this
conscious goal directed behavior to becoming “automat-
ically” controlled by preselected contextual cues. Once
these cues are activated, motivation guides a person’s be-
havior toward goal attainment without a person con-
sciously focusing on the goal at the time.
It should be noted, however, that the types of tasks Goll-
witzer and colleagues studied were usually one-time,
straightforward actions (apply to school, get an X-ray),
which the person already knew how to do. To date, only
one study, to the authors’ knowledge, has investigated im-
plementation intentions in the workplace. Brandstätter,
Heimbeck, Malzacher, and Frese (2003) found that people
were more successful in obtaining vocational retraining
when, in addition to setting goals to do so, they formulated
an implementation intention. In most work settings, how-
ever, task performance is ongoing, and complex. Possibly
Gollwitzer’s methodology could be applied fruitfully in or-
ganizations to minimize work procrastination (e.g., help
one to get started on a task).
Bargh and Ferguson (2000), in their review of the social
psychology literature, concluded that subconscious goals
produce the same outcomes as conscious goals, and are
affected by the same moderators. Stajkovic, Locke, and
Blair (2006) found that subconscious priming, achieved by
having participants unscramble sentences containing, in
this case, achievement-related words, affected perfor-
mance on a brainstorming task, as did the assignment of
conscious goals. Moreover, there was an interaction effect.
Although the main effect of a conscious goal led to perfor-
mance that was higher than the main effect for a subcon-
scious goal, those who had both a conscious and a subcon-
scious goal performed best. To date, no study in this area
has been conducted in a work setting. The extant social
psychology experiments have been limited to “free situa-
tions” relative to structured work settings.
In a follow-up study, Stajkovic and Locke (2007) pitted
consciously assigned and subconsciously primed goals
against one another in a proofreading task, using speed and
accuracy as dependent variables. The two conflicting goals
did partially offset one another in relation to speed. How-
ever, the effect of conscious goals was far stronger than
primed goals, and subconscious priming did not affect
proofreading accuracy at all. Clearly, additional studies are
warranted regarding the relative effectiveness of different
methods of priming.
Goal hierarchies also warrant further research. For ex-
ample, little is known about how people prioritize goals,
especially when faced with multiple tasks. Little is known
on whether or how they look for causal relationships
among goals at different levels (e.g., how will attaining X
help or hinder attaining Y?)
Finally, there is the issue of goals and knowledge. This,
by implication, “connects” goal setting to the entire field
of cognitive psychology. Research so far has only scratched
the surface of the issue of how goals and knowledge affect
one another, and work together to affect performance. Con-
sider one fascinating example: Wegge and Dibbelt (2000)
found that goals affect the speed of information processing.
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research 297
© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Conclusion
Goal setting is an open theory. It was and continues to be
built through induction. There is no limit to the types of
additional studies that can be fruitfully conducted. We have
talked here about the HPC, personality, proximal goals,
learning goals, framing, affect, goal setting in teams, unre-
alistic goals, goals in relation to age, implementation plans,
and subconscious priming. Additional studies are needed
within each of these areas.
Acknowledgments
This paper is an extended version of a presentation by the
second author to the 26th International Association of Ap-
plied Psychology in Athens, Greece, July 2006. Funding
for this paper was supported in part by a grant to the first
author by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC) of Canada.
References
Ackerman, P.L. (2000). Domain-specific knowledge as the “dark
matter” of adult intelligence: gf/gc, personality, and interest
correlates. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences,
55, 69–84.
Adler, S., & Weiss, H.M. (1988). Recent developments in the
study of personality and organizational behavior. In C.L. Coo-
per & I.T. Robertson (Eds.),International review of industrial
and organizational psychology (pp. 307–330). Oxford, UK:
Wiley.
Bargh, J., & Ferguson, M.J. (2000). Beyond behaviorism: On the
automaticity of higher mental processes. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 126, 925–945.
Baum, J.R., & Locke, E.A. (2004). The relationship of entrepre-
neurial traits, skill, and motivation to subsequent venture.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 587–598.
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A., & Smith, K.G. (2001). A multidimen-
sional model of venture growth. Academy of Management
Journal, 44, 292–303.
Borgogni, L., & Pettita, L. (2003).Lo suiluppo delle persone nelle
organizzantion: Goal setting, coaching and counseling [De-
veloping people in organizations]. Carocci: Roma.
Brandstätter, V ., Lengfelder, A., & Gollwitzer, P.M. (2001). Im-
plementation intentions and efficient action initiation.Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 946–960.
Brandstätter,V ., Heimbeck, D., Malzacher, J.T., & Frese M.
(2003). Goals need implementation intentions: The model of
action phases tested in the applied setting of continuing edu-
cation. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy-
chology, 12, 37–59.
Brett, J.F., & VandeWalle, D.M. (1999). Goal orientation and goal
content as predictors of performance in a training program.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 863–873.
Brockner, J., & Higgins, E.T. (2001). Regulatory focus theory:
Implications for the study of emotions at work.Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 86, 35–66.
Brown, G.P., & Beck, A.T. (2002). Dysfunctional attitudes, per-
fectionism, and models of vulnerability to depression. In G.L.
Flett & P.L. Hewitt (Eds), Perfectionism: Theory, research,
and treatment(pp. 231–251). Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
Brown, T.C., & Latham, G.P . (2002). The effects of behavioral
outcome goals, learning goals, and urging people to do their
best on teamwork behavior in a group problem-solving task.
Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 34, 276–285.
Bryan, W.L., & Hartner, N. (1897). Studies in the physiology and
psychology of the telegraphic language. Psychological Re-
view, 4, 27–53.
Carstensen, L.L., & Mikels, J.A. (2005). At the intersection of
emotion and cognition. Aging and the positivity effect. Cur-
rent Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 117–121.
Donovan, J.S., & Williams, K.J. (2003). Minding the mark: Ef-
fects of time and causal attributions on goal revision in re-
sponse to goal performance descriptions. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 88, 379–390.
Drach-Zahavy, A., & Erez, M. (2002). Challenge versus threat
effects on the goal-performance relationship. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 88, 667–682.
Dweck, C.S. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, per-
sonality, and development(Essays in social psychology). Phil-
adelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Earley, P.C., & Perry, B.C. (1987). Work plan availability and
performance: An assessment of task strategy priming on sub-
sequent task completion.Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 39, 279–302.
Erez, A., & Judge, T.A. (2001). Relationship of core self-evalua-
tions to goal setting, motivation, and performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86, 1270–1279.
Frese, M. (2005). Grand theories and midrange theories. Cultural
effects on theorizing and the attempt to understand active ap-
proaches to work. In K.G. Smith & M. Hitt (Eds.),The Oxford
handbook of management theory: The process of theory devel-
opment (pp. 84–108). Oxford University Press.
Frese, M., & Zapf, D. (1994). Action as the core of work psychol-
ogy: A German approach. In H.C. Triandis, M.D. Dunnette, &
L. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology (V ol. 4, pp. 271–340). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press, Inc.
Howard, A., & Bray, D.W. (1988).Managerial lives in transition:
Advancing age and changing times. New York: Guilford.
Ilies, R., & Judge, T.A. (2005). Goal regulation across time: The
effects of feedback and affect.Journal of Applied Psychology,
90, 453–467.
Judge, T.A., Locke, E.A., & Durham, C.C. (1997). The disposi-
tional causes of job satisfaction: A core self-evaluation ap-
proach. Research in Organizational Behavior, 19, 151–188.
Kanfer, R. (1987). Task-specific motivation: An integrative ap-
proach to issues of measurement, mechanisms, processes, and
determinants. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 5,
237–264.
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P.L. (1989). Motivation and cognitive
abilities: An integrative/aptitude-treatment interaction ap-
proach to skill acquisition.Journal of Applied Psychology, 74,
657–690.
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P.L. (2004). Ageing, adult development,
298 G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers
<<<PAGE=10>>>
and work motivation. Academy of Management Review, 29,
440–458.
Keith, N., & Frese, M. (2005). Self-regulation in error manage-
ment training: Emotion control and metacognition as media-
tors of performance effects. Journal of Applied Psychology,
90, 677–691.
King, L.A., & King, D.W. (1990). Role conflict and role ambigu-
ity: A critical assessment of construct validity. Psychological
Bulletin, 107, 48–64.
Koestner, R., Lekes, N., Powers, T.A., & Chicoine, E. (2002).
Attaining personal goals: Self-concordance plus implementa-
tion intentions equals success. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 83, 231–244.
Latham, G.P. (2004). The motivational benefits of goal setting.
Academy of Management Executive, 18, 126–129.
Latham, G.P . (2007).Work motivation: History, theory, research,
and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Latham, G.P., & Baldes, J.J. (1975). The “practical significance”
of Locke’s theory of goal setting.Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 60, 122–124.
Latham, G.P ., & Brown, T.C. (2006). The effect of learning vs.
outcome goals on self-efficacy and satisfaction in a MBA Pro-
gram. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 55 ,
606–623.
Latham, G.P ., Erez, M., & Locke, E.A. (1988). Resolving scien-
tific disputes by the joint design of crucial experiments by the
antagonists: Application of the Erez-Latham dispute regarding
participation in goal setting. Journal of Applied Psychology
Monograph, 73, 753–772.
Latham, G.P ., & Frayne, C.A. (1989). Self-management training
for increasing job attendance: A follow-up and a replication.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 411–416.
Latham, G.P ., & Locke, E.A. (1975). Increasing productivity with
decreasing time limits: A field replication of Parkinson’s law.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 524–526.
Latham, G.P., & Locke, E.A. (2006). Enhancing the benefits and
overcoming the pitfalls of goal setting. Organization Dynam-
ics.
Latham, G.P., Locke, E.A., & Fassina, N.E. (2002). The high per-
formance cycle: Standing the test of time. In S. Sonnentag
(Ed.), The psychological management of individual perfor-
mance. A handbook in the psychology of management in or-
ganizations (pp. 201–228). Chichester: Wiley.
Latham, G.P., Mitchell, T.R., & Dossett, D.L. (1978). The impor-
tance of participative goal setting and anticipated rewards on
goal difficulty and job performance. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 63, 163–171.
Latham, G.P ., & Pinder, C.C. (2005). Work motivation theory and
research at the dawn of the twenty-first century.Annual Review
of Psychology, 56, 485–516.
Latham, G.P., & Seijts, G.H. (1999). The effects of proximal and
distal goals on performance on a moderately complex task.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 421–429.
Latham, G.P ., Seijts, G.H., & Crim, (2006, August). The effects
of learning goal difficulty level and cognitive ability on strat-
egy development and performance. Paper presented at the an-
nual meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA.
Latham, G.P ., Steele, T.P., & Saari, L.M. (1982). The effects of
participation and goal difficulty on performance. Personnel
Psychology, 35, 677–686.
Latham, G.P ., & Yukl, G.A. (1975). A review of research on the
application of goal setting in organizations. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 18, 824–845.
Locke, E.A. (1965). The relationship of task success to task liking
and satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 49,379–385.
Locke, E.A. (1968). Toward a theory of task motivation and in-
centives. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, 3, 157–189.
Locke, E.A. (2001). Self-set goals and self-efficacy as mediators
of incentives and personality. In M. Erez & U. Kleinbeck
(Eds.), Work motivation in the context of a globalizing econo-
my (pp. 13–26). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Locke, E.A. (2007, August). What happens to performance when
conscious and subconscious goals are in conflict? In G.P. Lath-
am (Chair), Conscious and subconscious goal effects on self-
efficacy and performance in single and dual tasks.Symposium
presented at the Academy of Management, Philadelphia, PA.
Locke, E.A., & Bryan, J.F. (1969). Knowledge of score and goal
level as determinants. Journal of Applied Psychology, 53 ,
59–65
Locke, E.A., Cartledge, N., & Koeppel, J. (1968). Motivation ef-
fects of knowledge of results: A goal setting phenomenon?
Psychological Bulletin, 70, 474–485.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (1990a). A theory of goal setting
and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (1990b). Work motivation and sat-
isfaction: Light at the end of the tunnel.Psychological Science,
1, 240–246.
Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P . (2002). Building a practically useful
theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey.
American Psychologist, 57, 705–717.
Locke, E.A., Shaw, K.M., Saari, L.M., & Latham, G.P. (1981).
Goal setting and task performance: 1969–1980.Psychological
Bulletin, 90, 125–152.
Masuda, A. (2006). The effects of learning and outcome goals on
performance using a moderately complex task. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Albany.
Mace, C.A. (1935). Incentives: Some experimental studies. InIn-
dustrial health research report (Great Britain), No. 72.
Meyer, J.P., Kay, E., & French, J. (1965). Split roles in perfor-
mance appraisal. Harvard Business Review, 65, 123–129.
Mitchell, T.R. (1979). Organizational behavior.Annual Review of
Psychology, 30, 243–81.
Mitchell, T.R., & Daniels, D. (2003). Motivation. In W.C. Bor-
man, D.R. Ilgen, & R.J. Klimoski (Eds.), Comprehensive
handbook of psychology: Industrial organizational psycholo-
gy (V ol. 12, pp. 225–254). New York: Wiley.
Noel, T. (1997). The effects of learning goals on group perfor-
mance on an independent task.Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, University of Colorado at Boulder. UMI#9812911
Noel, T, & Latham, G.P. (2006). The importance of learning goals
versus outcome goals for entrepreneurs.International Journal
of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 7, 213–220.
Quigley, N.R., Tesluk, P.E., Locke, E.A., & Bartol, K.M. (2007).
A multilevel investigation of the motivational mechanisms un-
derlying knowledge sharing and performance. Organizational
Science, 18, 71–88.
Ronan, W.W., Latham, G.P., & Kinne, S.B. (1973). The effects of
goal setting and supervision on worker behavior in an indus-
trial situation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 58, 302–307
Roney, C.J.R., Griggs, M., & Shanks, B. (2003). The mediation
G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research 299
© 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300
<<<PAGE=11>>>
and moderation of general motivational variables by specific
goals that are negatively framed. Unpublished manuscript.
Ryan, T.A. (1947). Work and effort: The psychology of produc-
tion. New York: Ronald Press.
Ryan, T.A. (1970). Intentional behavior . New York: Ronald
Press.
Schönpflug, W. (1986). Behavioral economics as an approach to
stress theory. In M.H. Appley and R. Trumbull (Eds.),Dynam-
ics of stress: Physiological, psychological, and social perspec-
tives (pp. 81–98). New York: Plenum.
Seijts, G.H., & Latham, G.P . (2000). The effects of goal setting
and group size on performance in a social dilemma.Canadian
Journal of Behavioral Science, 32, 104–116.
Seijts, G.H., & Latham, G.P. (2001). The effect of learning, out-
come, and proximal goals on a moderately complex task.Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior, 22, 291–307.
Seijts, G.H., & Latham, G.P. (2005). Learning versus performance
goals: When should each be used? Academy of Management
Executive, 19, 124–131.
Seijts, G.H., Latham, G.P., Tasa, K., & Latham, B.W. (2004). Goal
setting and goal orientation: An integration of two different yet
related literatures. Academy of Management Journal, 47,
227–239.
Selden, S.C., & Brewer, G.A. (2000). Work motivation in the se-
nior executive service: Testing the high performance cycle the-
ory. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory,
10, 531–550.
Sonnentag, S. (2002). Performance, well-being, and self-regula-
tion. In S. Sonnentag (Ed.), Psychological management of in-
dividual performance (pp. 405–424). New York: Wiley.
Stajkovic, A.D., Locke, E.A., & Blair E.S. (2006). A first exam-
ination of the relationship between primed subconscious goals,
assigned conscious goals, and task performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91, 1172–1180.
Stanne, M.B., Johnson, D.W., & Johnson, R.T. (1999). Does com-
petition enhance or inhibit motor performance: A meta-analy-
sis. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 133–154.
Taylor, F. (1911).Principles of scientific management. New York:
Harper.
Terborg, J.R. (1976). The motivational components of goal set-
ting. Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, 613–621.
VandeWalle, D.M., Cron, W.L., & Slocum, J.W. (2001). The role
of goal orientation following performance feedback. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 86, 629–640.
Weiss, H.M., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory:
A theoretical discussion of the structure, causes, and conse-
quences of affective experiences at work. In B.M. Staw & L.L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior
(V ol. 18, pp. 1–74). Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Wegge, J., & Dibbelt, S. (2000) Zur wirkung von Zielsetzungen
auf die Informationsverarbeitung bei Buchstabenvergleichs-
aufgaben [Effects of goal setting on information processing in
letter-matching tasks]. Zeitschrift für Experimentelle Psycho-
logie, 47, 89–114.
Wegge, J., & Haslam, S.A. (2005). Improving work motivation
and performance in brainstorming groups: Effects of three
group goal setting strategies. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 14, 400–430.
Weldon, E., Jehn, K.A., & Pradham, P. (1991). Processes that me-
diate the relationship between group goal and improved group
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
61, 555–569.
Wiese, B.S., & Freund, A.M. (2005). Goal progress makes one
happy, or does it? Longitudinal findings from the work do-
main. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psycholo-
gy, 78, 287–304.
Winters, D., & Latham, G.P. (1996). The effect of learning versus
outcome goals on a simple versus a complex task. Group and
Organization Management, 21, 236–250.
Wong, A., Tjosvold, D., & Yu, Z. (2005). Organizational partner-
ships in China: Self-interest, goal interdependence, and oppor-
tunism. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 782–791.
Wood, R.E., Mento, A.J., & Locke, E.A. (1987). Task complexity
as a moderator of goal effects: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 72, 416–425.
Wyatt, S., Frost, L., & Stock, F.G.L. (1934).Incentives in repeti-
tive work. Industrial Health Research Board (Great Britain)
Report, No. 69.
Yukl, G.A., & Latham, G.P. (1978). Interrelationships among em-
ployee participation, individual differences, goal difficulty,
goal acceptance, goal instrumentality, and performance. Per-
sonnel Psychology, 31, 305–324.
About the authors
Gary Latham is the Secretary of State Professor of Organizational
Effectiveness at the Rotman School of Management, University
of Toronto, Canada, past President of the Canadian Psychological
Association, and President Elect of the Society of Industrial and
Organizational Psychology. His research interests include work
motivation, performance management, and self-regulation.
Edwin A. Locke is Dean’s Professor of Leadership and Motiva-
tion Emeritus at the R.H. Smith School of Management, Univer-
sity of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. He now resides in
California. His research interests include work motivation, job
satisfaction, and philosophy of science. Contact information:
elocke@rhsmith.umd.edu
Professor G. Latham
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6
Canada
Tel. +1 416 978-4916
E-mail latham@rotman.utoronto.ca
300 G.P. Latham & E.A. Locke: Goal Setting Research
European Psychologist 2007; V ol. 12(4):290–300 © 2007 Hogrefe & Huber Publishers