<<<PAGE=1>>>
Developing Theory to Guide Building Practitioners’ Capacity to 
Implement Evidence-Based Interventions
Jennifer Leeman, DrPH1, Larissa Calancie, BS1, Michelle C. Kegler, PhD2, Cam T. 
Escoffery, PhD2, Alison K. Herrmann, PhD3, Esther Thatcher, PhD1, Marieke A. Hartman, 
PhD4, and Maria Fernandez, PhD4
1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA
2Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
3University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
4University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, TX, USA
Abstract
Public health and other community-based practitioners have access to a growing number of 
evidence-based interventions (EBIs), and yet EBIs continue to be underused. One reason for this 
underuse is that practitioners often lack the capacity (knowledge, skills, and motivation) to select, 
adapt, and implement EBIs. Training, technical assistance, and other capacity-building strategies 
can be effective at increasing EBI adoption and implementation. However, little is known about 
how to design capacity-building strategies or tailor them to differences in capacity required across 
varying EBIs and practice contexts. To address this need, we conducted a scoping study of 
frameworks and theories detailing variations in EBIs or practice contexts and how to tailor 
capacity-building to address those variations. Using an iterative process, we consolidated 
constructs and propositions across 24 frameworks and developed a beginning theory to describe 
salient variations in EBIs (complexity and uncertainty) and practice contexts (decision-making 
structure, general capacity to innovate, resource and values fit with EBI, and unity vs. polarization 
of stakeholder support). The theory also includes propositions for tailoring capacity-building 
strategies to address salient variations. To have wide-reaching and lasting impact, the 
dissemination of EBIs needs to be coupled with strategies that build practitioners’ capacity to 
adopt and implement a variety of EBIs across diverse practice contexts.
Keywords
capacity building; dissemination; evidence-based interventions; knowledge translation; prevention 
support
Reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Corresponding Author: Jennifer Leeman, School of Nursing, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Carrington Hall, CB #7460, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. jleeman@email.unc.edu. 
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Supplemental Material
Additional supporting information is available at heb.sagepub.com/supplemental.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Educ Behav. 2017 February ; 44(1): 59–69. doi:10.1177/1090198115610572.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=2>>>
A growing number of organizations are disseminating evidence-based interventions (EBIs) 
for clinical, public health, and other practitioners to adopt and implement into practice 
(Briss, Brownson, Fielding, & Zaza, 2004; Leeman, Sommers, Leung, & Ammerman, 
2011). EBIs include a wide range of programs, practices, and policies that researchers and 
others have demonstrated to be effective at improving targeted outcomes (Rabin, Brownson, 
Haire-Joshu, Kreuter, & Weaver, 2008). Disseminating EBIs generally is insufficient to 
change practice, however, and practitioners continue to underuse the available EBIs (Hannon 
et al., 2013). One reason why EBIs are underused is that practitioners often lack the capacity 
to adopt, adapt, and implement EBIs within their practice settings.
A broad literature is developing that describes and evaluates strategies that are effective at 
building practitioners’ capacity to use EBIs. This literature employs a diverse terminology to 
refer to capacity building including “technical assistance,” “facilitation,” “knowledge 
brokering,” and “prevention support,” among other terms (Wandersman et al., 2008; Ward, 
House, & Hamer, 2009). We use the term “capacity building” (CB) to encompass this 
broader literature and define it as any strategy or combination of strategies that seeks to 
provide practitioners’ with menus of EBIs and increase their motivation and ability to adopt 
and implement those EBIs (Flaspohler, Duffy, Wandersman, Stillman, & Maras, 2008). 
Although we recognize the importance of also building capacity at the levels of 
organizations and systems, for the purposes of this review we have excluded strategies that 
directly target those levels from our definition of CB. CB strategies include training, 
technical assistance, tools, and other strategies (Leeman, Calancie, et al., 2015; Wandersman 
et al., 2008). Although extensive research has demonstrated that CB is effective at promoting 
practitioners’ EBI adoption and implementation (Durlak & DuPre, 2008; Mitton, Adair, 
McKenzie, Patten, & Waye Perry, 2007), researchers typically have provided limited details 
on the design of CB strategies or the theory guiding which strategies were selected. 
Furthermore, most of the CB literature has taken a “one-size-fits-all” approach with little 
attention to differences in the types of capacity required to adopt and implement different 
types of EBIs across varying contexts. For example, different capacities will be required to 
adopt and implement EBIs to enact smoke-free policies than for EBIs to support individual-
level smoking cessation. In addition, capacity needs will differ between contexts, such as 
between a large, academically affiliated health care center and a small geographically 
isolated department of public health.
Scholars have developed many frameworks describing CB but few of these frameworks 
provide guidance on how to tailor CB to address the needs of different EBIs and contexts 
(McCormack et al., 2013; Ward et al., 2009). Developing more comprehensive theory is 
essential to advancing understanding of what CB strategies may work best under what 
circumstances. The purpose of this review was to advance theory to guide the design of CB 
strategies, with a specific focus on strategies to adopt and implement community-based 
prevention EBIs. The central questions guiding the review were the following: (a) In what 
ways do EBIs and contexts vary? (b) How might CB strategies be tailored to address those 
variations?
Leeman et al. Page 2
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Conceptual Framework
The review was guided by a framework that builds on Wandersman et al.’s (2008) 
Interactive Systems Framework for Dissemination and Implementation. The Interactive 
Systems Framework posits that EBI implementation requires interaction among three 
systems: synthesis and translation systems disseminate EBIs, and support systems provide 
training, technical assistance, tools, and other CB strategies to promote delivery system’s 
adoption and implementation of EBIs into practice. As summarized in Table 1, Leeman, 
Calancie, et al. (2015) have previously documented the types of CB strategies that support 
systems use and variations in the ways they are structured (e.g., dose, mode; Leeman, 
Calancie, et al., 2015). The review framework (Figure 1) posits that CB strategies affect 
practitioners’ capacity, which in turn affects the extent and quality of delivery systems’ EBI 
adoption and implementation. The effectiveness of CB is moderated by characteristics of 
both EBIs and practice contexts. In this review, we focused on identifying salient variations 
in EBIs and practice contexts and then developing theory to guide support systems in 
tailoring their CB strategies contingent on those variations.
Review Methods
We conducted a scoping study to identify relevant frameworks followed by the extraction of 
framework constructs and propositions (Levac, Colquhoun, & O’Brien, 2010). We then 
synthesized constructs using an analytic approach similar to that used by Damschroder et al. 
(2009) and others (Contandriopoulos, Lemire, Denis, & Tremblay, 2010; Michie, van 
Stralen, & West, 2011) to consolidate existing dissemination/implementation science 
frameworks. The team that conducted the study included members of the Capacity-Building 
Technical Assistance and Training workgroup of the Cancer Prevention and Control 
Research Network, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and National Institutes of 
Health–funded network of 10 centers nationwide (Fernandez et al., 2014).
Search Methods
To identify relevant frameworks, we assessed those included in three prior reviews of 
dissemination/implementation frameworks (Damschroder et al., 2009; Meyers, Durlak, & 
Wandersman, 2012; Tabak, Khoong, Chambers, & Brownson, 2012). We also solicited 
recommendations from members of the workgroup. To be included, frameworks had to 
address variations in EBIs and/or contexts and the potential effect those variations might 
have on EBI adoption or implementation. The diversity of terminology and extensiveness of 
the literature limited our ability to identify and include all potentially relevant frameworks. 
The search was designed to be broad but not exhaustive, with the goal of creating a 
beginning theory that might be further developed over time.
Data Abstraction and Synthesis
All authors participated in the abstraction process. For each publication, two authors 
extracted the following information: evidence base for the framework, constructs related to 
salient variations in EBIs and contexts, and propositions regarding how to tailor CB to 
address those variations. The two authors then compared extractions and resolved 
Leeman et al. Page 3
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=4>>>
discrepancies via consensus. The lead authors (JL, LC) then reviewed all extractions to 
identify themes, and iteratively developed and refined the themes to create consolidated lists 
of constructs and propositions. The two lead authors then selected constructs and 
propositions to be included in the beginning theory, with priority given to findings that 
occurred most frequently across frameworks and to findings derived from a systematic 
review of the literature or a research study. Secondary priority was given to frameworks 
derived from authors’ reflections on their applied, field-based experience or from 
nonsystematic review of the literature. The goal of the synthesis was to reconcile conflicting 
or overlapping constructs and propositions and integrate them into a single comprehensive, 
yet parsimonious provisional theory. A summary report was created outlining the provisional 
theory and detailing the full list of consolidated constructs and propositions with related 
citations. The summary report was presented to Capacity-Building Technical Assistance and 
Training workgroup members to get their feedback and further refine the theory to best fit 
review findings.
Results
Included Frameworks
Twenty-four frameworks were included in the review (Table 2). Seven of the frameworks 
were derived from systematic reviews of the literature, nine from empirical studies, five 
from authors’ applied experience, and three from a non-systematic review of existing 
literature and theory. The theories cited most frequently as contributing to frameworks 
included Diffusion of Innovations (n = 6), Actor-Network Theory (n = 2), Complexity 
Science (n = 2), and the Interactive Systems Framework (n = 2).
Variations in EBIs and Contexts: How to Tailor CB Contingent on Those Variations
Figure 2 presents characteristics of EBIs and contexts whose variations moderated the 
relationship between CB strategies and the delivery system’s successful adoption and 
implementation of EBIs. In relation to EBIs, the two most salient factors were complexity 
and uncertainty. Salient contextual factors included the adoption/implementation setting’s 
decision-making structure and general capacity to innovate, the EBI’s fit with the setting’s 
capacity and values, and the extent of stakeholder unity/polarization in support of the EBI. 
Table 3 defines each salient characteristic and offers propositions for tailoring CB contingent 
on those characteristics with further details provided in the online appendix (available online 
at heb.sagepub.com/supplemental).
EBI complexity refers to the extent to which the overall task of adopting and implementing 
an EBI is intricate or complicated. An EBI’s complexity increases contingent on the number 
and socioecological levels it targets; diversity and interdependence of stakeholders (e.g., 
from different settings, sectors, disciplines), organizations, and/or systems-levels required to 
adopt and implement the EBI; and the duration and number of components and episodes that 
comprise EBI implementation (Atun et al., 2010; Damschroder et al., 2009; Greenhalgh et 
al., 2004; Kitson et al., 2008; Lanham et al., 2012; Rogers, 2003; Scheirer, 2013). The 
diversity and interdependence of involved stakeholders is a central feature contributing to 
EBI complexity. Stakeholders include any individual or group that has a stake in the task and 
Leeman et al. Page 4
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=5>>>
may include those who adopt, support, oppose, implement, and/or benefit from an EBI. 
Scheirer (2013) has proposed a typology of interventions that largely categorizes them 
according to their place on a continuum of stakeholder diversity and interdependence. At 
one end of the continuum, individual providers can implement interventions independently 
(e.g., prescribing a nicotine patch); further along the continuum interventions require 
coordination among multiple staff over time (e.g., delivering a smoking cessation program); 
and still further along the continuum, the intervention requires collaboration across sectors 
(e.g., enacting policy to ban smoking in public settings).
When task complexity is higher as opposed to lower, support systems may explore 
marketing EBIs in formats that maximize their adaptability and triability (Atun et al., 2010; 
May et al., 2009). Maximizing EBIs’ adaptability involves combining clearly defined core 
components with more peripheral components that can be adapted to meet the needs of local 
settings and stakeholders (Damschroder et al., 2009). Maximizing EBIs’ triability involves 
marketing them in formats that allow stakeholders to pilot them on a small scale prior to 
committing to full-scale implementation (Damschroder et al., 2009). When EBI complexity 
is high, support systems also may need to provide more CB (dose frequency and duration; 
Le et al., 2014) and to focus CB on building practitioners’ capacity to assess local contexts, 
select and adapt EBIs to fit with contexts, and develop the administrative and other 
infrastructure necessary to manage interdependency throughout the process of planning, 
implementing, and sustaining the intervention (Leeman et al., 2007; Scheirer, 2013; 
Snowden & Boone, 2007).
EBI uncertainty refers to the lack of an evidence base to guide intervening. Although only a 
few authors used the term “uncertainty,” authors used other terms (e.g., “unproven 
knowledge”; Elwyn et al., 2007) to refer to similar concepts. Uncertainty is high when 
guidance on how to implement an intervention is limited, the evidence base for available 
EBIs is weak, or the potential to translate an EBI to a new context is unknown (DeGroff et 
al., 2010; Elwyn et al., 2007; Kitson et al., 2008; Yuan et al., 2010). The evidence base for 
translating EBIs to new contexts often is less certain when those contexts are complex 
adaptive systems that are composed of numerous elements that interact in ways that cannot 
be predicted (Lanham et al., 2013; Snowden & Boone, 2007). For example, EBIs that 
change public policies (e.g., tobacco control policies) typically occur within complex 
systems whose interacting elements are hard to control or predict.
When EBI uncertainty is low and causal links between EBIs and outcomes are clear, support 
systems might select EBIs that are packaged into standardized formats and focus on building 
practitioners’ capacity to select, adapt, and implement EBIs with fidelity (Le et al., 2014; 
Snowden & Boone, 2007). For example, they may select from one of Cancer Control 
Planet’s packaged intervention programs (http://rtips.cancer.gov/rtips/index.do). When 
uncertainty is high, practitioners have little information about what EBIs may work or 
whether they will work within their practice contexts. Support systems therefore need to 
select EBIs that are less standardized and have more flexible formats (Dreisinger et al., 
2012; Lanham et al., 2013; Snowden & Boone, 2007), such as the Guide to Community 
Preventive Services recommended strategies (www.the-communityguide.org). When 
uncertainty is high, support systems also will need to provide more CB (dose frequency and 
Leeman et al. Page 5
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=6>>>
duration), and strengthen collaborative relationships between CB providers and recipients. In 
numerous frameworks and theories, scholars have pointed to the influence of the CB 
provider/recipient relationship on EBI adoption and implementation (Atun et al., 2010; 
Clavier et al., 2012; Elwyn et al., 2007; Rogers, 2003). Relationships are stronger when the 
individuals providing CB are consistent over time and are perceived to have mastered the 
recipients’ “norms, values, and languages” (Clavier et al., 2012). When EBIs are uncertain, 
collaborative CB provider/recipient relationships have the potential to maintain recipients’ 
continued motivation despite a lack of clarity about the initiatives’ direction and potential 
benefits.
In cases of high uncertainty, support systems should focus on building practitioners’ 
capacity to engage stakeholders in collectively developing a shared understanding of the 
problem and context and in formulating an intervention plan that is both evidence-informed 
and context specific (DeGroff et al., 2010; Elwyn et al., 2007; Lanham et al., 2013; Le et al., 
2014; May et al., 2009; May et al., 2011). Priority should be given to developing 
practitioners’ capacity to engage stakeholders, facilitate ongoing communication, and 
encourage both dissent and a diversity of viewpoints (Lanham et al., 2013; Snowden & 
Boone, 2007). When the evidence base for intervening is highly uncertain, support systems 
may want to build practitioners’ capacity to create an environment that promotes 
experimentation and allows innovations to emerge over time (Lanham et al., 2013; Snowden 
& Boone, 2007).
Additional CB strategies that may be useful when uncertainty is high include peer 
networking and assessment and feedback of performance data (DeGroff et al., 2010). Peer 
networking provides an opportunity for practitioners to learn how other practitioners have 
successfully engaged stakeholders, achieved desired outcomes, and overcome barriers. 
Support systems may use assessment and feedback to provide data that practitioners can use 
to monitor for improvements in performance following, for example, pilot studies and other 
forms of experimentation (DeGroff et al., 2010; Yuan et al., 2010).
Adoption/implementation setting’s decision-making structure refers to whether the decision 
to adopt and implement an EBI is centralized within a hierarchical organizational structure 
or decentralized across a horizontal structure (DeGroff et al., 2010; Rogers, 2003; 
Wandersman et al., 2008). Decision making in health care organizations is often centralized 
within a hierarchy, with the organization’s leaders making an initial decision to adopt an 
intervention and then deploying responsibility for implementation to middle managers and 
staff. In contrast, decision making in community coalitions is often decentralized and 
involves collaborative deliberation across all organizations participating in the coalition.
The intended audience and focus of capacity building will differ depending on the decision-
making structure. When decision making is structured hierarchically, capacity building may 
need to be targeted to those working at different levels of the organization with a focus on 
strengthening organizational leaders’ overall motivation to adopt and support the 
intervention; middle managers’ capacity to implement, supervise, and sustain the 
intervention; and practitioners’ capacity to deliver the intervention (Fixsen et al., 2005; 
Scheirer, 2013; Weiner, 2009). When decision making is decentralized, capacity-building 
Leeman et al. Page 6
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=7>>>
may need to be delivered to the coalition or team that will plan and implement the EBI. CB 
will need to focus on building practitioners’ capacity to engage partners and to facilitate 
collaborative decision making in addition to implementing the EBI (Clavier et al., 2012; 
Contandriopoulos et al., 2010).
Adoption/implementation setting’s overall capacity to innovate refers to the setting’s overall 
capacity to adopt and implement new interventions than do others. Factors that contribute to 
the capacity to innovate include strong leadership, a learning culture, and past success with 
overall capacity to adopt and implement new interventions than do others. Factors that 
contribute to the capacity to innovate include strong leadership, a learning culture, and past 
success with innovations (Dreisinger et al., 2012; Kitson et al., 2008; Rogers, 2003; Weiner, 
2009). High levels of staff turnover and overall turbulence may limit innovation capacity 
(Dreisinger et al., 2012; Snowden & Boone, 2007).
When general capacity is low, support systems may have more success if they select and 
market EBIs that embed change in existing technologies, information systems, or policies 
rather than EBIs that require individual or collective behavior change (Scheirer, 2013). For 
example, EBIs might involve changing policy governing the foods and beverages served at 
worksite celebrations or changing the type of equipment on a playground. Prior to 
promoting EBIs that require collective behavior change, support systems may first need to 
invest in building overall capacity (e.g., leadership development; Scheirer, 2013).
EBI-setting resources fit refers to the match between EBIs and the existing resources and 
infrastructure of the systems into which they will be implemented. Wandersman et al. (2008) 
refer this to as “innovation-specific” as opposed to “general” capacity. Innovation-specific 
capacity includes stakeholders’ individual and collective knowledge, skills, and self-efficacy 
in relation to the targeted problem, intervention options, and/or the selected EBI (Weiner, 
2009). Capacity also encompasses the infrastructure and other resources of both the 
implementation settings (e.g., existing staff’s skill mix, space, equipment, etc.) and the wider 
economic, political, and social context (e.g., Atun et al., 2010). For example, does the EBI 
align with available funding streams or staffing?
If there is a poor fit between the EBI and existing capacity, support systems may need to 
identify an EBI that provides a better fit. Alternatively, they might build practitioners’ 
capacity to adopt and implement the EBI and thereby improve its fit and/or to acquire 
additional resources or new partners (Wandersman et al., 2008). CB providers also might 
need to provide funding or other supports such as free materials or direct assistance to 
support intervention planning or delivery (Contandriopoulos et al., 2010; Dreisinger et al., 
2012).
EBI-setting values fit is the extent to which stakeholders perceive the EBI as fostering 
“fulfillment of their values” (Weiner, 2009). Many frameworks identify potential adopters’ 
perceptions of an intervention’s advantages relative to its alternatives as central to successful 
adoption and implementation (e.g., Damschroder et al., 2009). Stakeholders’ perceptions of 
an EBI’s relative advantage are influenced by their values, which determine the problems 
Leeman et al. Page 7
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=8>>>
stakeholders view as high priority and in need of change and the outcomes they view as most 
important (Damschroder et al., 2009; Greenhalgh et al., 2004; Weiner, 2009).
When there is a poor fit between the EBI and existing values, support systems may need to 
identify an EBI that provides a better fit. Support systems also might reframe their EBI 
marketing to better align with stakeholders’ values and alter their perceptions of its attributes 
(Rogers, 2003). Providers also might consider facilitating peer networking and providing 
funding or other incentives. Facilitating interactions with peers who have adopted and 
implemented an EBI can be an effective way to improve potential adopters’ perceptions of 
the EBI and motivation to use it, particularly if those peers are opinion leaders within the 
potential adopters’ organization or professional networks (Greenhalgh et al., 2004; Leeman 
et al., 2007; Rogers, 2003; Yuan et al., 2010). Funding and other types of incentives are 
another strategy that can be used to influence perceptions of an intervention’s advantage to 
those adopting and implementing it into practice (Leeman et al., 2007).
Stakeholder unity/polarization refers to the extent to which stakeholders share similar or 
divergent values in relation to an EBI and the intensity of their endorsement of divergent 
values (Contandriopoulos et al., 2010; Denis et al., 2002; Weiner, 2009). The perceived 
benefits and risks of an EBI may not be distributed evenly across stakeholder groups. As a 
result stakeholders’ may be polarized on their views of the problem, its priority, and/or its 
potential solutions (Contandriopoulos et al., 2010; Denis et al., 2002). Stakeholders’ position 
on a proposed EBI may be further polarized when stakeholder groups have a past history of 
conflict (Clavier et al., 2012).
When stakeholders are unified, capacity-building strategies can focus on a content-based, 
technical, rational approach to adoption/implementation (Contandriopoulos et al., 2010). 
When stakeholders are polarized, CB providers may need to look for another EBI or reframe 
their EBI marketing to better map the EBIs costs and benefits to the values of relevant 
stakeholder groups. In such instances, capacity building will need to focus on a relationship-
based, strategic and political approach (Contandriopoulos et al., 2010; Denis et al., 2002). 
CB providers will need to build practitioners’ capacity to assess stakeholders’ positions and 
to strategically build support and manage opposition. Greater doses of CB also may be 
required than for interventions where stakeholders are more unified.
Discussion
Numerous foundations, governmental agencies, consultants, and universities are serving in 
the role of support systems as they deliver training, technical assistance, and other CB 
strategies to build practitioners’ capacity to adopt and implement EBIs. The aim of this 
review was to create a beginning theory that support systems might use to guide their CB 
efforts. We identified numerous frameworks that described CB strategies and factors that 
may influence their design and effectiveness. By reviewing these frameworks, we were able 
to create a beginning theory that consolidates salient variations in EBIs and contexts and 
begins to identify propositions for tailoring CB contingent on those variations.
Leeman et al. Page 8
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=9>>>
As detailed in Tables 2 and 3, multiple frameworks supported the identified variations in 
EBIs and contexts and the propositions for tailoring CB strategies. Findings should be 
interpreted with caution, however, as the search was not exhaustive and the strength of the 
evidence base in support of identified frameworks was mixed. While the majority of the 24 
frameworks were based on systematic reviews of the literature or empirical studies (n = 16), 
8 were derived from authors’ applied experience or from a nonsystematic retrieval of and 
integration of existing literature and theory. Additional intervention research is needed to 
compare the effectiveness of different CB designs across variations in EBIs and contexts. 
The beginning theory offers a starting point for guiding CB but will require further research 
to verify the identified variations in EBIs and contexts and to assess their role in moderating 
the effectiveness of different CB designs.
Implications for Practice
Little is known about how to design CB strategies and even less about how best to tailor 
them to practitioners’ varying needs. When interviewed, CB providers have reported that 
their mandate was “too vague,” “underformalized,” and “ill-defined” (Clavier et al., 2012). 
The proposed beginning theory represents an initial step toward filling this gap. Support 
systems might use the beginning theory (Figure 2) to characterize EBIs and contexts. They 
might then use the list of propositions (Table 3) to design their CB strategies contingent on 
those characterizations. For example, if a support system planned to promote after school 
practitioners’ use of obesity prevention EBIs, they might assess available EBIs and identify 
several whose complexity and uncertainty levels are low. They would then tailor capacity 
building to focus on adapting EBIs to the local context and implementing them with fidelity 
to their core components. Support systems might also assess the after school system’s 
context. Are the after school programs centrally organized under the direction of a regional 
office or decentralized with decision making controlled locally? Who are the key 
stakeholders involved in both adoption and implementation and how well do the proposed 
EBIs fit with their values? What general and EBI-specific capacity do after schools have to 
implement the EBIs? Following this initial assessment, the support system might then 
further tailor CB strategies to fit the context following the propositions outlined in Table 3.
As another example, a support system may want to promote public health practitioners use 
of EBIs to create health-supporting policies (Leeman, Myers, Ribisl, & Ammerman, 2015). 
EBIs that target changes to policy often have high levels of both complexity and uncertainty. 
The support system, therefore, might employ CB strategies that capitalize on practitioners’ 
tacit knowledge of what works in their community (Kothari et al., 2012) by facilitating peer 
networking and providing data-based feedback on what is working and what is not. The 
focus of CB would be on engaging stakeholders in collaboratively developing a shared 
understanding of both problems and potential solutions.
Conclusions
To have wide reaching and lasting impact, the dissemination of EBIs needs to be coupled 
with strategies that build practitioners’ capacity to adopt and implement interventions within 
their diverse and ever-changing practice contexts. The proposed theory offers much needed 
Leeman et al. Page 9
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=10>>>
guidance on how to tailor capacity-building strategies to address variations in interventions 
and practice contexts. Additional research is needed to further develop and test the theory.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of 
this article: This publication was supported by Cooperative Agreement Numbers U48DP00194409, U48DP001949, 
U48DP0010909, and U48DP001934 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Cancer 
Institute to Cancer Prevention and Control Research Network sites. Marieke A. Hartman was supported by the 
postdoctoral fellowship, University of Texas School of Public Health Cancer Education and Career Development 
Program, National Cancer Institute (NIH Grant R25CA57712) and NIH Grant R01CA163526. Esther Thatcher was 
supported by the National Institute of Nursing Research (Grant 5T32NR00856). The findings and conclusions 
presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention or the National Institutes of Health.
References
Atun R, de Jongh T, Secci F, Ohiri K, Adeyi O. Integration of targeted health interventions into health 
systems: A conceptual framework for analysis. Health Policy and Planning. 2010; 25:104–111. 
[PubMed: 19917651] 
Briss PA, Brownson RC, Fielding JE, Zaza S. Developing and using the guide to community 
preventive services: Lessons learned about evidence-based public health. Annual Review of Public 
Health. 2004; 25:281–302.
Clavier C, Senechal Y , Vibert S, Potvin L. A theory-based model of translation practices in public 
health participatory research. Sociology of Health & Illness. 2012; 34:791–805. [PubMed: 
21929647] 
Contandriopoulos D, Lemire M, Denis JL, Tremblay E. Knowledge exchange processes in 
organizations and policy arenas: A narrative systematic review of the literature. Milbank Quarterly. 
2010; 88:444–483. [PubMed: 21166865] 
Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation 
of health services research findings into practice: A consolidated framework for advancing 
implementation science. Implementation Science. 2009; 4:50.doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-4-50 
[PubMed: 19664226] 
DeGroff A, Schooley M, Chapel T, Poister TH. Challenges and strategies in applying performance 
measurement to federal public health programs. Evaluation and Program Planning. 2010; 33:365–
372. [PubMed: 20303176] 
Denis JL, Hebert Y , Langley A, Lozeau D, Trottier LH. Explaining diffusion patterns for complex 
health care innovations. Health Care Management Review. 2002; 27(3):60–73. [PubMed: 
12146784] 
Dreisinger ML, Boland EM, Filler CD, Baker EA, Hessel AS, Brownson RC. Contextual factors 
influencing readiness for dissemination of obesity prevention programs and policies. Health 
Education Research. 2012; 27:292–306. [PubMed: 21893684] 
Durlak JA, DuPre EP. Implementation matters: A review of research on the influence of 
implementation on program outcomes and the factors affecting implementation. American Journal 
of Community Psychology. 2008; 41:327–350. [PubMed: 18322790] 
Elwyn G, Taubert M, Kowalczuk J. Sticky knowledge: A possible model for investigating 
implementation in healthcare contexts. Implementation Science. 2007; 2:44.doi: 
10.1186/1748-5908-2-44 [PubMed: 18096040] 
Leeman et al. Page 10
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Fernandez ME, Melvin CL, Leeman J, Ribisl KM, Allen JD, Kegler MC, … Hebert JR. The Cancer 
Prevention and Control Research Network: An interactive systems approach to advancing cancer 
control implementation research and practice. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. 
2014; 23:2512–2521.
Fixsen, DL., Naoom, SF., Blase, KA., Friedman, RM., Wallace, F. Implementation research: A 
synthesis of the literature. Tampa: University of South Florida, National Implementation Research 
Network; 2005. 
Flaspohler P, Duffy J, Wandersman A, Stillman L, Maras MA. Unpacking prevention capacity: An 
intersection of research-to-practice models and community-centered models. American Journal of 
Community Psychology. 2008; 41:182–196. [PubMed: 18307028] 
Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O. Diffusion of innovations in service 
organizations: Systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly. 2004; 82:581–630. 
[PubMed: 15595944] 
Hannon PA, Maxwell AE, Escoffery C, Vu T, Kohn M, Leeman J, … DeGroff A. Colorectal Cancer 
Control Program grantees’ use of evidence-based interventions. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine. 2013; 45:644–648. [PubMed: 24139779] 
Kitson AL, Rycroft-Malone J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A. Evaluating the 
successful implementation of evidence into practice using the PARiHS framework: Theoretical and 
practical challenges. Implementation Science. 2008; 3:1.doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-3-1 [PubMed: 
18179688] 
Kothari A, Rudman D, Dobbins M, Rouse M, Sibbald S, Edwards N. The use of tacit and explicit 
knowledge in public health: A qualitative study. Implement Science. 2012; 7:20. 1748-5908-7-20. 
Lanham HJ, Leykum LK, Taylor BS, McCannon CJ, Lindberg C, Lester RT. How complexity science 
can inform scale-up and spread in health care: Understanding the role of self-organization in 
variation across local contexts. Social Science & Medicine. 2013; 93:194–202. [PubMed: 
22819737] 
Le LT, Anthony B, Broheim SM, Holland CM, Perry DF. A technical assistance model for guiding 
service and systems change. Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research. 2014; Advance 
online publication. doi: 10.1007/s11414-014-9439-2
Leeman J, Baernholdt M, Sandelowski M. Developing a theory-based taxonomy of methods for 
implementing change in practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing. 2007; 58:191–200. [PubMed: 
17445022] 
Leeman J, Calancie L, Hartman M, Escoffery C, Hermman A, Tague L, … Samuel-Hodge C. What 
strategies are used to build practitioners’ capacity to implement community-based interventions 
and are they effective? A systematic review. Implementation Science. 2015; Advance online 
publication. doi: 10.1186/s13012-015-0272-7
Leeman J, Myers A, Ribisl K, Ammerman A. Disseminating policy and environmental change 
interventions: Insights from obesity prevention and tobacco control. International Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine. 2015; 22:301–311. [PubMed: 25037977] 
Leeman J, Sommers J, Leung MM, Ammerman A. Disseminating evidence from research and practice: 
A model for selecting evidence to guide obesity prevention. Journal of Public Health Management 
and Practice. 2011; 17:133–140. [PubMed: 21297408] 
Levac D, Colquhoun H, … Brien KK. Scoping studies: Advancing the methodology. Implementation 
Science. 2010; 5:69.doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-5-69 [PubMed: 20854677] 
May CR, Finch T, Ballini L, MacFarlane A, Mair F, Murray E, … Rapley T. Evaluating complex 
interventions and health technologies using normalization process theory: Development of a 
simplified approach and web-enabled toolkit. BMC Health Services Research. 2011; 11:245.doi: 
10.1186/1472-6963-11-245 [PubMed: 21961827] 
May CR, Mair F, Finch T, MacFarlane A, Dowrick C, Treweek S, … Montori VM. Development of a 
theory of implementation and integration: Normalization process theory. Implementation Science. 
2009; 4:29.doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-4-29 [PubMed: 19460163] 
McCormack, L., Sheridan, S., Lewis, M., Boudewyns, V ., Melvin, CL., Kisteler, C., … Lohr, KN. 
Communication and dissemination strategies to facilitate the use of health-related evidence. 
Evidence Reports/Technology Assessments, No. 213. 2013. Retrieved from http://
Leeman et al. Page 11
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=12>>>
effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/ehc/products/433/1756/medical-evidence-communication-
executive-131120.pdf
Mendel P, Meredith LS, Schoenbaum M, Sherbourne CD, Wells KB. Interventions in organizational 
and community context: A framework for building evidence on dissemination and implementation 
in health services research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health. 2008; 35(1–2):21–37. 
[PubMed: 17990095] 
Meyers DC, Durlak JA, Wandersman A. The quality implementation framework: A synthesis of 
critical steps in the implementation process. American Journal of Community Psychology. 2012; 
50:462–480. [PubMed: 22644083] 
Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: A new method for characterising 
and designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation Science. 2011; 6:42.doi: 
10.1186/1748-5908-6-42 [PubMed: 21513547] 
Mitton C, Adair CE, McKenzie E, Patten SB, Waye Perry B. Knowledge transfer and exchange: 
Review and synthesis of the literature. Milbank Quarterly. 2007; 85:729–768. [PubMed: 
18070335] 
Ogilvie D, Cummins S, Petticrew M, White M, Jones A, Wheeler K. Assessing the evaluability of 
complex public health interventions: Five questions for researchers, funders, and policymakers. 
Milbank Quarterly. 2011; 89:206–225. [PubMed: 21676021] 
Rabin BA, Brownson RC, Haire-Joshu D, Kreuter MW, Weaver NL. A glossary for dissemination and 
implementation research in health. Journal of Public Health Management & Practice. 2008; 
14:117–123. [PubMed: 18287916] 
Rogers, EM. Diffusion of Innovations. New York, NY: Free Press; 2003. 
Rycroft-Malone J. The PARIHS framework—A framework for guiding the implementation of 
evidence-based practice. Journal of Nursing Care Quality. 2004; 19:297–304. [PubMed: 
15535533] 
Scheirer MA. Linking sustainability research to intervention types. American Journal of Public Health. 
2013; 103:e73–e80.
Snowden DJ, Boone ME. A leader’s framework for decision making. Harvard Business Review. 2007 
Nov.:1–9.
Tabak RG, Khoong EC, Chambers DA, Brownson RC. Bridging research and practice: Models for 
dissemination and implementation research. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2012; 
43:337–350. [PubMed: 22898128] 
Wandersman A, Chien VH, Katz J. Toward an evidence-based system for innovation support for 
implementing innovations with quality: Tools, training, technical assistance, and quality assurance/
quality improvement. American Journal of Community Psychology. 2012; 50:445–459. [PubMed: 
22538406] 
Wandersman A, Duffy J, Flaspohler P, Noonan R, Lubell K, Stillman L, … Saul J. Bridging the gap 
between prevention research and practice: The interactive systems framework for dissemination 
and implementation. American Journal of Community Psychology. 2008; 41:171–181. [PubMed: 
18302018] 
Ward VL, House AO, Hamer S. Knowledge brokering: Exploring the process of transferring 
knowledge into action. BMC Health Services Research. 2009; 9:12.doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-9-12 
[PubMed: 19149888] 
Weiner BJ. A theory of organizational readiness for change. Implementation Science. 2009; 4:67.doi: 
10.1186/1748-5908-4-67 [PubMed: 19840381] 
Yuan CT, Nembhard IM, Stern AF, Brush JE Jr, Krumholz HM, Bradley EH. Blueprint for the 
dissemination of evidence-based practices in health care. Issue Brief (Commonwealth Fund). 
2010; 86:1–16. [PubMed: 20469542] 
Leeman et al. Page 12
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Figure 1. 
Conceptual framework guiding the review.
Note. CB = capacity building; TA = technical assistance; EBIs = evidence-based 
interventions. Adapted from Leeman, Calancie, et al. (2015) and Wandersman et al. (2008).
Leeman et al. Page 13
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Figure 2. 
Revised framework of salient variations in EBIs and contexts.
Note. CB = capacity building; TA = technical assistance; EBIs = evidence-based 
interventions.
Leeman et al. Page 14
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 15
Table 1
Definitions of Capacity Building Strategy Types and Structures.
CB strategies Definitions
Types
 EBI selection and marketing The identification of specific EBIs and the way they are communicated to specific delivery-system 
audiences
 Training The provision of preplanned education or skill building sessions to a group
 Tools Media or technology resources for use in planning or implementing an intervention
 Technical assistance The provision of interactive, individualized education, skill building, and problem-solving sessions
 Assessment and feedback Collecting and providing data-based feedback on delivery system performance
 Peer networking Bringing practitioners together to learn from each other via in-person or distance trainings and 
technical assistance sessions
 Incentives Financial compensation and in-kind resources to incentivize progress or build capacity
Structures
 Dose The duration, frequency, and amount of CB provided
 Level of CB provider/recipient 
collaboration
“The relationship between support providers and recipients varies in the extent of collaboration with 
some providers functioning as advisors while others function as fully engaged participatory 
partners” (Leeman, Calancie, et al., 2015)
 Target audience CB strategies vary in whether the intended recipients are those who will make the adoption decision, 
plan the intervention, implement the intervention, and/or manage those who implement the 
intervention
Note. CB = capacity building; EBIs = evidence-based interventions. Adapted from Leeman, Calancie, et al. (2015) and Wandersman, Chien, & 
Katz (2012).
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 16
Table 2
Purpose, Evidence Base, and Underlying Theory or Framework of the Articles Informing the Development of 
a Beginning Theory Providing Guidance on How to Tailor Capacity-Building Strategies to Address Variations 
in Interventions and Practice Contexts.
Citation Country Purpose
Evidence base for 
framework Underlying theory/framework
Atun, de Jongh, 
Secci, Ohiri, and 
Adeyi (2010)a
United Kingdom Present an analytical 
framework that identifies 
critical elements that 
affect adoption, diffusion, 
and assimilation of 
innovations within health 
systems
Literature Diffusion of Innovations and 
others
Clavier, Senechal, 
Vibert, and Potvin 
(2012)d
Canada Propose a theory-based 
model of translation 
practices at the nexus 
between academic 
researchers and 
practitioners in 
participatory research
Empirical—Focus groups with 
intermediaries
Actor-network theory, sociology 
of intermediate actors
Contandriopoulos et 
al. (2010)d
Canada Develop an integrated 
interdisciplinary 
framework for 
understanding collective-
level knowledge exchange 
interventions
Systematic review Multiple
Damschroder et al. 
(2009)a,b
United States Provide an overarching 
typology to promote 
implementation theory 
development
Systematic review Multiple
DeGroff, Schooley, 
Chapel, and Poister 
(2010)d
United States Explore challenges in 
public health problems, 
systems, and data and 
suggest approaches to 
performance measurement 
in public health
Applied experience NA
Denis, Hebert, 
Langley, Lozeau, and 
Trottier (2002)d
Canada Describe how the 
distribution of benefits 
and risks map onto the 
interests, values, and 
power distribution of the 
adopting system is critical 
to understanding how 
innovations diffuse
Empirical—Multicase study Actor-network theory
Dreisinger et al. 
(2012)a
United States Identify individual, 
organizational, and 
intervention 
characteristics that 
contribute to an 
intervention’s readiness 
for widespread 
dissemination
Empirical—Interviews with 64 
staff in 19 programs
Diffusion of innovations
Durlak and DuPre 
(2008)b
United States Assess impact of 
implementation on 
program outcomes and 
identify factors affecting 
the implementation 
process
Systematic review Interactive systems framework
Elwyn, Taubert, and 
Kowalczuk (2007)a
United Kingdom Explore applicability of 
sticky knowledge (a 
business model) to 
implementation of 
evidence-based practice in 
health care
Sticky knowledge is based on 
empirical, cross-sectional 
survey
Communication theory, 
knowledge transfer
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 17
Citation Country Purpose
Evidence base for 
framework Underlying theory/framework
Fixsen, Naoom, 
Blase, Friedman, and 
Wallace (2005)a,b,c
United States Create a topographical 
map of implementation as 
seen through evaluation of 
factors related to 
implementation attempts
Systematic review NA
Greenhalgh, Robert, 
Macfarlane, Bate, 
and Kyriakidou 
(2004)a,b,c
United Kingdom Create a parsimonious and 
evidence-based model for 
considering the diffusion 
of innovations in health 
service organizations
Systematic review Multiple
Kitson et al. 
(2008)a,b,c; Rycroft-
Malone (2004)a,b,c
United Kingdom Describe an 
implementation 
framework and integrate 
work to date that used the 
framework
Empirical—Case studies Multiple
Lanham et al. 
(2012)d
United States Reexamine two cases of 
successful scale up and 
spread of innovations in 
clinical settings
Empirical—Two case studies Complexity science
Le, Anthony, 
Broheim, Holland, 
and Perry (2014)d
United States Examine technical 
assistance through 
interviews with skilled 
providers to further a 
more evidence-based 
approach
Empirical—Interviews with 14 
technical assistance providers
Theories of change, Adult 
learning, facilitation, etc.
Leeman, Baernholdt, 
and Sandelowski 
(2007)c
United States Develop a provisional 
taxonomy of 
implementation methods 
and links them to 
theoretical constructs
Systematic review Diffusion of innovations, 
contingency theory, behavioral 
change theories
May et al. (2009)a; 
May et al. (2011)a
United Kingdom Proposes a theory of 
normalization processes 
for implementation, 
embedding, and 
integration in conditions 
marked by complexity and 
emergence
Empirical—Three phases of 
qualitative studies
Normalization process theory
Mendel, Meredith, 
Schoenbaum, 
Sherbourne, and 
Wells (2008)a,c
United States Provide a framework for 
understanding contexts 
and how they influence 
diffusion and for 
identifying strategies to 
promote adoption and 
implementation
Applied experience Diffusion of innovations, social 
cognitive theory, agency theory
Ogilvie et al. (2011)d United Kingdom Present a framework for 
evaluating complex public 
health interventions
Applied experience NA
Rogers (2003)a,b United States Describe diffusion of 
innovations theory
Empirical—40 years of 
research
Diffusion of innovations, social 
learning theory
Scheirer (2013)d United States Suggests a framework for 
analyzing the 
sustainability of six types 
of interventions
Applied experience Congruence and open-systems 
theories
Snowden and Boone 
(2007)d
United States Presents a framework to 
guide decision making in 
business and government 
agencies
Applied experience Complexity science
Wandersman et al. 
(2008)a,b
United States Proposes a framework that 
specifies interactive 
systems of activities that 
are necessary to bridge the 
gap between science and 
practice
Literature Diffusion of innovations, 
technology transfer model, 
integrated systems framework
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 18
Citation Country Purpose
Evidence base for 
framework Underlying theory/framework
Weiner (2009)a United States Theorizes organizational 
determinants of effective 
implementation of 
complex innovations in 
worksites
Literature Theory of implementation of 
complex innovations
Yuan et al. (2010)a United States Proposes a blueprint for 
national quality 
improvement campaigns
Systematic review Conceptual framework of 
diffusion
Note. Source of framework:
aFrom Tabak et al. (2012).
bFrom Meyers et al. (2012).
cFrom Damschroder et al. (2009).
dCapacity Building Training and Technical Assistance Workgroup.
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 19
Table 3
Guidance on Tailoring Capacity Building Contingent on Salient Variations in Evidence-Based Interventions 
and Contexts.
Salient variation Guidance for tailoring capacity building
Factor EBI selection/marketing
CB structure and types 
(in addition to training, 
TA, tools) CB focus
EBI: Complexity When high
Select a different EBI
Market EBIs in formats that 
promote their adaptability and 
triability
When high
Provide more CB (dose) 
than when lower
When high
Focus on capacity to assess 
local contexts, select and adapt 
EBIs to fit context, and develop 
infrastructure to manage 
interdependency
EBI: Uncertainty When low
Select standardized EBIs
When high
Select broad, flexible EBIs
When high
Provide more CB (dose) 
than when lower
Strengthen CB provider/
recipient collaboration
Facilitate peer networking
Assess and provide 
feedback on performance
When low
Focus on capacity to adapt to 
local context, and implement 
with fidelity
When high
Focus on capacity to engage 
stakeholders, facilitate ongoing 
and open communication, 
collect local data, develop a 
shared understanding of 
problem, and collectively 
formulate an intervention plan
Context: Setting’s Decision-Making 
Structure
When hierarchical, 
centralized
Tailor and deliver CB to 
those working at different 
levels of the organization 
(target audience)
When horizontal, 
decentralized
Deliver CB to the 
coalition or team (target 
audience) that will plan 
and implement the EBI
When hierarchical, 
centralized
Focus on organizational 
leaders’ capacity to adopt and 
support the intervention; middle 
managers’ capacity to 
implement, supervise, and 
sustain the intervention; and 
practitioners’ capacity to deliver 
the intervention
When horizontal, 
decentralized
Focus on capacity to engage 
partners and to facilitate 
collaborative decision making
Context: Settings’ Overall Capacity When low
Select EBIs that embed change 
in existing technologies or 
operating procedures
When low
Efforts to build capacity 
to adopt and implement 
EBIs may not be 
successful
When low
Focus on building overall 
capacity prior to focusing on 
EBIs
Context: EBI-Setting Resources Fit When poor fit
If possible, select an EBI that 
provides a better fit
When poor fit
Provide incentives 
(funding or in-kind 
resources) to build 
capacity
When poor fit
Focus on capacity to adapt EBI 
and/or acquire additional 
resources
Context: EBI-Setting Values Fit When poor fit
Select an EBI that provides a 
better fit
When poor fit
CB provider/recipient 
collaboration
Facilitate peer networking
Assess and provide 
feedback on performance
When poor fit
Focus on capacity (motivation) 
to adopt and implement EBIs
Context: Stakeholder Unity/Polarization When polarized
Select an EBI that provides a 
better fit
Reframe EBI marketing
When polarized
Provide more CB (dose) 
than when lower
When unified
Focus on capacity for a 
technical, rational approach to 
adoption/implementation
When polarized
Focus on capacity for strategic 
and political approaches to 
adoption/implementation
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Leeman et al. Page 20
Note. Variation in CB type/structure is italicized. EBI = evidence-based intervention; TA = technical assistance; CB = capacity building.
Health Educ Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 28.