<<<PAGE=1>>>
31 Rose D, O’Reilly K. Economic and Social Research Council, Great Britain, Office for
National Statistics. The ESRC Review of Government Social Classification . London:
Office for National Statistics, 1998.
32 Office for National Statistics. Family Spending, 2012 Edition . London: Office for
National Statistics, 2012. Available at: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/family-
spending/family-spending/family-spending-2012-edition/index.html (26 February
2014, date last accessed).
33 Office of the Chief Statistician - Scottish Executive. Scottish Index of Multiple
Deprivation 2004: Technical Report. Scottish Executive, 2004. Available at: http://
www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/26350/0025281.pdf (26 February 2014, date last
accessed).
34 National Records of Scotland. General Register Office for Scotland - Migration
between Scotland and Overseas. In, out and net migration by age group between
Scotland and overseas, 2001/02 to latest. Edinburgh: National Records for Scotland,
2012. Available at: http://www.gro-scotland.gov.uk/files2/stats/migration/overseas_
mig_flows_by_age_scotland_2001-02_to_2011-12_updsept13.pdf (26 February
2014, date last accessed).
35 Cleves MA, Gould WW, Gutierrez RG, Marchenko A. An Introduction to Survival
Analysis Using Stata , 2nd edn. College Station, TX: Stata Press, 2008.
36 Menard SW. Applied Logistic Regression Analysis . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 2002.
37 Watt G. The inverse care law today. Lancet 2002;360:252–4.
38 Benach J, Malmusi D, Yasui Y, et al. A new typology of policies to tackle health
inequalities and scenarios of impact based on Rose’s population approach. J
Epidemiol Community Health 2012;67:286–91.
39 Hawkins SS, Stern AD, Gillman MW. Do state breastfeeding laws in the USA
promote breast feeding? J Epidemiol Community Health 2012;67:250–6.
40 OECD. OECD Family Database . Paris: OECD, 2014. Available at: www.oecd.org/
social/family/database (26 February 2014, date last accessed).
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
European Journal of Public Health , Vol. 24, No. 6, 1041–1047
/C223The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Public Health Association. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1093/eurpub/cku038 Advance Access published on 28 March 2014
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
Cultures of evidence across policy sectors: systematic
review of qualitative evidence
Theo Lorenc 1, Elizabeth F. Tyner 2, Mark Petticrew 1, Steven Duffy 3, Fred P. Martineau 2,
Gemma Phillips 2, Karen Lock 2
1 Department of Social and Environmental Health Research, School for Public Health Research, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
2 Department of Health Services Research and Policy, School for Public Health Research, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK
3 Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York
Correspondence: Theo Lorenc, Department of Science, Technology, Engineering and Public Policy (STEaPP), University
College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK, Tel: +44 (0)20 76795743, e-mail: t.lorenc@ucl.ac.uk
Present address:Department of Science, Technology, Engineering and Public Policy (STEaPP), University College London,
London
Background: It is important to understand the decision-making process, and the role of research evidence within
it, across sectors other than health, as interventions delivered within these sectors may have substantial impacts on
public health and health inequalities. Methods: Systematic review of qualitative evidence. Twenty-eight databases
covering a range of sectors were searched. Studies were eligible if they included local decision-makers in a policy
field relevant to the social determinants of health (including housing, transport, urban planning and regeneration,
crime, licensing or trading standards), were conducted in a high-income country, and reported primary qualitative
data on perceptions of research evidence. Study quality was assessed and a thematic synthesis undertaken.
Results: Sixteen studies were included, most using interview designs, and most focusing on planning or
transport policy. Several factors are seen to influence decision-makers’ views of evidence, including practical
factors such as resources or organizational support; the credibility of the evidence; its relevance or applicability
to practice; considerations of political support or feasibility; and legislative constraints. There are limited data on
how evidence is used: it is sometimes used to not only support decision-making, but also to lend legitimacy to
decisions that have already been made. Conclusion: Although cultures of evidence in non-health sectors are similar
to those in health in some ways, there are some key differences, particularly as regards the political context of
decision-making. Intersectoral public health research could benefit from taking into account non-health decision
makers’ needs and preferences, particularly around relevance and political feasibility.
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
Introduction
B
ecause many major determinants of public health and health
inequalities are social and environmental in nature, a broad
range of public policies and services, not only healthcare or public
health, can have an impact on health.
1,2 The need for intersectoral
working to understand the health impacts of policy has been widely
discussed in recent years,3 for example with reference to the Health in
All Policies model.4 In many countries in Europe and globally, local
government is the most important tier in controlling policy sectors
that impact on the social and environmental determinants of health.
In the UK, the Health and Social Care Act moved public health de-
partments from the National Health Service to local government in
April 2013. In other European countries, public health decision-
Cultures of evidence across policy sectors 1041
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=2>>>
makers have long worked in, or in close collaboration with, local
authorities or municipalities.5
Intersectoral government working presents a number of challenges,
relating particularly to the role of research evidence in decision-
making across sectors, or the ‘cultures of evidence’ among decision-
makers in different fields. The hypothesis motivating this review is
that policy-makers from different sectors may use and understand
evidence differently, and that the relation between evidence and
decision-making processes is likely to vary between sectors. The use
and uptake of research evidence by policy-makers and practitioners is
currently an active field of research.
6,7 However, most research has
focused on healthcare and public health policy. The cultures of
evidence in other sectors influencing population health are less well
understood. Evidence may inform policy differently outside the health
sector, and similar evidence may be understood differently by public
health practitioners compared with people working in other sectors,
potentially leading to miscommunication and missed opportunities
for intersectoral action. These differences may arise for a number of
reasons, such as the nature of the decisions made (e.g. the different
constraints on decisions about the physical built environment, as
opposed to social policy), decision-makers’ own training or back-
grounds, organizational cultures and histories
8 and, in some cases,
differences in the corresponding academic disciplines. Hence, there
is a need to explore the cultures of evidence in policy sectors outside
health to develop a more accurate picture of how research evidence
may impact on policy.
The aim of this review was to synthesize data from qualitative
research studies about local decision-makers in policy sectors
broadly related to the built environment, relating to their use or
perceptions of research evidence (see further under ‘inclusion
criteria’ below). The built environment was chosen as it is an
important locus of upstream determinants of health, and is the
target of a fairly well-defined subset of policy sectors. We focused
on qualitative data to gain a more nuanced picture of cultures of
evidence in their practical context.
Methods
The review protocol is available from the School for Public Health
Research@LSHTM website, http://sphr.lshtm.ac.uk.
Searching
In October 2012, twenty-eight databases (table 1) were searched
using a strategy combining terms for decision-makers, terms for
views, attitudes or qualitative research, and terms for evidence. An
example search strategy is presented in Supplementary data
Appendix A. We also hand-searched the following four key
journals for the past five years:
/C15 Evidence and Policy
/C15 Journal of Housing and the Built Environment.
/C15 Police Practice and Research
/C15 Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice
Finally, we screened all references cited by studies included in the
review and studies that cited the included studies. The searches were
not limited by date or language of publication.
Inclusion criteria
All titles and abstracts identified by the search strategy were screened
against the following inclusion criteria:
(i) Does the study concern one of the following health-relevant
policy fields: housing, transport, urban planning and regener-
ation, crime and disorder, alcohol and food licensing, or
trading standards?
(ii) Does the study report primary qualitative data (e.g. interviews,
ethnography)?
(iii) Was the study conducted in a high-income country (current
OECD member)?
(iv) Does the study population include local policy-makers, prac-
titioners or anyone with a local-level decision-making role?
(v) Does the study report data concerning perceptions of research
evidence? (Inclusion was restricted to perceptions of research
conducted by academic researchers; studies of other types of
information or data, such as GIS or transport modelling, were
excluded unless data were generated by academics.)
Regarding the last criterion, we initially included any type of explicit
knowledge or information. However, these data proved to be too
conceptually heterogeneous to produce a meaningful synthesis,
because of the wide variation in the types of information
discussed in the studies. (It also became clear that, while drawing
the line at research evidence is arbitrary, drawing it at explicit in-
formation is no less arbitrary, given the importance of tacit
knowledge in decision-making.)
A randomly selected sample of 10% of abstracts was independently
double-screened by two reviewers, and differences were resolved by
discussion. Subsequent references were screened by one reviewer.
Full-text references were independently double-screened by two
reviewers. EPPI-Reviewer 4 software was used to manage data.
Quality appraisal, data extraction and synthesis
The quality of each included study was appraised using the quality
appraisal tool produced by the Centre for Public Health Excellence
at the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE).
9 Each study was quality-assessed by two reviewers inde-
pendently, and differences were reconciled by discussion. The tool
assesses the appropriateness of qualitative approach to the research
question, methodological rigour and relevance, and adequacy of the
findings. Each study was then awarded a cumulative quality
category: low, medium or high quality.
Table 1 Databases searched for the review ( N = 28)
Applied Social Sciences Index and Abstracts (ASSIA)
Campbell Library
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL)
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR)
Cochrane Methodology Register (CMR)
Conference Proceedings Citation Index- Science (CPCI-S)
Conference Proceedings Citation Index- Social Science and Humanities
(CPCI-SSH)
COPAC
Criminal Justice Abstracts
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE)
EconLit
Enviroline
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) database
MEDLINE
MEDLINE In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS)
NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS EED)
OAISTER
OpenGrey
PAIS International
PsycINFO
Science Citation Index (SCI)
Social Care Online
Social Policy and Practice
Social Science Citation Index (SSCI)
Social Services Abstracts
TRID (Transportation Research Information Services (TRIS) database and
International Transport Research Documentation (ITRD) database)
Zetoc
1042 European Journal of Public Health
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Data extraction was conducted independently by two reviewers.
Data were extracted from each study on the policy field, research
parameters, data collection methods, population and sample
selection, outcomes, analysis methods, limitations and funding
source. Data were coded line-by-line, using an open code set, and
synthesized thematically using a constant comparison technique.
Findings
Sixteen studies were included in the synthesis. Figure 1 shows the
flow of literature through the review. Table 2 provides an overview
of the context, methods and research question of each included
study, and the quality assessment ratings. All but one study used
interview or focus group methodologies, with six also incorporating
case study methods. Eight studies concern planning or environment
policy, seven transport, one urban regeneration and one community
safety (with one covering both planning and transport). The findings
are presented under three broad thematic questions:
(i) What is considered to be evidence by non-health decision-
makers?
(ii) What factors affect decision-makers’ use of research evidence?
(iii) How do decision-makers use research evidence?
What is considered to be evidence?
A range of types of evidence are mentioned by participants,
including outcome evaluations such as trials, 12,20 literature
reviews,13,22 needs assessments, 11 surveys of public views or prefer-
ences or more informal types of public consultation, 11,19,20,22
examples or case studies of what other decision-makers are doing
elsewhere,12,13 expert opinion 13 and various types of routine data
and statistics.20
There is thus considerable latitude in what these non-health pol-
icymakers define as ‘evidence’. Even though this review adopted a
narrow definition of ‘research evidence’, it is clear that academic
research is only one among many potential sources of information.
Several studies from transport and planning conclude that academic
research evidence is less used than other types of information.
12,22,25
Decision-makers in planning and transport are seen to value data
that illuminate local contexts
24 or help to predict the public’s
responses to policy decisions. 20 One study of built environment
decision-makers finds that cost–benefit or other economic analyses
are particularly convincing.
13
One study of the New Deal for Communities evaluation 12 finds
that local practitioners often see their own informal practice-based
expertise as more valuable than academic research. For example, one
participant argues: ‘You don’t learn by sitting people in front of
screens and giving them information. It’s more about dialogue.
You need to discuss it and test it out in different scenarios.’
12
Participants in this study also link practitioner expertise to lay
knowledge, and identify a potential tension between evidence use
and local empowerment, pointing out that local people may not
make ‘evidence-based’ decisions.
What factors affect decision-makers’ use of research
evidence?
The studies identify a wide range of factors that may impact on
decision-makers’ use of evidence. Several participants from
Unique records iden/g415ﬁed through 
database searching 
(n = 13,126)
Screening Included Eligibility Iden/g415ﬁca/g415on 
Addi/g415onal records iden/g415ﬁed 
through other sources 
(n = 5)
Records screened 
(n = 13,131) 
Records excluded 
(n=12,890; n=14 
irretrievable)  
Full-text ar/g415cles assessed 
for eligibility 
(n = 227) 
Full-text ar/g415cles excluded 
(n = 209) 
1. Policy ﬁeld not relevant (14) 
2. Not substan/g415ve primary 
qualita/g415ve data (73) 
3. Not a high-income country (0) 
4. Popula/g415on not decision-makers 
(19) 
5. Not about evidence (103) 
Studies included in 
qualita/g415ve synthesis 
(n = 16 + 2 linked reports)
Figure 1 Flow of literature through the review.
Cultures of evidence across policy sectors 1043
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=4>>>
transport and planning mention practical barriers, including lack of
time or research skills, 12,19,20,25,26 or lack of institutional support to
keep up with research. 12,25 Participants in several studies of the built
environment and transport sectors mention contact or collaboration
between researchers and decision-makers as a facilitator of research
use,
20,26 but it is rarely described as a major factor.
A number of characteristics of the evidence itself are also
mentioned. Some issues relate to the presentation of evidence
rather than the nature of the evidence: for example, reports that
are over-long20,22 or difficult to read 12,20 are less likely to influence
practice. Research in planning and transport may sometimes be
lacking altogether 10,12,13 and is often of poor quality, 19,20 although,
as discussed below, many participants do not clearly distinguish
between high-quality and poor-quality evidence.
12,19
Perhaps the most frequently mentioned facilitator of evidence
uptake is its ‘credibility’, a complex notion that refers less to the
methodological or substantive characteristics of the research
itself than to the personal authority of the individuals putting
it forward, particularly senior academics. Academic researchers are
seen as neutral and disinterested, and hence able to intervene more
credibly in politically loaded decisions, particularly in transport.
16,22
More broadly, research conducted by academics is seen to grant
‘legitimacy’.24 As one transport policy-maker states: ‘certain
academics have a national standing and [policy] boards value their
perspective’.22 Coote et al.12 report the perception that the credibility
of research suffered when it was led by more junior researchers
rather than the senior academics who led bids for research funding.
Another prominent set of themes concerns the relevance of
research. Participants in one study see academic researchers in
transport as self-absorbed and pre-occupied with developing
sophisticated theories rather than usable solutions; 18 in other
studies, academics are seen to focus on over-simplified problems
that do not reflect the complexity of practice. 12,19 Research reports
are perceived as not drawing clear and well-informed implications
for practice. 12,22 Where they do attempt to inform practitioners,
Coote et al. 12 argue that they focus excessively on ‘stories of
‘‘good practice’’ rather than insights into processes or outcomes
that might help them to improve delivery’ (quote from report
authors), and fail to illuminate causal links. 13 Practitioners are
often uncertain about how to apply evidence generated in other
Table 2 Overview of the included studies ( N = 16)
First author and
references
Country/ies Data collection
methods
Policy sector Focus/RQ Quality
rating
Allender10 UK Focus groups Planning; transport Town planning and transport
professionals’ views about
NICE public health guidance
++
Allison11 USA Interviews Community safety Barriers and facilitators of
community youth violence
prevention programmes
/C0
Coote
12 UK (and some USA data) Interviews and
case studies
Urban regeneration and
social policy
Role of evidence and evaluation
in social policy; policy-makers’
and practitioners’ views and
experiences of evaluation
(particularly New Deal for
Communities)
+
Freeman
13 Australia Interviews Built environment and
health
Policy development in healthy
built environments; research-
policy partnerships
+
Garcia14 USA Interviews and
case studies
Environmental health;
planning
Process evaluation of community-
based environmental justice
advocacy project
+
Gonzalez
15 USA Interviews and
case studies
Environmental health;
planning
Process evaluation of community-
based environmental justice
advocacy project
+
Gudmundsson16 Sweden Interviews and
case studies
Transport Use of decision support in
transport planning and policy
/C0
Harrison17 UK Interviews Planning; nature
conservation
Practitioners’ views and practices
about nature conservation in
brownfield sites
/C0
Hatzopoulou
18 Canada Interviews Transport Use of modelling tools in
decision-making
+
Hewson19 UK Survey feedback Transport (road injury
reduction)
Description of course on
evidence-based practice for
practitioners
/C0
Hinchcliff
20,21 Australia (and some USA
data)
Interviews Transport (graduated
licensing, road safety)
Policy-makers’ views of evidence;
evidence–policy relation more
generally
++
Marsden22 France, UK, Germany,
Sweden, Denmark,
USA, Canada
Interviews Transport Policy transfer in sustainable
urban transport
/C0
Minkler
23 USA Interviews and
case studies
Environmental health;
planning
Process evaluation of community-
based environmental justice
advocacy project
+
Petersen
24 USA Interviews and
case studies
Environmental health;
planning
Process evaluation of community-
based environmental justice
advocacy project
+
Sandstro¨ m
25 Sweden Interviews Planning Urban planners’ views about
green space
/C0
Timms26 France, UK, Italy, Poland,
Sweden, Austria, Norway
Interviews Transport Policy transfer and policy-makers’
information needs
/C0
1044 European Journal of Public Health
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=5>>>
countries or contexts. 12 The issue of relevance helps to explain why
many participants, across sectors including planning, transport and
urban regeneration, feel overwhelmed by the volume of
evidence,10,12,19,22 even though little of it is usable for practice.
Several participants also question how much research evidence
really adds to existing practitioner expertise. Research findings and
evidence-based guidelines are often seen as ‘common sense’
generalities that do not add to what is already known. 10,12 As
discussed further below, several participants question the value of
building an ever greater evidence base that has limited applicability
to practice. One participant argues: ‘You can run the research until
the cows come home, I actually think a lot of it’s simply [about] that
implementation’.
13
A range of more macro-level variables also affect evidence use.
Theoretically possible options may not be politically accept-
able.
12,20,21 Research findings thus need to be balanced against
what is politically achievable and realistic. This is highlighted in
Hinchcliff et al.’s 20 study of transport. One participant
summarizes: ‘It boils down to what the research evidence is telling
you, what the practicality of your system allows you to do, and what
we interpret from the community as being initiatives they think are
workable’. However, acceptability may in its turn be affected by
other factors. The media, for example, influence decision-makers’
agendas, but can themselves be influenced by researchers.
21
Finally, in some sectors, decision-makers’ options are narrowly
constrained by legislation or guidance. In planning, several partici-
pants point out that legal regulations, where they apply, take
precedence over evidence-based decisions, and that evidence has a
much greater chance of being used if it takes this context into
account.
10 One planning practitioner argues: ‘Is this [guidance]
going to be a stand alone thing or is it going to be integrated into
PPG 17 etc? Otherwise it’s almost a throwaway guidance whereas if
it’s through PPG 17 it actually has the authority and people take much
greater due regard to that when they’re making planning decisions’.
10
How do decision-makers use research evidence?
A number of participants in transport and community safety describe
using research evidence to make informed decisions, 11,12,16,18,20
although other participants report not using research at all. 11,19,25
Where research is used, it is generally not the main determining
factor in what decisions are made, and it is often unclear from the
studies how research is used or what difference it makes (the main
exception being Hinchcliff et al.’s
20 study of driver licensing). In line
with the issues of political feasibility and legislation, some partici-
pants report that evidence is only useful once local policy objectives
are already set. 12,20 In contrast, one participant suggests research
may help to expand the possibilities considered by decision-
makers: ‘it questions what we all accept as good practice, when in
fact this might be flawed. But at least it makes us think there is better
practice’.19 Research, particularly local evaluation, may also help
local decision-makers demonstrate that they are meeting targets or
conforming to performance management standards.
12
Other studies suggest that research evidence is often used to justify
or defend decisions that have already been made, and to manage
relations with national policy-makers or others in positions of
power. Coote et al. 12 conclude that local decision-makers largely
use evidence ‘to justify prior decisions and to help them make the
case for political and financial support’ (quote from report authors).
Other participants talk of a feeling of ‘confidence’ from having
decisions backed up by evidence.
12 As already described, the ‘cred-
ibility’ of research evidence associated with prestigious senior
academics helps to bestow legitimacy on decisions that are aligned
with it. 23,24 Institutional credibility from organizations like NICE
also helps to grant legitimacy to decisions in other sectors such as
planning or transport. 10
Many participants are aware of the tension between the rhetoric of
evidence-based policy and how research is actually used in practice.
Participants in Coote et al.’s 12 study express frustration that the
policies they implement, led by national government agencies, are
not themselves evidence based, ‘yet we’re expected to find evidence
to support the implementation—I think that’s contradictory’.
Participants in two studies perceive policy formation at national
government level to be frequently driven by political factors rather
than by evidence.
12,20 Research may be commissioned to provide a
pretext for delaying unpopular decisions or diverting attention from
certain issues, 20 and national policy-makers may reject negative
research findings or distort them in the service of political agendas. 12
Discussion
Comparison of our findings with the literature on decision-makers’
views of evidence in health-related fields reveals some congruent
findings, for example, the emphasis on relevance, or the finding
that evidence is often used ‘tactically’, in Weiss’ sense,
27 as a
means of obtaining support for decisions that have already been
made. However, this review suggests some important differences
between the findings reported in the health literature
6,7,28 and our
findings from other policy sectors. Three are particularly striking.
First, direct collaboration between researchers and policy-makers or
practitioners is much more rarely mentioned in our data. Second,
‘credibility’ is an important perceived facilitator of evidence use, and
appears to have as much to do with the personal status of academic
researchers as with the robustness of the evidence. Third, many
decisions in non-health sectors are limited much more by political
or legal constraints than those in public health or clinical practice;
as these factors must generally be prioritized over the use of
evidence, the scope for the latter to make informed decisions is
often limited. These differences, we argue, are striking enough to
license speaking of distinct ‘cultures’ of evidence, at least in the
minimal (e.g. structural–functionalist) sense of coherent patterns
of norms and orientations governing how knowledge is understood
and used.
This review has some limitations, particularly the narrow focus on
academic research evidence. Our findings indicate that decision-
makers use a wide range of other sources of information, both
formal tools for decision support or information management and
more informal types of expertise. Future research could usefully
focus on situating evidence use and other information sources
within the actual decision-making process in specific fields. This
restriction of scope also means that fairly few studies met our
criteria, and of those, several made only a limited contribution to
the synthesis.
It is also important to note that many of these studies were
conducted before the current economic recession. There may now
be even greater financial constraints on the production of new
evidence and evaluation, and on its application. Evidence-based
decision-making may now have more of a focus on ‘what doesn’t
work’ rather than on ‘what works’: one recent report notes how
English local authorities are ‘using evidence ... [by] applying lean
thinking to drive out unproductive activities’.
29 Our focus on local-
level decision-makers is also a potential limitation; however, many of
our findings are likely to be generalizable to other levels, and in any
case there is value in focused attention on local government, where
most policies in the sectors concerned are implemented.
Our findings suggest a number of implications for public health
researchers and practitioners. The finding that evidence is not
perceived as relevant or practically usable suggests that a key task
for public health researchers working with practitioners in other
sectors sector is a translational one, which can help to draw out
the value of the existing research for practice. Because practitioners
already feel overwhelmed with evidence, little of which is useable, an
exclusive focus on the need for more evidence is likely to meet with
skepticism. On the side of public health practitioners, the findings
suggest that effective intersectoral working may involve translating
Cultures of evidence across policy sectors 1045
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=6>>>
between different cultures of evidence. In particular, the information
resources and standards of reliability used by practitioners in non-
health sectors may be different.
Furthermore, decision-makers have clear views about the limita-
tions of the existing evidence base, and report a number of good
reasons why research findings are not put into practice. They also
report that evidence is often used in a ‘tactical’, post hoc way. These
findings suggest that the value of research is likely to be maximized if
researchers work with decision-makers to explore their research
needs, and to understand the shape of the decision-making
process, rather than trying to promote the uptake or impact of
evidence for its own sake.
However, the decision-making process in local government is
complex and contingent, and it is likely that other factors, particu-
larly political factors, will often play a greater role than research
evidence. One Director of Public Health in the UK recently noted
that political judgement permeates every decision: ‘There may be a
political angle to a mental health campaign or a social marketing
campaign to reach seldom heard groups. You need to be aware of
how it plays politically’.30 Nutley and Davies 31 (p. 337 figure 2) set
out the main categories of influence on individual practice, among
which are ‘organisational structures and cultural norms’. We
conclude from our review that in local government this has a par-
ticularly strong influence, which is not yet well understood; and the
structures, cultures and norms that researchers most need to
understand if they are to have an impact on decision-making are,
firstly, political structures, and secondly, evidence cultures. More
broadly, discussion of evidence and policy would gain from more
focused attention to the institutional and socio-political contexts
through which knowledge passes, and to the cultural differences
that may impact on the generation and use of evidence.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at EURPUB online.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR)’s School for Public Health Research (SPHR).
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Key points
/C15 Because of the importance of intersectoral working and
policy-level interventions in promoting health, we need to
understand non-health decision-makers’ practices and
views, particularly about the use of research evidence.
/C15 Decision-makers in non-health sectors value evidence that is
credible and relevant to practice, and feel that much existing
research evidence does not meet these needs.
/C15 In some sectors, laws and regulations may limit the extent to
which evidence can be used to make informed decisions.
/C15 Evidence may often be used tactically to justify and
legitimize decisions post hoc . Hence, increasing the uptake
of research evidence may make limited difference to the
quality of decisions.
/C15 Public health policy-makers and practitioners should be aware
that other sectors may have different cultures of evidence.
References
1 Macintyre S, Ellaway A. Neighbourhood influences on health. In: Graham H, editor.
Understanding Health Inequalities, 2nd edn. Maidenhead: Open University Press,
2009: 84–101.
2 Marmot M, Friel S, Bell R, et al. Closing the gap in a generation: health equity
through action on the social determinants of health. Lancet 2010;372:1661–9.
3 Loewenson R. Evaluating intersectoral processes for action on the social deter-
minants of health: learning from key informants. Social Determinants of Health
Discussion Paper 5: Policy & Practice. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2013.
4 Stahl T, Wismar M, Ollila E, et al. Health in All Policies: Prospects and Potentials.
Finland: Finnish Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, European Observatory on
Health Systems and Policies, 2006. Available at: http://www.euro.who.int/__data/
assets/pdf_file/0003/109146/E89260.pdf (28 June 2013 date last accessed).
5 European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. Countries and subregions.
Health systems in transition. Available at: http://www.euro.who.int/en/who-we-are/
partners/observatory/health-systems-in-transition-hit-series/countries-and-
subregions (14 June 2013 date last accessed).
6 Orton L, Lloyd-Williams F, Taylor-Robinson D, et al. The use of research evidence in
public health decision making processes: systematic review. PloS One 2011;6:e21704.
7 Oliver K, Innvær S, Lorenc T, et al. A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators
of the use of evidence by policy makers. BMC Health Serv Res 2014;14:2.
8 Pettman T, Armstrong R, Pollard B, et al. Using evidence in health promotion in
local government: contextual realities and opportunities. Health Promot J Austr
2013;24:72–5.
9 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Methods for the Development
of NICE Public Health Guidance. 2nd edn. Appendix H, 2009. Available at: www.
nice.org.uk/media/2FB/53/PHMethodsManual110509.pdf (14 June 2013 date last
accessed).
10 Allender S, Cavill N, Parker M, Foster C. ‘Tell us something we don’t already know
or do!’—the response of planning and transport professionals to public health
guidance on the built environment and physical activity. J Public Heal Policy 2009;
30:102–16.
11 Allison KW, Edmonds T, Wilson K, et al. Connecting youth violence prevention,
positive youth development, and community mobilization. Am J Community
Psychol 2011;48:8–20.
12 Coote A, Allen J, Woodhead D. Finding Out What Works. Building Knowledge About
Complex, Community-Based Initiatives . London: Kings Fund, 2004.
13 Freeman E, Thompson S, Jalaludin B. Healthy built environments: stakeholder
engagement in evidence based policy making. In: Whitzman C, Fincher R, editors.
Proceedings of the State of Australian Cities Conference 29 November–2 December,
Melbourne, Melbourne: Australian Sustainable Cities and Regions Network, 2011.
14 Garcia AP, Wallerstein N, Hricko A, et al. THE (Trade, Health, Environment)
Impact Project: a community-based participatory research environmental justice
case study. Environ Justice 2013;6:17–26.
15 Gonzalez PA, Minkler M, Garcia AP, et al. Community-based participatory research
and policy advocacy to reduce diesel exposure in West Oakland, California. Am J
Public Health 2011;101:S166–75.
Individual
practice
Organisational 
structures and 
cultural norms
Routines and
craft/procedural
knowledge
Figure 2 Categories of influence on practice (reproduced with
permission from Davies and Nutley 31)
1046 European Journal of Public Health
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025
<<<PAGE=7>>>
16 Gudmundsson H, Ericsson E, Tight M, et al. The role of decision support in the
implementation of ‘‘sustainable transport’’ plans.Eur Plan Stud 2012;20:171–91.
17 Harrison C, Davies G. Conserving biodiversity that matters: practitioners’ per-
spectives on brownfield development and urban nature conservation in London.
J Environ Manage 2002;65:95–108.
18 Hatzopoulou M, Miller E. Transport policy evaluation in metropolitan
areas: the role of modelling in decision-making. Transp Res A Policy Pract 2009;43:
323–38.
19 Hewson P. Evidence-based practice in road casualty reduction. Inj Prev 2007;13:
291–2.
20 Hinchcliff R, Ivers RQ, Poulos R, Senserrick T. Utilization of research in policy-
making for graduated driver licensing. Am J Public Health 2010;100:2052–8.
21 Hinchcliff R, Poulos R, Ivers R, Senserrick T. Understanding novice driver policy
agenda setting. Public Health 2011;125:217–21.
22 Marsden G, Frick KT, May AD, Deakin E. How do cities approach policy innovation
and policy learning? A study of 30 policies in Northern Europe and North America.
Transp Policy 2011;18:501–12.
23 Minkler M, Garcia AP, Williams J, et al. Si se puede: using participatory research to
promote environmental justice in a Latino community in San Diego, California.
J Urban Health 2010;87:796–812.
24 Petersen D, Minkler M, Va ´squez VB, Baden AC. Community based participatory
research as a tool for policy change: a case study of the Southern California
Environmental Justice Collaborative. Rev Policy Res 2006;23:339–54.
25 Sandstro¨m UG, Angelstam P, Khakee A. Urban comprehensive planning–identifying
barriers for the maintenance of functional habitat networks. Landsc Urban Plan
2006;75:43–57.
26 Timms P. Urban transport policy transfer:‘‘bottom-up’’ and ‘‘top-down’’ perspec-
tives. Transp Policy 2011;18:513–21.
27 Weiss CH. The many meanings of research utilization. Public Adm Rev 1979;39:
426–31.
28 Innvær S, Vist G, Trommald M, Oxman A. Health policy-makers’ perceptions of
their use of evidence: a systematic review. J Health Serv Res Policy 2002;7:239–44.
29 Johnstone D. Squaring the Circle: Evidence at the Local Level . London: Alliance for
Useful Evidence, 2013.
30 Vize R. BMJ briefing: meet the new masters of public health. BMJ 2013;346:
f4242.
31 Nutley S, Davies H. Making a reality of evidence-based practice. In: Davies H,
Nutley S, Smith P, editors. What Works? Evidence-based Policy and Practice in Public
Aervices. Bristol: The Policy Press, 2000: 317–50.
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
European Journal of Public Health , Vol. 24, No. 6, 1047–1052
/C223The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Public Health Association. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1093/eurpub/cku043 Advance Access published on 7 April 2014
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
Public health in the 21st century: working differently
means leading and learning differently
Katarzyna Czabanowska 1,2, Kenneth A. Rethmeier 3,4, George Lueddeke 5, Tony Smith 6,
Andre´ Malho7, Robert Otok 8, Mindaugas Stankunas 9,10
1 Department of International Health, CAPHRI, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands
2 Institute of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College
3 The Rethmeier Group, LLC, Town of Bermuda Run, NC, USA
4 Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
NC, USA
5 Education Advisor, GRL Consulting in Higher and Medical Education Southampton, Hampshire, UK
6 Leadership and Organisation Development Centre for Leadership in Health and Social Care, Faculty of Health and
Wellbeing, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK
7 Department of International Health, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht,
The Netherlands
8 The Association of Schools of Public Health in the European Region (ASPHER), Brussels, Belgium
9 Department Health Management, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania
10 Health Services Department, School of Medicine, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia
Correspondence: Katarzyna Czabanowska, PO Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands, Tel: +31 43 3881592,
Fax: +31 43 38 84 172, e-mail: kasia.czabanowska@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Background: Public health needs to adapt to the complex context of 21st century Europe. Unquestionably, leaders
for health require new skills to face a myriad of wicked problems and challenges that are at a critical juncture for
potential improvements. Public health curricula are traditionally oriented around core educational disciplines, and
there is little room for developing students’ leadership capabilities within the context of public health. The aim is
to present the meaning of contemporary public health leadership based on qualitative research and propose a
curriculum model for contemporary public health leadership. Methods: A series of in-depth semi-structured
interviews were carried out with six European public health leaders from a variety of countries and professional
backgrounds. The interviews recorded and transcribed. A thematic content analysis was undertaken to identify
themes within the data. Results: Five common themes that help to inform future leadership capacity arose from
the interviews: the inner path of leadership, the essence of leadership, new types of leadership, future leaders’
imperatives functioning within a complex and uncertain European public health context. Conclusion: The
leadership thematic model makes an important contribution to defining public health leadership in Europe and
can help to guide the content development of public health leadership curricula. The authors assert that a new
‘integrative inquiry-based learning model’, with leadership as a central component, will allow schools and depart-
ments of public health across Europe to be able to ensure that tomorrow’s public health leaders are adequately
trained and prepared for the challenges they will face.
.................. ................... ................... .................. ................ ...............
Working differently means leading and learning differently 1047
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurpub/article/24/6/1041/608675 by World Bank user on 17 March 2025