<<<PAGE=1>>>
A growing num ber of governm ents in devel -
oping countries around the world are work -
ing to im prove their perform ance by creating 
system s to m easure and help them  under -
stand the perform ance of their services and 
program s. This trend is inﬂuenced by O rgan -
isation for E conom ic Co- operation and D e -
velopm ent (O E CD ) countries, m ost of which 
place a high priority on the four m ain uses of 
M &E  ﬁndings: 
1. policy developm ent 
2 . evidence-based policy m aking and budg -
eting 
3. m anagem ent perform ance 
4. accountability. 
T he priority for m easuring and better 
m anaging governm ent perform ance in m id -
dle- and low-incom e countries is intensiﬁed 
by continuing ﬁscal and m acroeconom ic 
pressures affecting all countries, and by ever- 
rising expectations from  ordinary citizens. It 
is also inﬂuenced by the need for citizens, 
governm ents, and the international com m u -
nity to m ake state actions m ore effective in 
increasing welfare, reducing poverty, and im -
proving opportunities for all. An additional 
im petus to focus on perform ance is the 
strong expectations of international donors. 
There is an increasing body of literature 
on the experience of countries in building 
and strengthening their M &E  system s, and 
on the M &E  tools and techniques that they 
use. T his literature com prises conference 
proceedings, research papers on country 
case studies, academ ic reviews, and num er -
ous W eb sites of donors, governm ents, and 
evaluation associations. Accessing and digest -
ing the inform ation in its various form ats can 
be difﬁcult, especially for senior ofﬁcials who 
are new to M &E . 
W hy M &E System s Im prove 
G overnm ent Perform ance 
T his note 1 outlines the m ain ways in which 
M &E  ﬁndings can be used throughout the 
policy cycle to im prove the perform ance of 
governm ent decision m aking and of govern -
m ent services and program s, including the 
FROMtHEPOVERtYREDuCtIONANDECONOMICMANAgEMENtNEtWORK 
A u g u s t 
2 0 1 0 
N u M B E R 1
PREM notes 
Special Series on 
Conceptual Fram ew ork for 
M onitoring and Evaluation 
K eith M ackay 
T his is the ﬁrst note in a m onthly series on governm ent m onitoring and evaluation (M & E) system s led 
by the PR EM  Poverty R eduction and Equity G roup under the guidance of Jaim e Saavedra, G ladys Lopez- 
A cevedo, and K eith M ackay, w ith contributions from  several W orld Bank colleagues. T he m ain purpose 
of this series is to synthesize existing know ledge about M & E system s and to docum ent new  know ledge on 
M & E system s that m ay not yet be w ell understood. T he series targets W orld Bank other donor staff w ho 
are w orking to support client governm ents in strengthening their M & E system s, as w ell as governm ent 
ofﬁcials interested in learning about the uses and beneﬁts of M & E and in adopting a m ore system atic 
approach tow ard M & E in their governm ents. 
The World Bank 
Series Introduction 
 Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
<<<PAGE=2>>>
use of M &E  for evidence-based policy m ak -
ing, budgeting, m anagem ent, and accounta -
bility. There are m any different types of M &E 
tools and approaches, each with advantages 
and lim itations. T his note presents four ex -
am ples of successful governm ent system s for 
M &E — in both developed and developing 
countries— and discusses som e of their hard- 
earned lessons for building M &E  system s. 
T hese lessons are evidence of what works 
and what doesn’t in the developm ent and 
sustainm ent of successful M &E  system s. 
G overnm ent system s for M &E  focus on 
m easuring the results produced by govern -
m ent— its outputs, outcom es, and im pacts. 
The M &E  system  m ay exist at the level of an 
individual agency, entire sector, or the gov -
ernm ent as a whole. M &E  can provide 
unique inform ation about the perform ance 
of governm ent policies, program s, and proj -
ects— at the national, sector, and subnational 
levels. It can identify what works, what does -
not, and the reasons why. M &E  also provides 
inform ation about the perform ance of a gov -
ernm ent, of individual m inistries and agen -
cies, and of m anagers and their staff. H igh -
lighting exam ples of good practice and poor 
practice can help im prove perform ance. 
Three deﬁning characteristics of success -
ful M &E  system s are 
1. intensive utilization of the M &E  infor -
m ation in one or m ore stages of the pol -
icy cycle; 
2 . inform ation that m eets standards for data 
quality and evaluation reliability; and 
3. sustainability, by which the system  will 
survive a change in adm inistration, gov -
ernm ent m inisters, or top ofﬁcials. 
Perhaps the best way to understand the 
potential contribution of M &E  to sound gov -
ernm ent is to view it at different parts of the 
policy cycle (ﬁgure 1). The early stages of the 
PREM NOtE 2 August 2010 
Figure 1. The Policy Cycle: Linking Policy, Planning, Budgeting, M anagem ent, and M &E 
S ource: Adapted from World Bank (1998). 
Develop Policy 
and Begin Planning 
Set objectives, policies, 
strategies, and priorities 
Evaluate and Audit 
The efficiency and 
effectiveness of activities 
M onitor Activities 
and Account for 
Expenditures 
Prepare Budget 
Allocate resources 
Im plem ent 
and M anage 
Planned Activities 
Review  Policy 
Review the past planning 
and budget period
<<<PAGE=3>>>
policy process— the analysis and develop -
m ent of governm ent policy and the planning 
of priorities and strategies, including how 
consistent are they with the objective of 
poverty reduction— all beneﬁt from  evidence 
of what has or has not worked in the past; in 
other words, evidence-based policy m aking. It 
is an im portant discipline for governm ents to 
consider carefully what they are trying to 
achieve from  their policies, and to plan for 
them  accordingly. Thus it helps to clarify, for 
each possible program , what success would 
look like and how the governm ent will know 
if it has (or has not) been achieved. It also 
helps to clarify what are the potential poverty 
and distributional effects of policies and pro -
gram s. Setting perform ance targets, and 
m easuring the extent of progress toward 
achieving them , is thus an im portant part of 
governm ent planning and policy review. 
Inform ation on the perform ance of ex -
isting governm ent program s, and on the ex -
pected perform ance of new program s, is im -
portant for the next stage of the policy cycle: 
budget decision m aking— the allocation of 
resources in the budget. M &E  inform ation, 
and especially evaluation ﬁndings that ex -
plain past perform ance, helps to guide gov -
ernm ent decisions so that the m ost cost-ef -
fective collection of policies and program s 
can be adopted in the annual budget. 
At the next stage in the policy cycle— the 
im plem entation and m anagem ent of activities 
funded by the budget— M &E  helps m anagers 
to m onitor their activities, including govern -
m ent service delivery and staff m anagem ent, 
so that they learn quickly what is working and 
what is not, for exam ple, in term s of expected 
outputs, expected outcom es, or even higher 
level objectives such as increasing welfare. Per -
form ance indicators can be used to m ake cost 
and perform ance com parisons— perform ance 
benchm arking— am ong different adm inistra -
tive units, regions, and districts. O ngoing m on -
itoring of these activities— including spending ,
processes, outputs, outcom es, and im pacts— is 
particularly im portant. Com parisons m ade 
over tim e can help identify good, bad, and 
prom ising practices. E valuations or reviews 
can identify the reasons for this good or bad 
perform ance. This is the learning function of 
M &E , often referred to as results-based m an -
agem ent. 
T he ﬁnal stages of the policy cycle in -
clude accountability relationships. M &E  re -
veals the extent to which the governm ent has 
achieved its objectives and thus provides the 
evidence needed to ensure strong accounta -
bility, such as of governm ent to the congress 
or parliam ent, to civil society, and to donors. 
M &E  also supports accountability relation -
ships within governm ent, such as between 
sector m inistries and central m inistries, 
am ong agencies and their sector m inistry, 
and am ong m inisters, m anagers, and staff. 
Strong accountability can provide the incen -
tives necessary to im prove perform ance. 
M &E  can also play a role in anticorrup -
tion efforts. It can help identify “leakages” in 
governm ent funding, as well as som e of the 
possible m anifestations of corruption— such 
as when governm ent spending is not reﬂect -
ed in the physical quality of infrastructure or 
in the volum e and quality of governm ent 
services provided. 
W hat Is M &E? 
To som e senior ofﬁcials and donor staff, M &E 
can appear to be a highly technical topic with 
techniques that at ﬁrst glance can be difﬁcult 
for nonspecialists to understand. To m ake 
m atters worse, M &E  contains a lot of buzz 
words and term inology that are confusing to 
those not in the ﬁeld. Som etim es the phrase 
“M &E ” is identiﬁed with speciﬁc tools, and 
m eans different things to different people. 
Technical and sem antic debates are unim por -
tant to the readers of this series; what is im -
portant is the appropriate use of the key M &E 
tools and techniques that can m easure the 
perform ance of governm ent program s in dif -
ferent ways. Som e com m only used tools in -
PREM NOtE August 2010 3
<<<PAGE=4>>>
clude perform ance indicators, rapid evalua -
tions, im pact evaluations, and com prehensive 
spending reviews. A forthcom ing note in this 
series will discuss M &E  tools. 
W hat Does a G overnm ent System 
for M &E Look Like? 
M ost governm ents have data system s for 
m easuring their spending, processes, and 
outputs. B ut this is not the sam e as a system  to 
m onitor and evaluate the perform ance of all 
of its program s. A m uch sm aller num ber of 
governm ents possess such system s. These sys -
tem s involve the regular, system atic collection 
and use of M &E  inform ation; an M &E  system 
m ay exist at the level of an individual agency, 
or an entire sector, or for the governm ent as a 
whole. The focus of these system s is on m eas -
uring the results produced by governm ent— 
its outputs, outcom es, and im pacts. 
Fortunately, there are a num ber of con -
vincing, well-docum ented exam ples of gov -
ernm ents that have devoted the effort neces -
sary to build high-perform ing M &E  system s. 
E xam ples of four countries with well-docu -
m ented and analyzed M &E  system s are Aus -
tralia, Chile, Colom bia, and the U nited States 
(see box 1). E ach of the four governm ents uti -
lizes its M &E  inform ation intensively. O ther 
com m on features include a powerful central 
m inistry with leading role in the M &E  system 
(such as the ﬁnance or planning m inistry), 
and— as a consequence— an em phasis on us -
ing M &E  inform ation to support the budget 
process. W hat is less well known and docu -
m ented, however, is how effective these sys -
tem s have been in supporting the use of M &E 
inform ation for ongoing program  m anage -
m ent. O f particular note are the differences 
between these four M &E  exam ples. D ifferent 
countries em phasize different M &E  tools and 
techniques. Som e place a heavy reliance on 
m onitoring data, others on evaluations and 
reviews of various kinds. Som e countries have 
extensive (and expensive) M &E  system s; oth -
ers have m ore stream lined, low-cost system s. 
T here is no sim ple answer to the com -
m on question: what does a good M &E  system 
look like? R ather, it all depends on country- 
speciﬁc factors, such as governm ent dem and 
for M &E  inform ation; the uses to which the 
inform ation will be put; the availability and 
quality of existing governm ent data; the abil -
ities of ofﬁcials and consultants to conduct 
evaluations and to analyze M &E  inform ation; 
and the am ount the governm ent is prepared 
to spend on M &E . 
The Three Deﬁning 
Characteristics of Successful 
M &E System s 
A “successful” M &E  system  has three de -
ﬁning characteristics. T he ﬁrst is intensive 
utilization of the M & E inform ation provided 
by the system  in one or m ore of the stages of 
the policy cycle discussed above. It m ay seem 
trite to argue that M &E  inform ation should 
only be collected if it is going to be used, but 
m ost evaluators in governm ents (and in 
donor agencies) have a surprisingly poor un -
derstanding of the extent to which the M &E 
inform ation they produce is actually used by 
others. If M &E  inform ation is not being used 
then it is im portant to discover the reasons 
why. Is it because the M &E  inform ation is re -
garded as being of poor quality, or not 
tim ely, or because evaluations have not ad -
dressed the m ost relevant questions concern -
ing program  perform ance? O r is it because 
the intended users within the governm ent— 
such as the ﬁnance or planning m inistries— 
have neither the skills nor interest in using 
this inform ation in their work? 
R eliable, quality inform ation is another 
feature of successful M & E system s. T here 
are various standards of what constitutes 
quality m onitoring data and evaluations, and 
these standards can be used to assess the reli -
ability of the inform ation that any M &E  sys -
tem  produces. M ost governm ent evaluation 
ofﬁces have som e sort of quality control 
m echanism  in place. M ost, however, do not 
PREM NOtE 4 August 2010
<<<PAGE=5>>>
appear to conduct or com m ission form al re -
views of the quality of their work. T hree of 
the four countries highlighted in box 1 have 
conducted such reviews: Australia, Chile, and 
Colom bia. 
T he third characteristic of a successful 
M & E system  is sustainability. This relates to 
the likelihood that the M &E  system  will 
survive a change in adm inistration or in gov -
ernm ent m inisters or top ofﬁcials. W hen the 
utilization of M &E  inform ation is ﬁrm ly em -
bedded— that is, m ainstream ed— in core gov -
ernm ent processes, such as the budget cycle, 
it can be said to be institutionalized and thus 
is likely to be sustained over tim e. Conversely, 
when M &E  has only a handful of key sup -
porters or is little used, or if it is largely fund -
ed by donors rather than by the governm ent 
itself, then sustainability is less likely. 
Building a G overnm ent M &E 
System — W hat to Do and 
W hat Not to Do 
M any developed and developing countries 
have accum ulated substantial experience in 
building M &E  system s. As with any form  of 
capacity building, there are a num ber of 
hard-earned lessons about what works best 
and what does not (discussed m ore fully in 
M ackay [2 007]). E ight key lessons are dis -
cussed below. 
Lesson 1: First and forem ost is the need 
for substantive governm ent dem and for 
M &E  inform ation. Such dem and is necessary 
PREM NOtE August 2010 5
Box 1 .Four Exam ples of Successful G overnm ent M &E System s 
Australia: The government evaluation system was managed by the Department of Finance (DoF), and it re -
quired ministries to evaluate every program every three to five years. The evaluations were conducted by the 
line ministries themselves, but they were overviewed by the DoF and other central departments. By 1994, al -
most 80 percent of new spending proposals in the budget process relied on evaluation findings, usually to a 
significant degree. About two-thirds of savings options also relied on evaluation findings. DoF officials, who at -
tended the Cabinet meetings that considered these budget proposals, judged that this information was highly 
influential on the Cabinet’s budget decision making. The Australian National Audit Office found that line depart -
ments also used this information intensively, particularly to help improve their operational efficiency. 
Chile: The Ministry of Finance (MoF) commissions the evaluations externally to academics and consulting 
firms, and it uses standardized terms of reference and methodologies for each type of evaluation it uses. MoF 
officials use the M&E findings intensively in their budget analysis of the performance of each ministry and 
agency. The ministry also uses the information to set performance targets for each agency and to impose man -
agement improvements on both ministries and agencies. The MoF carefully oversees the extent to which each 
ministry implements these management improvements. 
Colom bia: The government’s M&E system, SINERGIA, is managed by the Department of National Planning. 
The system includes information for 500 performance indicators, as well as a number of rapid and impact eval -
uations. The president has used the information provided by SINERGIA intensively in his monthly 
management control meetings with each minister and in his weekly town hall meetings in municipalities around 
the country. 
United States: In 2002, the government created the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART), building on 
earlier efforts to measure government performance. The performance of all 1,000 government programs have 
been rated using the PART methodology, and PART ratings are required to be used by departments in their 
annual budget funding requests to OMB. The requests must highlight the PART ratings, the recommendations 
for improvements in program performance, and performance targets. OMB, in turn, also uses the PART ratings 
when it prepares the administration’s funding requests to the Congress, and to impose performance improve -
ment requirements on departments. 
S ource: Mackay 2007
<<<PAGE=6>>>
if a serious effort to build an M &E  system  is 
to be started and sustained. A signiﬁcant ef -
fort is required to build an M &E  system , in -
cluding the creation or upgrading of data 
system s such as decisions about types of data 
to be collected, data collection m ethods, 
storage, quality control, and transm ission. 
E qually im portant com ponents of the M &E 
system  include the training of statistical ana -
lysts; choice of evaluation tools and tech -
niques, and their adaptation to local circum -
stances and priorities; training of evaluators 
and developm ent of national evaluation con -
sultants; creation of M &E  ofﬁces inside a 
lead m inistry and probably in som e or all sec -
tor m inistries; training of the users of M &E 
inform ation— m id-level analysts, senior ofﬁ -
cials in central and sector m inistries, and pos -
sibly their m inisters; and the creation of a bu -
reaucratic infrastructure to decide which 
governm ent program s should be evaluated 
and what issues should be addressed in each 
evaluation. Frankly, this effort is not worth -
while unless the resulting M &E  inform ation 
is likely to be used intensively. 
Lesson 2: Incentives are a key part of the 
dem and side. Strong incentives are needed 
for M &E  to be conducted, and for the infor -
m ation to be used. M &E  experts often m ake 
a basic m istake by asserting that M &E  infor -
m ation is intrinsically “a good thing” and 
that if the inform ation is m ade available, 
then it will autom atically be used. This tech -
nocratic view that M &E  has inherent m erit is 
naïve; M &E  inform ation has value only if it is 
reliable and if it is used intensively. 
U tilization does not usually— and does 
not regularly— happen by chance. There need 
to be incentives for M &E  inform ation to be 
used by program  m anagers in their day-to- 
day work, by budget and planning ofﬁcials 
responsible for advising on policy options, or 
by a congress or parliam ent responsible for 
accountability oversight. 
T here are three types of incentives: car -
rots, sticks, and serm ons. 2 An exam ple of a 
carrot is the provision of greater autonom y 
to m anagers who can dem onstrate (through 
reliable M &E  inform ation) that their pro -
gram s are perform ing well. An exam ple of a 
stick is to set challenging (but realistic) per -
form ance targets that each m inistry and pro -
gram  m anager is required to m eet. An exam -
ple of a serm on is a high-level statem ent of 
support for M &E , such as from  a president 
or inﬂuential m inister. M any of these incen -
tives have been applied successfully in build -
ing M &E  system s in developed and develop -
ing countries. 
Lesson 3: It helps to start with a 
diagnosis of what M &E  functions already ex -
ist in the country— in the governm ent, aca -
dem ia, and the consulting com m unity. A di -
agnosis should identify the strengths and 
weaknesses of what exists on both the de -
m and and supply sides. A diagnosis is really a 
type of evaluation, and the very process of 
conducting it provides an opportunity for 
key stakeholders within the governm ent to 
becom e m ore fam iliar with M &E  and its po -
tential beneﬁts to the governm ent. A diagno -
sis naturally leads to an action plan to 
strengthen M &E . T his can facilitate a coali -
tion of support from  interested sector m in -
istries and the donor com m unity. 
Lesson 4: Another dim ension of the de -
m and side is the need for a powerful cham pi -
on, an inﬂuential m inister or senior ofﬁcial 
who is able to lead the push to institutionalize 
M &E , to persuade colleagues about its im por -
tance, and to allocate signiﬁcant resources to 
creating a whole-of-governm ent M &E  system . 
G overnm ent cham pions have played pivotal 
roles in som e of the m ost successful M &E  
system s. 
W hat has been a lot less successful is re -
liance on a law, decree, or cabinet decision to 
institutionalize an M &E  system . Such an ap -
proach can help to legitim ize an M &E  sys -
tem , particularly in those countries where 
the presence of a legal instrum ent is viewed 
as necessary for any governm ent reform  to 
PREM NOtE 6 August 2010
<<<PAGE=7>>>
be perceived as worthwhile and to be taken 
seriously. B ut a law or decree on its own does 
not ensure that the considerable efforts re -
quired to build an M &E  system  will be under -
taken and m aintained. 
Lesson 5: Another com m on feature of 
successful M &E  system s is the stewardship by 
a capable m inistry that can design, develop, 
and m anage the system . Thus it helps to have 
the institutional lead of the M &E  system 
close to the center of a governm ent, such as 
in the president’s ofﬁce or in the ﬁnance or 
planning m inistries. 
O ne role of this institutional leader is to 
continually review the extent of progress in 
developing the M &E  system  and m ake any 
necessary adjustm ents to its action plan. D if -
ﬁculties and roadblocks are inevitable, so it is 
im portant to identify what is working, what is 
not, and why. R egular reviews of progress 
provide the opportunity to analyze both the 
dem and and supply sides of the M &E  system . 
In fact, m ost countries with well-perform ing 
M &E  system s have not actually developed 
them  in a linear m anner— that is, starting 
with a clear understanding of what the 
system  would look like once fully m ature and 
then progressively achieving this vision. 
R ather, countries’ M &E  system s are m ore 
com m only developed increm entally and 
even in a piecem eal and opportunistic m an -
ner, with som e false starts and blind alleys 
along the way. 3
Lesson 6: A com m on m istake once M &E 
has been em braced enthusiastically is to over- 
engineer the M &E  system . T his is often evi -
dent in the large num ber of perform ance in -
dicators that are collected. O ver-engineering 
can also result in the proliferation of m inistry 
data system s. These are often uncoordinated 
even within each m inistry. T he problem  is 
m ultiplied if there are several whole-of- 
governm ent data system s, which m ay be 
m anaged by different central m inistries and 
m ay well require related (but different) in -
form ation to be provided by sector m inistries 
and agencies. In M exico, for exam ple, the so -
cial developm ent agency (SE D E SO L ) had 
eight different, uncoordinated m anagem ent 
inform ation system s. In U ganda in recent 
years, there were as m any as 16  separate sec -
tor and subsector system s that the govern -
m ent had to try to coordinate. 
That said, there is real value in building 
reliable m inistry data system s: these provide 
the raw data on which a whole-of-governm ent 
M &E  system  depends. An audit of data sys -
tem s and a diagnosis of data capacities can 
be helpful in this situation because they 
could provide a basis for rationalizing exist -
ing data collections and im proving their 
quality. 
Lesson 7: T his is, unsurprisingly, that 
building an M &E  system  usually includes 
training for a range of M &E  tools, m ethods, 
approaches, and concepts. It is necessary to 
have well-trained ofﬁcials or consultants who 
are highly skilled in M &E . Training should 
provide m ore than com petencies in M &E , 
however. Senior ofﬁcials need to understand 
the strengths and lim itations— the relative 
cost-effectiveness— of various types of M &E 
tools and techniques. Introductory training 
can also raise awareness of and dem and for 
M &E  inform ation. Training should also ex -
tend to the use of M &E  ﬁndings. B udget an -
alysts, poverty analysts, and program  m an -
agers need to be able to interpret m onitoring 
data to understand trends, data deﬁnitions, 
breaks in data tim e series, and so forth. They 
also need to be discrim inating consum ers; 
they m ust be able to tell when an evaluation 
is reliable or when its m ethodology or ﬁnd -
ings are questionable. 
Lesson 8: A ﬁnal lesson is that it requires 
a long-term  effort, with patience and deter -
m ination, to build an effective M &E  system . 
It takes tim e to create or strengthen data sys -
tem s; to recruit and train qualiﬁed staff; to 
plan, conduct, and m anage evaluations; and 
to train staff to use M &E  in their day-to-day 
work, whether that involves program  opera -
PREM NOtE August 2010 7
<<<PAGE=8>>>
tions or policy analysis and advice. Australia 
and Chile were able to create well-function -
ing M &E  system s— in term s of the quality, 
num ber, and utilization of evaluations— with -
in four or ﬁve years; but in Colom bia’s case, 
it has taken m ore than a decade. 
Conclusions 
A growing num ber of developing countries 
are successfully building governm ent M &E 
system s. They look to the exam ples of devel -
oped countries— especially m em bers of the 
O E CD — but increasingly they are also looking 
to their peers: countries such as Chile, Colom -
bia, and M exico. These countries have cre -
ated well-perform ing M &E  system s where the 
M &E  ﬁndings that are produced are used in -
tensively. These countries have dem onstrated 
not only that it is feasible to build a govern -
m ent M &E  system , but that the system s are 
also valued highly by the governm ents. 
H opefully, this short note and the future 
notes in this series will engage the interest of 
senior ofﬁcials in developing countries and 
prom pt them  to fully investigate whether 
their governm ent should devote the tim e 
and effort to building such a system . T he 
donor com m unity— including the W orld 
B ank— stands ready to support them  in this 
work. 
About the Author 
Keith M ackay retired from  the W orld Bank in 20 0 8 
and now  w orks as a consultant. H e w as a lead evalua -
tion ofﬁcer in the Bank’s Independent Evaluation 
G roup, providing technical advice and other support to 
countries w orking to strengthen their M & E system s as 
an integral part of sound governance. Before joining 
the Bank in 1 997 , he w as the m anager of A ustralia’s 
w hole-of-governm ent evaluation system . H e has w ritten 
over 6 0  publications on M & E system s. 
Endnotes 
1. T his note has beneﬁted from  com m ents by 
G ladys L opez-Acevedo, N idhi Khattri, Jaim e 
Saavedra, and H elena H wang. T he views ex -
pressed here are those of the author. 
2 . A long list of M &E  incentives is provided by 
M ackay (2 007, chapter 11). 
3. R easons for this are discussed m ore fully by 
M ackay (2 007). 
References 
IE G  (Independent E valuation G roup). 2 004a. “In -
ﬂuential E valuations: E valuations T hat Im -
proved Perform ance and Im pacts of D evelop -
m ent Program s.” W orld B ank, W ashington, 
D C. 
— — — . 2 004b. “M onitoring and E valuation: 
Som e Tools, M ethods and Approaches.” 2 nd 
edition. W orld B ank, W ashington, D C. 
L opez-Acevedo, G ladys, Katia R ivera, L ycia L im a, 
and H elena H wang, eds. 2 010. “Challenges in 
M onitoring and E valuation: An O pportunity 
to Institutionalize M &E  System s.” W orld B ank 
and Inter-Am erican D evelopm ent B ank, 
W ashington, D C. 
M ackay, Keith. 2 007. H ow  to Build M & E System s to 
Support Better G overnm ent. W ashington, D C: 
W orld B ank. 
W orld B ank. 1998 . Public Expenditure M anagem ent 
H andbook. W ashington, D C: W orld B ank. 
W orld Bank W eb Sites 
www.worldbank.org/poverty 
www.worldbank.org/lacm onitoringandevaluation 
www.worldbank.org/ieg/ecd 
Prepared for World Bank staff 
This note series is intended to sum m arize good practices and key policy ﬁndings on PRE M - 
related topics. The views expressed in the notes are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reﬂect those of the W orld B ank. PRE M notes are widely distributed to B ank staff and are also 
available on the PRE M  W eb site (http://www.worldbank.org/prem ). If you are interested in 
writing a PRE M note, em ail your idea to M adjiguene Seck at m seck@ worldbank.org. For addi -
tional copies of this PRE M note please contact the PRE M  Advisory Service at x8 7736 . PRE M notes 
are laid out by U pperCase Publication Services, L td.