<<<PAGE=1>>>
Summary
The marketing of tobacco products in poor countries is intensifying. Despite 
their commitment, in 2010, the 15 countries that make up the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) were still far from a legislative 
environment conducive to tobacco control. This case study focuses on the appli-
cation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on T obacco 
Control (FCTC) in West Africa, and how the use of action research to gener-
ate evidence and the creation of consensus between the different stakehold -
ers involved in tobacco control can change policy. The process was supported 
through an action-research process led by the Consortium for Economic and 
Social Research, based in Senegal, working closely with ECOWAS. Research 
was conducted in each country, tax rates were modelled, and the situation and 
possible taxation rates workshopped with stakeholders, including members of 
the ECOWAS legislature. The evidence produced and the actions undertaken 
have contributed to the adoption of a new law on tobacco control in Senegal 
and a new directive on the taxation of tobacco products in the ECOWAS area, 
which is now better able to comply with the provisions of the FCTC.
Background
T obacco control is a global public health priority. According to the World 
Health Organization (WHO), smoking kills more than five million people per 
year worldwide ( WHO, 2015). If nothing is done, by 2030, the number of 
tobacco-related deaths per year will double. More than 40% of these deaths 
will occur in developing countries (
Goodchild et al., 2018). Strong tobacco 
control policies are leading to a decline in consumption in developed countries 
(Chaloupka et al., 2010). This is leading to an intensification of tobacco mar-
keting in poor countries, shifting the future burden of tobacco-related mortal-
ity and morbidity to developing countries ( IARC, 2011). Under the aegis of 
the WHO, the international community has decided to take action through 
the WHO Framework Convention on T obacco Control (FCTC), which was 
signed in 2003. All 15 countries that are part of the Economic Community of 
West African States (ECOWAS) have ratified this framework convention.
12 Using evidence for tobacco 
control in West Africa
Papa Yona Boubacar Mane, Abdoulaye Diagne  
and Salifou Tiemtore
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 207
Despite their commitment to tobacco control, in 2010, these 15 countries 
were still far from a legislative environment conducive to tobacco control. 
National laws for control were either non-existent, incomplete or not enforced. 
Tax policies were far from sufficient to reverse the trend of increasing tobacco 
consumption or to control tobacco use. This was due to two main constraints. 
First, tobacco industry lobbying has been successful in countering or circum -
venting any laws or regulations made by states. Second, there was a lack of 
knowledge about the use of tax policy as an effective means of tobacco con -
trol and only timid reforms undertaken in this field by tax administrations. In 
addition, countries ignored the policies of their neighbours, even though they 
belonged to ECOWAS and some are also part of the West African Economic 
and Monetary Union (WAEMU).
Other factors were that civil society had not seen the potential of a tobacco 
tax and researchers were not interested in the issue. Meanwhile, the regional 
directives that defined the taxation of tobacco products by ECOWAS and 
WAEMU member states proposed a type of tax, tax rates, and a tax base that 
did not promote an effective tax policy.
On a global scale, there is renewed interest in protecting health through 
tobacco control. Since their engagement by the FCTC, ECOWAS countries 
have increasingly participated in major international meetings on health and 
tobacco, including the Conference of the Parties to the WHO FCTC and the 
World T obacco Conference. This has raised awareness in ECOWAS countries 
of the challenges of tobacco control and of the need to set up an appropriate 
framework for the transposition of the WHO Framework Convention. It is in 
this context that these countries have implemented changes in their tobacco 
control environment. This chapter presents the process of implementing these 
changes through a participatory approach based on action research.
This case study focuses on the application of the Framework Convention in 
West Africa, and the development and passing of a directive with much more 
punitive tax rates on tobacco. It demonstrates how the use of action research to 
generate evidence and the creation of consensus between the different stakehold-
ers involved in tobacco control can change policy. The evidence produced and 
the actions undertaken have contributed to the adoption of a new law on tobacco 
control in Senegal and a new directive on the taxation of tobacco products in  
the ECOWAS area, which is now better able to comply with the provisions of the 
FCTC. The process was supported through an action-research process led by the  
Consortium for Economic and Social Research (CRES)
1 based in Senegal.
An earlier CRES-led action-research project ran from 2011 to 2017. The 
research for the case study underlying this chapter used the following methodology. 
Initially, a literature review was conducted on the taxation of tobacco. The various 
reports and outputs produced by the previous action-research project were ana-
lysed to understand the context and environment of tobacco control, the process of 
adopting the new directive, the various challenges facing ECOWAS countries and 
the main results of that action-research project. Following the literature review, nine 
people were interviewed: the ECOWAS representative and the director of CRES 
(the two champions in this case study), two representatives of research institutes,
<<<PAGE=3>>>
208 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
two representatives of tax administrations, a representative from WAEMU, and rep-
resentatives from a tobacco control focal point and from a civil society organisation. 
A questionnaire was submitted to respondents a week in advance. The questions 
were discussed in a telephonic interview where the respondent lived outside Sen-
egal, and in a face-to-face interview where the respondent lived in Senegal.
The evolution of the tobacco control process
The institutional context
Unlike other cases in this book, this case has a regional dimension. WAEMU and 
ECOWAS play a growing role in West Africa, particularly in a strategic aspect of 
tobacco control, namely tobacco taxation. The ECOWAS and WAEMU com-
missions are the bodies that lead any tax change process in the region. Any draft 
new directive must be prepared by a technical committee of experts from the 
member states, which is submitted to the Council of Ministers. The ECOWAS 
Commission mobilised participants for the regional conferences and provided 
financial support for the events.
The role of the tax and customs units of national ministries of economy/
finance is crucial in any changes to taxation policy. Staff of these ministries 
analyse the technical aspects of any policy change and make proposals to the 
ministry for a draft law, decree or directive.
Civil society organisations initiated the fight to protect people’s health from the 
harm of tobacco use, and so also play a key role in tobacco control. A particularity 
of the taxation of tobacco in West Africa was the lack of country-level studies and 
data. Research centres and national statistical institutes played an important role in 
filling these gaps, in collaboration with tax and customs administrations.
Moving from local and national actions to regional
Initial work in Senegal
Figure 12.1 shows a timeline for the evolution of the process that led up to the 
adoption by ECOWAS and WAEMU of a new tobacco directive in 2017. It 
started in 2006 with an African tobacco situation analysis (ASTA), 2 funded by 
the Canadian International Development Research Centre (IDRC) and the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. A political mapping approach was used to 
develop a situation analysis to understand the factors that determine success 
in tobacco control in 10–14 African countries. This enabled each country to 
clearly understand the broader context in which their tobacco control priori -
ties are situated. The next step was for each country to work on an immediate 
action plan to achieve one or two priorities of their choice. The programme 
required proposing projects that combined research and action.
CRES was a participant in the ASTA research and, in preparing their action 
plan bid, CRES organised a workshop in 2006 to choose between different
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 209
priorities. The two priorities selected were Facilitating the Adoption of a Law 
Responding to the Legislative Need Relating to the Framework Convention 
on T obacco Control in Senegal, and Strengthening the T obacco-Free City of  
T ouba. The first project involved working closely with the Senegalese Ministry 
of Health and other stakeholders to develop a new draft law on tobacco con -
trol. A draft bill was produced in 2011. However, The Bill on the Manufacture, 
Packaging, Labelling, Sale and Use of T obacco was only adopted by the National 
Assembly of Senegal on 14 March 2014 and the implementing decree was signed 
in July 2016, subsequent to some of the regional work described later.
The second CRES-led ASTA project focused on measures to ban tobacco 
which have existed for several decades in some religious cities in Senegal such 
as T ouba. As a religious centre of the Mouride Muslim Brotherhood, T ouba’s 
DEC
2017
JULY
2014
FEB
2014
OCT
20132006
FEB
2011
Adoption of new project 
of directive on tobacco 
taxation by all 15 
ECOWAS countries
ASTA project Workshop on advocacy 
document for the adop-
tion of a new taxation 
directive on tobacco 
products
Regional conference on 
advocacy document for 
tobacco taxation change 
in ECOWAS and  regional 
conference of ECOWAS 
members of 
parliament to support 
the draft of a new 
directive on the taxation 
of tobacco products
Workshop on 
methodology of 
countries' proﬁles
November 2012: 
Workshop to discuss 
countries' proﬁles results ECOWAS and WA
EMU 
adopt  the directive
Figure 12.1 Milestones in the ECO WAS new tobacco fiscal directive productsess
Source: Author generated.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
210 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
influence extends to several other cities and towns spread throughout Senegal, 
some of which are under the direct authority of the Khalife of T ouba. Outside 
the Mouride religious cities, there are networks of disciples throughout the 
country and abroad who convey the religious directives and recommendations 
from T ouba. This network would be influenced by a tobacco ban measure in 
T ouba (ASTA Project T echnical Report, 2010). Through a mapping of local 
actors involved in tobacco control, grassroots associations came to support such 
a measure and a prefectural decree was drafted by the local authorities in 2010 
for T ouba to move from an unwritten tobacco ban to a formal ban.
Moving to a West African approach
After raising awareness among part of the population and authorities on the 
need to formalise laws to counter tobacco use in Senegal, CRES decided to 
widen its scope and look at more effective taxation on tobacco products across 
the region as a key control measure. As tax policy for the region is governed 
by ECOWAS, funding was obtained from IDRC for another action-research 
project in West Africa on tobacco taxation, again with CRES as the project 
manager. Key stakeholders were identified and brought into the project, notably 
the chairman of the Customs Commission of ECOWAS. The design and meth-
odology were developed, a steering committee was established in each country 
and regionally to oversee the project and a scientific committee was set up as 
the validation body for the documents and procedures.
A first research methodology workshop took place in February 2011 to look 
at regional decision-making mechanisms, taxation experiments and the levers 
of the tobacco control strategy. Participants included representatives from each 
of the 15 ECOWAS member states, the two regional economic communities 
and technical and financial partners active in the fight against tobacco.
The workshop confirmed the lack of national information on tobacco taxa-
tion and the need to take stock of the taxation of tobacco products in the 
region, including information on the consumption, production, marketing and 
taxation of tobacco products.
A multidisciplinary research team was set up in each of the 15 countries in 
2011. T o ensure rigorous data collection and analysis, an academic researcher 
was appointed as team leader. In addition, there was an official from the tax 
administration, an official from the customs administration and a statistician, 
making it easier to collect the required tax and customs data in each coun -
try. The methodology for collecting and analysing data was shared with all 
stakeholders and validated at a sub-regional workshop held in Ouagadougou, 
Burkina Faso, in November 2012. These teams coordinated the research and 
ensured the consistent application of methodologies for the collection and 
drafting of country profile documents, including conducting a survey using the 
same methodology in all ECOWAS countries to determine the evolution of 
cigarette prices in the retail trade.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 211
Subsequently, a conference of decision makers was held in Ouagadougou 
from 26 to 28 November  2012, with the aim of making decision makers 
aware of the similarities and differences in tobacco taxation policies and 
practices in the West African region and to determine ways in which they 
can use the economic unions to harmonise policies and practices. Repre -
sentatives of each of the 15 ECOWAS member states attended. Each coun -
try’s ministry of finance and the focal point on tobacco control in the health 
ministry of each country were represented. The two regional economic 
communities were also represented by the commission, which is responsible 
for changing tax directives. Other technical and financial partners active in 
tobacco control participated in the workshop. One of the major outcomes 
of this conference was the recommendation to move towards the adop -
tion of new regional directives on the taxation of tobacco products. The 
ECOWAS and WAEMU commissions provided guidance on the procedure 
required. This involved draft guidelines being prepared by a technical com -
mittee of experts from member countries and submitted to the Council of 
Ministers. This technical committee is the only body authorised to draw 
up directives and must be convinced of the need for a change in tax policy, 
based on solid arguments and evidence. After these directives have been 
approved by the ECOWAS Council of Ministers, they are submitted to the 
Council of Presidents.
A position paper was then developed by CRES to support a change in 
tobacco taxation in the ECOWAS region. This advocacy paper compared the 
tax situation in ECOWAS countries, drawn from the country profiles, with the 
tax situation in other countries and economic areas around the world ( WHO, 
2015
). In October 2013, a regional workshop was held to discuss and refine the 
first draft of the argument. This workshop was attended by several academic 
researchers and ECOWAS and WAEMU regional organisations.
Once the document was finalised, a regional conference was organised 
in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, in February  2014 to share the findings. It was 
attended by representatives of the tax and customs administrations, minis -
tries of health, parliamentarians from WAEMU and ECOWAS, civil society 
and international organisations including the WHO and the World Bank. 
At that conference, participants discussed the gap that existed between 
taxation of tobacco products in West African countries at that time and 
potential effective taxation. The discussions led to consensus amongst 
stakeholders on the need to prepare a preliminary proposal for a new 
directive.
In parallel with the conference of technical staff, an advocacy conference was 
held with parliamentarians from ECOWAS and WAEMU to present them with 
the arguments in favour of a change of directive and gain support for adop -
tion. The parliamentarians appreciated the initiative and agreed to support the 
adoption of the preliminary draft directive, which they embodied in a signed 
declaration.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
212 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
Meanwhile, CRES developed models of combinations of tax types and rates 
that could lead to higher prices, higher tax revenues and lower consumption 
(see Box 12.1). A proposal for a combination of two types of taxes was put for-
ward, taking into account the literature, the results of the modelling and, above 
all, the arguments of the technicians who would have to apply the tax changes. 
It was recommended that the minimum tax rate of 15% of the sale price be 
increased to 50%, that the maximum rate be removed and finally that a specific 
tax of $0.02 per cigarette be introduced into the system.
A final conference was held in Ouagadougou on 10 and 11 July 2014, which 
was devoted to a review and validation of the draft directive on the harmonisation 
of excise duties. It brought together representatives of the 15 ECOWAS member 
countries, of WAEMU, German Cooperation (GIZ), CRES and resource persons. 
The various articles of the directive were examined and amended. The conference 
urged the ECOWAS Commission to accelerate the adoption process. Unfortu-
nately, a delay then ensued in the final adoption due to the Ebola epidemic in West 
Africa, which stopped travel and had a disruptive effect, diverting attention from 
regional processes. However, the new guidelines were finally adopted in Decem-
ber 2017 by the two sub-regional organisations (ECOWAS and WAEMU).
The research evidence generated
The research undertaken by the country teams produced three main docu -
ments – country profiles, a regional synthesis and a position paper, referred to 
as ‘arguments’ in French (CRES, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c).
The country profiles covered evidence around key issues such as consump-
tion of tobacco products; the economic importance of tobacco production; 
the inefficiency of applied taxation; the relationship between tax increases and 
Box 12.1 Tax cate gories
There are taxes that are common to all goods and services, such as VAT 
and customs duties, and there are so-called excise taxes that are only 
applied to certain products such as tobacco products. Excise taxes fall 
into two categories. An ad valorem tax is a tax that is applied to a value. 
The authority sets a rate or range of rates to be applied to a given value 
called the tax base. For example, in the ECOWAS region, countries apply 
the rates set on the producer price, that is the amount that the tobacco 
industry declares as the sum of its production costs and profits.
The second category of tax is called a specific tax. It corresponds to a fixed 
amount that the authority levies on cigarette sales, regardless of the price of 
the tobacco or cigarettes. In Gambia, for example, for any sale of a packet 
of 20 cigarettes, the tax authority charged five dalasi, regardless of the price. 
Sometimes the two types of taxes are combined in the same country.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 213
price increases; and the challenges related to gathering data and measuring 
the value of smuggling of tobacco products. As well as the 15 country profiles, 
stakeholders requested a single West African regional profile on tobacco taxa -
tion which showed the differences and similarities between countries.
The reports of the national research teams in each of the 15 countries, the 
resulting regional synthesis and the various workshops showed that reform must 
focus on the adjustment and harmonisation of tax levels and the tax structure 
to converge towards common objectives for controlling tobacco consumption. 
The advocacy document (CRES, 2013c) used the results of these various stud-
ies, along with elements from the international literature on tobacco taxation, 
to provide West African leaders with arguments for tobacco tax reform and the 
best practices available to them to carry it out. These included, for example, a 
reallocation of household spending away from tobacco towards health insur-
ance, which would go a long way towards ensuring that basic health care is 
affordable for a significant proportion of the population. The document also 
showed that there was a lot of inefficiency in tax uptake. The WHO has set as 
its main criterion for judging the effectiveness of the tax system on tobacco that 
tax should be at least 70% of the retail price of cigarettes. Of the 15 ECOWAS 
countries, only two collected more than 40% of the retail price of cigarettes, 
while this is at least 60% in some European countries. In addition, the main rea-
sons for the ECOWAS countries’ delay in raising taxation were identified and 
explained. The first is that tax increases are often not regularly adjusted upwards. 
Increasing the price of tobacco products through taxation is a very effective tool 
for reducing consumption, but because of the addictive nature of these products 
and the behaviour of tobacco manufacturers, it is important to increase the 
value of the price strongly and continuously to reduce consumption.
The second reason was the inefficiency of applying only an ad valorem tax. 
The regional legislation in force in the sub-region only provided for excise 
duties in value terms. No West African country had achieved the target of total 
taxes representing 70% of the selling price of the cigarette packet.
The third reason was the weakness of the tax base. The ex-works price 
declared by the tobacco industry did not even represent half of the final selling 
price. Taxation based on the ex-works price can in no way achieve the objec-
tive of a tax share in the retail price.
A clear example of use – but the story is not finished
The final version of the tax adopted by ECOWAS was based on the position 
paper. The process led to specific recommendations based on evidence and was 
carried out in a manner that built the commitment of the technical staff, who 
had to develop the proposal and implement it, and the policy makers who had 
to adopt the directive. According to the representative of the ECOWAS Cus-
toms Commission,
T o be able to adopt the directive, it was necessary to make technical reports 
to convince the states. However, ECOWAS is not a research centre. It is
<<<PAGE=9>>>
214 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
therefore thanks to the documents produced  . . . that we were able to 
develop them and propose a new range of taxes.
The country profile documents were used in Senegal
to inform the Minister of Health about the existence of possible tax niches 
through tobacco that could finance health.  . . . Civil society has emerged 
strengthened by this project. His speeches, which focused on raising aware-
ness among targeted audiences, particularly schoolchildren, have now been 
expanded to include taxation as the best way to reduce tobacco consump-
tion. These details have greatly helped in political decision making.
(T obacco focal point, Senegal Ministry of Health)
A respondent who represented Senegalese civil society indicated that civil soci-
ety is now invited to participate in technical meetings with the tobacco indus-
try, enabling them to compete with the tobacco industry.
The project also opened opportunities for members of the national teams:
I was approached as a resource person for a study on smuggling, commis-
sioned by customs, and the research and analysis tools from the Benin coun-
try profile were used in the methodology. I also participated in programmes 
on national television with civil society and the Ministry of Health to inform 
national opinion on certain aspects, mechanisms to reduce tobacco con -
sumption, updating the law, etc. My contribution was based on the results of 
the studies carried out as part of the tobacco project. . . . I am often asked to 
give my opinion on tobacco issues because I led the national research team.
(The leader of Benin T eam)
According to the representative of fiscal administration in the Burkina Faso 
team, ‘The Legislation Directorate worked on amending the code for the 
increase in tobacco tax based on data collected through the CRES project. 
Currently we are in the process of increasing taxes to reach the FCTC rate.’ 
(Fiscal administration representative for Benin).
An unintended consequence of the new tobacco fiscal directive process is 
that greater emphasis has been placed on research into tobacco use in West 
Africa, with more and more research institutes interested in the topic and doc-
toral and master’s theses supported on these topics. The team researcher in 
Senegal said:
My impression has changed considerably. I think that researchers in eco -
nomics and even sociology can indeed intervene to counter the purchase of 
cigarettes, which are a heavy expense, and convince public decision makers 
to fight smoking through tax collection. With regard to the involvement 
of economists, researchers can have a significant impact and guide public 
decisions to eradicate the scourge.
(T eam researcher from Senegal)
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 215
Tax administrations saw the taxation of tobacco products as an instrument 
for collecting tax revenue, while civil society actors and ministries of health 
focused on the health dangers. The bringing together of these stakeholders has 
shifted the philosophy towards the consideration of taxation as a tool for pro -
tecting public health. These stakeholders have thus integrated into their behav-
iour that tobacco use must be analysed over a long- or medium-term horizon 
to take into account all relevant aspects in political decision making (CRES, 
2014).
After the adoption of the new regional directive, each country’s tax admin-
istration had to incorporate it into national legislation. However, progress has 
been slow. Nigeria has introduced a specific tax but keeps the ad valorem tax 
below the minimum imposed by the new directive. Senegal and Ghana have 
increased their ad valorem tax rates without introducing a specific tax.
The slow adoption and transposition of the directive into national legis -
lation may be due mainly to two factors. First, as the representative of the 
ECOWAS Commission pointed out, ECOWAS management teams change 
every four years. The new management team takes time to understand, carry 
out and enforce decisions made by their predecessors. Second, the new, more 
binding directive runs counter to the interests of the tobacco industry, which 
is trying to influence decision making by arguing that the tobacco industry 
contributes to the countries’ economies through job creation and tax revenue. 
Its interventions can delay decision making. Lobbying by the tobacco industry 
delayed the process but the relevance of the evidence and the determination 
of stakeholders finally won. Thus, stakeholders have changed their vision of 
tobacco.
Finally, a steering committee must be set up to monitor the process of tran-
scription into national legislation and ensure that the laws are applied. This 
regional committee is not yet in place and some pressure is needed to ensure it 
gets established. CRES has initiated a new project to address this.
The purpose of the action-research project was to protect people’s health 
from the negative effects of tobacco. One of the outcomes of this project was to 
measure the costs of tobacco through non-communicable diseases. The results 
showed that while tobacco caused some of these diseases, food was a large 
contributing factor. Thus, CRES has launched a new action-research project in 
Senegal on the food system and non-communicable diseases.
The factors enabling and hindering evidence use
What types of use do we see?
In this book we have characterised uses of evidence as instrumental, conceptual, 
process and symbolic (see Chapter 2). We do see instrumental use, in that the form of 
the directive was largely drafted as part of the action-research process. The specific 
proposal from the simulations of the tax rates to use was also adopted in the directive.
Underlying instrumental use was significant conceptual use. As a result of the 
process, stakeholders had a much better understanding of the challenges arising
<<<PAGE=11>>>
216 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
from tobacco consumption, the limited benefits to the economy compared to the 
costs to the state, and possible modalities of taxation. This understanding led to the 
approval of the directive and tax rates. As taxation is a regional issue, each country 
realised that regional tax harmonisation was the only way to control consump-
tion and reduce illicit trade, and that a regional strategy would have more impact. 
Another form of conceptual use that emerged is that local evidence on tobacco use 
is now produced and disseminated widely which makes it possible to talk about real 
statistics from the region. In terms of research, we can see a flowering of documents 
that use the statistics produced by CRES. Countries have also used their greater 
understanding to inform their participation in international meetings such as the 
Conference of the Parties to the FCTC (Civil society respondent).
The process also greatly raised the profile of the dangers of tobacco con -
sumption in the region, which helped to counteract the lobbying from the 
tobacco industry. This is an example of positive symbolic use.
In terms of process use, the establishment of research units in each country led 
to countries acknowledging the importance of the evidence process.
How evidence use was promoted
A variety of interventions promoted the use of evidence (see Table 12.1), but 
there were four main levers. An important first lever was the process facilitation role 
played by CRES, along with key champions in CRES and ECOWAS. The CRES 
director used his contacts to bring together all the key players in the fight against 
tobacco. He understood the multidisciplinary aspects of tobacco control, the need 
to produce relevant rigorous evidence and the need to master political decision-
making mechanisms. He involved his academic colleagues specialising in law and 
sociology for the draft law in Senegal and the smoking ban in T ouba. He used his 
relationship with the ECOWAS representative to work on tariffs in ECOWAS. 
The collaboration between CRES and ECOWAS helped them to understand the 
steps to be taken for a change of directive. The director of CRES also seized on 
the opportunity of a meeting with the then president of the Republic of Senegal 
to raise the president’s awareness of the need for a new law to control tobacco use.
CRES obtained funding for the action research and immediately started to 
address the main shortcomings highlighted in the prior situational analysis, namely 
the lack of synergy in tobacco control between researchers and other stakehold-
ers like civil society, ministries of health, fiscal and customs administrations, and 
members of Parliament at the national and regional levels. CRES had an under-
standing of how this synergy could be built that could lead to a new tobacco 
directive. This process began with the involvement of all stakeholders from the 
beginning through a methodological workshop to upgrade their knowledge in 
terms of tobacco use and especially tobacco taxation. This enabled all stakehold-
ers to discuss the subject and to understand actual practice in the region. A key 
champion in ECOWAS, the chairman of the Customs Commission, indicated,
I had no knowledge of this issue. I started to get a better idea of the tobacco 
issue at the first methodological workshop. It was with the country profiles
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 217
T able 12.1 Use interventions and their influence
Intervention Effect
Process facilitation CRES facilitated the overall process over a number of years, 
and knowledge managing the IDRC-funded project and using it to conduct 
brokering the research, liaise with stakeholders, organise effective events 
and problem-solve to take the process to completion. Many of 
the following process elements were intended to help interaction 
and building of trust between stakeholders, to agree and work 
together on a common cause.
Creation of a civil A key feature with civil society was the need to unite and advocate 
society coalition for tobacco control in-country. A coalition was established 
in Senegal to which helped to create this.
support action on 
tobacco taxation
Scientific These structures brought together government and non-
committee, government stakeholders and helped to build agreement, 
steering commitment and trust in relation to the credibility and importance 
committee of the process.
comprising key 
stakeholders
Multidisciplinary Multidisciplinary teams ensured rigour in producing the evidence 
research teams and access to tax and customs data. The recommendations gave 
were set up in decision makers confidence in their decision making in 2011. 
each of the 15 These teams increased the ability of countries to generate and 
countries use evidence, as they undertook much of the research. The 
composition of the teams made it easier to access and collect the 
required information on each country and strengthened country 
ownership of the data and process.
Database of CRES initiated a database which they made available to civil 
tobacco control society to make civil society actors aware of who else is working 
stakeholders in in the tobacco space. This tool has contributed to the creation of 
Senegal partnerships between the actors.
Targeted events at A series of regional events was organised, some with technical 
a technical level staff, some with high-level politicians, some with members 
and political level of Parliament. The location was rotated between countries to 
maximise ownership. These events developed and agreed content, 
built ownership and agreement at different levels, and fostered trust 
between technical staff, politicians and non-state actors. Getting 
key decisions from decision makers at these events made it easier 
to formalise decisions later.
Collaboration CRES received examples of letters sent by the tobacco industry 
between state and to government and collaborated with civil society in drafting 
non-state actors responses. This built government’s ability to respond as well as 
to counter the trust between state and non-state actors.
tobacco lobby
Reports The position paper summarised the arguments for policy makers, 
consolidated which helped to build understanding and awareness of the costs 
arguments for and benefits around tobacco and the options available.
policy makers
(Continued)
<<<PAGE=13>>>
218 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
that I learned about the harmful effects of tobacco, especially on young 
people and vulnerable people.
This process facilitation involved a second lever, the inclusion of key people in the 
process as the intention was that the Council of Ministers would change the tobacco 
taxation directive on the basis of evidence. In order to achieve this, it was impor-
tant that the technical staff who had to convince the ministers of the need for this 
change were involved throughout. Hence, officials from the ministries responsible 
for the application of taxation had to be involved in the steering committees, be 
part of the research generation process, participate in key events and so forth.
The integration of the technical experts from the administrative bodies who 
would analyse the proposals to be made to the ministers was facilitated by their 
inclusion in multidisciplinary national research teams that were expected to 
produce most of the evidence.
The third lever to promote use of the evidence was the organisation of work-
shops and conferences that brought together the 15 ECOWAS member countries 
led by CRES. All 15 ECOWAS countries were represented by a delegation of at 
least two people from the tax and customs administrations and the country’s minis-
try of health. The host city for these events was rotated, with workshops and confer-
ences held in Ouagadougou, Dakar and Abidjan. Each of these events was opened 
Intervention Effect
Format of reports A policy note was produced for each country profile and for key 
recommendations. The policy notes were in a four-page format
written in both English and French, to make the key results 
accessible and help policy makers be aware of them.
Reports public All reports produced by CRES in this process are publicly accessibl
at www.cres-sn.org, which promoted access to evidence.
Knowledge- CRES played a key role in knowing the research world and 
brokering role of linking the research world with the public sector and political 
CRES world. They ensured that effective research teams were set up 
in each country, that good evidence was generated and that it 
was disseminated in an accessible form, and so easy to access and
use. They organised events where this evidence was tabled, at 
technical and political level. They built trust with governments 
and the commission and built the capability and motivation of th
technical staff and politicians who participated.
Use of WHO Being aware of WHO standards provided an external benchmark, 
standards as a for example, in deciding what tax levels could be/should be. 
reference This provided some motivation for change as well as trust that 
the proposed recommendations were appropriate.
Use of peer The comparison of the 15 countries in reports and in the 
comparison to conferences allowed participants to learn what others were 
promote use doing and introduced some level of competition to be seen to 
be doing well.
, 
e 
 
e 
Note: Change mechanisms are highlighted in italics.
T able 12.1 (Continued)
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 219
by eminent people from the host country in the presence of high-level representa-
tives from community institutions. For example, the two advocacy workshops, the 
first bringing together tax, customs and health administrations and the second the 
parliamentarians, held in Abidjan, were attended by the chief of staff of the Minister 
of African Integration, a vice president of the National Assembly of Côte d’Ivoire, 
a vice president of the Ivorian Senate, the chairman of the ECOWAS Customs 
Commission and the representative of the WAEMU Commission.
The fourth lever was the presentation of the results in the form of easy to 
read policy notes to better disseminate the results. Each country profile was the 
subject of a policy note in a brief, four-page format focusing on policy recom-
mendations. The policy notes were written in both English and French.
Facilitators and barriers to the use of evidence
The three key facilitators of the use of evidence
RATIFICATION OF THE WHO FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO  
CONTROL AT REGIONAL LEVEL
When the action-research project on tobacco taxation in West Africa began, 
all ECOWAS countries had ratified the WHO FCTC which identified taxa -
tion as the most effective way to reduce consumption. Thus, there was a strong 
commitment by each country to fight the consumption of tobacco products. 
The need to fulfil this commitment provided an environment conducive to the 
adoption of a new directive on the taxation of tobacco products and contrib -
uted to the active participation of governments.
PARTICIPATION IN INTERNATIONAL MEETINGS
Since ratification of the FCTC, tobacco control stakeholders have participated 
in international meetings such as the Conference of the Parties to the FCTC 
and the World T obacco Conference. These meetings raised awareness of the 
need for strong commitment against tobacco, and demonstrated that the inter-
national community has decided to take action. According to the civil society 
respondent, the discussions at these conferences provided an opportunity to 
hear about the strength of taxation as a means of tobacco control.
THE ROLE OF CHAMPIONS
T wo main champions were the driving force behind the new tobacco tax direc-
tive – the director of CRES and the chairman of the ECOWAS Customs Com-
mission. The director of CRES designed the action-research project to create 
synergy between research, advocacy and political decision making. CRES’s role 
in process facilitation, led by the director, is described earlier. Second, agreement 
of a new directive on the taxation of tobacco would not have been possible with-
out the political will of the chairman of the ECOWAS Customs Commission.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
220 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
At the outset he had no knowledge of the issue, but he was committed to 
providing ECOWAS countries with an effective tool to control tobacco. He 
mobilised ECOWAS delegations for the meetings and ensured the preparation 
of technical notes for the discussions. Once the directive was ready for adoption, 
despite the considerable delays caused by the Ebola virus crisis in the ECOWAS 
region, he continued to work towards the final adoption of the process.
The three key barriers to the use of evidence
THE EBOLA CRISIS
After analysis and validation of the draft directive in 2014, the Ebola virus crisis hit 
West Africa. As some ECOWAS countries had Ebola cases, ECOWAS was forced 
to suspend all inter-state gatherings to prevent the spread of the disease. This situa-
tion slowed down the process of adopting the directive, which delayed the process 
for about three years. However, as the two key champions were still in their posi-
tions in ECOWAS and in CRES, it was relatively easy to pick up the process again.
INTERFERENCE FROM THE TOBACCO INDUSTRY
The tobacco industry took advantage of the Ebola crisis to try to discredit the 
process. Letters were sent to a few ministers to discourage them from adopting 
the draft regional directive. The lobbyists denounced the role played by CRES, 
arguing that it had replaced the administrations as the driver of the process. 
CRES and civil society shared these letters and helped government to respond 
to these letters, and the tobacco industry did not manage to derail the process.
THE EXISTENCE OF TWO PARALLEL DIRECTIVES
Both ECOWAS and WAEMU developed directives. The WAEMU directive 
does not have a specific tax, just an ad valorem figure. Countries belonging to 
both regional bodies can apply the directives of both. However, this does not 
make the application of the same directive in the 15 ECOWAS countries any 
easier. WAEMU, being an economic and monetary union, has more opportu-
nities to meet, because it deals with more economic issues and is more closely 
integrated. The issues around these multiple tax jurisdictions are discussed in 
Blecher and Drope (2014).
Conclusions and lessons
How did the context and intervention influence the use of evidence
First, we apply the realist approach to look at what mechanisms are likely to 
lead to successful outcomes in what contexts. The mechanisms applied included 
the generation of evidence and interventions to maximise the likelihood of use.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 221
The hypothesis was that these would lead to the outcomes of changes in indi-
vidual/organisational motivation, in capability and in the opportunity to use 
evidence, which would lead to behaviour change in individuals/organisations/
systems, which would result in policy performance and wider systems change.
The context in this case was characterised by fragmented stakeholders with 
differing worldviews, notably from tax and health perspectives, 15 different 
countries, and a contentious topic with a strong industry lobby. On a regional 
dimension, the signing of the FCTC provided some incentive for countries to 
comply.
Interventions to promote use started with the approval of the action-research 
project, and an immediate focus on bringing stakeholders together, the start 
of strong process facilitation by CRES through the project, coupled with 
an institutional champion in ECOWAS. A ser ies of processes and events was 
used to build consensus across the 15 countries, helped by the convening 
power of ECOWAS, and this collective power helped to offset the lobby -
ing from the tobacco industry. Evidence was generated through the creation 
of multidisciplinary virtual research units in each country, which helped to 
create ownership as well as generate rigorous evidence. The research units 
generated country profiles, a synthesis, models of tax rates and eventually 
a rationale/argument for a new directive and for the eventual revised tax 
rates. Use interventions after the evidence was produced included producing 
policy briefs to summarise the argument and recommendations, produc-
tion of a draft directive, and tabling these at technical and political regional 
committees.
In terms of outcomes, ultimately the directive was adopted, a major achieve-
ment, and an example of instrumental use of the recommendations. We see 
increased capability of country stakeholders to work together, to produce evi -
dence, and conceptual use of the evidence to argue for tobacco control at inter -
national fora. The need to address the Framework Convention provided the 
opportunity, which was enhanced by support from high levels in ECOWAS.  
The process stimulated the motivation of stakeholders to produce and approve the  
directive, even despite the loss of momentum with the interregnum during  
the Ebola epidemic. Domestication of the directive into country legislation is 
the next battle.
Emerging lessons
Some of the emerging lessons for evidence use from this case include:
• Under taking a situation analysis at the beginning was important, through 
which the multidisciplinary aspect of the tobacco issue was identified, as 
well as key stakeholders.
• The actual e vidence generation was probably less than half the effort. High-
quality process facilitation  to support a multi-stakeholder partnership was 
essential, championing and facilitating processes over time. These skills are
<<<PAGE=17>>>
222 Papa Yona Boubacar Mane et al.
not usually present in government, and such processes can be led by non-
state actors, where the key government champion is able to ask for support.
• The inclusion of all stakeholders, through a participatory approach, from the 
beginning of the process created a real synergy between the actors allowing 
everyone to drive the fight that was needed.
• Action-research processes are potentially very powerful, where as much 
attention is given to the use interventions and process support as to evi -
dence generation itself, and the evidence is located within a wider process.
• The f acilitator needs to bridge the understanding of evidence with a good 
knowledge of the functioning of government  (and, in this case, regional insti -
tutions) and work in an empowering way. According to the director of 
CRES, ‘if we did not know how the two regional organisations work, how 
the different countries work with these institutions, I  do not think we 
could do this mobilisation work in such a short time’.
• The lead organisation must be credible. CRES gained credibility in all the 
member states through prior work on negotiations for an economic part -
nership agreement. This made it much easier to mobilise the regional 
organisations and the 15 member states (CRES director).
• It is impor tant to have champions who can carry the momentum effectively 
over a number of years  – in this case, an institutional champion and an 
evidence/knowledge broker champion.
• Coalitions of state and non-state actors  can be very powerful, if they can 
develop a common vision, and the process is well supported. This is par -
ticularly important for sectors where industry lobbies are powerful, such as 
around tobacco, climate change, mining and so forth.
• Piloting processes in one country can be helpful prior to applying at the 
regional level, and this can even work across language and cultural divides.
• An international/regional agreement can be used to help large-scale change to 
happen.
The process of adopting a new directive on tobacco taxation in West Africa 
has been very rewarding for all stakeholders in tobacco control. The case study 
provides a number of lessons and demonstrates that it is possible to use evidence 
to change public policies. However, having good evidence was only one of a 
number of necessary factors.
The adoption of a new directive on the taxation of tobacco products in 
ECOWAS is a very significant step forward in tobacco control. ECOWAS 
countries have the opportunity to use the most effective means to reduce 
tobacco consumption. This must make it possible to meet the commitments 
made when ratifying the Framework Convention. Now it remains for ECO -
WAS countries to transpose the new directive into national legislation in 
order to implement it, and in Senegal’s case to enforce the law. This battle is 
not yet won.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Using evidence for tobacco control 223
Notes
 1 Consortium pour la Recherche Economique et Sociale.
 2 This focused on undertaking a situation analysis to assess cur rent tobacco use, the dynam-
ics of tobacco farming and existing tobacco control policies (including their level of 
implementation) in 10 to 14 sub-Saharan African countries. At the same time, it endeav-
oured to build the technical capacity of African researchers to gather, synthesise and ana-
lyse data at the country and the regional level.
See www.idrc.ca/en/project/african-tobacco-situation-analyses.
References
ASTA. 2010. Rapport technique final, Analyse Situationnelle sur le tabac au Sénégal. Dakar, Sen-
egal: Consortium pour La Recherche Economique et Sociale.
Blecher, E. and Drope, J. 2014. The rewards, risks and challenges of regional tobacco tax 
harmonisation. Tobacco Control, 23, e7–e11. https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol- 
2013-051241
Chaloupka IV , F .J., Peck, R., Tauras, J.A., Xu, X. and Y urekli, A. 2010. Cigarette excise taxation: 
The impact of tax structure on prices, revenues, and cigarette smoking. Cambridge, MA: National 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 16287. https://doi.org/ 10.3386/
w16287
CRES. 2013a. Profils-pays sur la fiscalité du tabac en Afrique de l’Ouest . Dakar, Senegal: Con-
sortium pour La Recherche Economique et Sociale. Retrieved from www.cres-sn.org.
CRES. 2013b. Synthèse régionale des profils-pays sur la fiscalité du tabac en Afrique de l’Ouest. 
Dakar, Senegal: Consortium pour La Recherche Economique et Sociale. Retrieved from 
www.cres-sn.org
CRES. 2013c. Argumentaire pour un changement de la fiscalité sur les produits du tabac . Dakar, 
Sénégal: Consortium pour La Recherche Economique et Sociale. Retrieved from www.
cres-sn.org
CRES. 2014. Rapport technique ‘Projet régional de recherche-action sur la taxation des produits de 
tabac en Afrique de l’Ouest’. Dakar, Sénégal: Consortium pour La Recherche Economique 
et Sociale. Retrieved from www.cres-sn.org
Economic Community of West African States. June  2009. Directive C/DIR.2/06/09 On 
Excise Tax harmonization.
Goodchild, M., Nargis, N. and Tursan d’Espaignet, E. 2018. Global economic cost of  
smoking-attributable diseases. Tobacco Control, 27(1), 58–64.
IARC. 2011. Effectiveness of tax and price policies for tobacco control. IARC Handbooks of Cancer 
Prevention: T obacco Control. WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer.
WHO. 2015. WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic: Raising taxes on tobacco. Geneva: World 
Health Organisation.