<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
African Evaluation Journal  
ISSN: (Online) 2306-5133, (Print) 2310-4988
Page 1 of 9 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Steven Masvaure1 
Tebogo E. Fish1 
Affiliations:
1Centre for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results-
Anglophone Africa, Faculty 
of Commerce, Law and 
Management, University 
of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Tebogo Fish,
tebogo.fish1@wits.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 12 Apr. 2022
Accepted: 24 Oct. 2022
Published: 15 Dec. 2022
How to cite this article:
Masvaure, S. & Fish, T.E., 
2022, ‘Strengthening and 
measuring monitoring and 
evaluation capacity in 
selected African 
programmes’, African 
Evaluation Journal 10(1), 
a635. https://doi.
org/10.4102/aej.v10i1.635
Copyright:
© 2022. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
In this article, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity strengthening is defined as the process 
of improving the ability of individuals, institutions and the overall M&E system to meet its M&E 
objectives and expectations (Tarsilla 2014). We take cognisance of the debate and negative 
connotations associated with capacity development and capacity building. Monitoring and 
evaluation capacity building refers to the building of new M&E systems according to a prescribed 
design, while capacity development  refers to building on existing M&E skills and knowledge, 
driving a dynamic and flexible process of change, borne by local actors (Tarsilla 2014). In this 
article, we collectively refer to the terms capacity building and capacity development as capacity 
strengthening (CS), which we are defining as the process through which individuals, institutions 
and countries develop, enhance and organise their M&E systems to effectively monitor the 
performance and evaluate development interventions at both state and institutional (non-state or 
state) levels (Masvaure, Kiwekete & Chirau 2020).
In this article, M&E capacity is viewed as consisting of three interwoven levels: individual, 
organisational or institutional and system or country levels. Individual capacity level refers to 
individual technical skills and abilities (Babu 2018), while at an institutional level, capacity 
refers to having systems that enable M&E functions within organisation, evidence of such 
systems is revealed through processes, structures, governance and management frameworks, 
resources and processes (Struyk, Damon & Haddaway 2011). At the system level, coherent 
policies, culture, structures, behaviour and strategies among state and non- state entities create 
an enabling environment for the development and use of M&E system information and evidence 
(Nuyens 2005). 
Background: Strengthening the capacities of countries and organisations to perform 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions is gaining momentum in the Global South. 
However, there is limited literature on the effectiveness and impact of these capacity 
strengthening initiatives in Africa. Across the continent, there has been a global push to 
strengthen M&E capacity both within the state and non-state sector. The rationale for the push 
and investments is based on the premise that M&E capacity is critical for assisting public 
officials, non-state sector development managers, non-governmental organisations, and 
donors to improve the design and implementation of their projects, improve progress, increase 
impact, and enhance learning. Despite considerable investments to build M&E capacity in the 
African context, literature shows that the measurement of these initiatives is non-existent. 
Objectives: To explore M&E capacity strengthening initiatives and how their effectiveness is 
being measured.
Method: The study adopted a qualitative research approach, specifically using semi-structured 
interviews to gain an in-depth understanding of capacity-strengthening approaches and how 
capacity strengthening activities are measured. A sample was drawn from Botswana, Ethiopia, 
Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. 
Results: This study found that M&E capacity strengthening in the selected countries is ad hoc, 
indiscriminate, haphazard and mainly focuses on developing individual skills and abilities. 
Conclusion: The significance of strengthening M&E system capacity in Anglophone Africa has 
been strongly supported by this study, considering the critical impact that effective M&E 
systems have in enabling countries to reach their development goals.
Keywords: monitoring and evaluation (M&E); capacity-strengthening; training; measurement; 
system-level; institutional level; individual level.
Strengthening and measuring monitoring and 
evaluation capacity in selected African programmes
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
We view M&E capacity strengthening as a long-term 
change process, aimed at strengthening capacity in related 
management systems, developing national or sectoral 
performance M&E systems. It is also a means to support 
more effective policies and programmes as well as help 
achieve high levels of public and private sector performance 
(Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). On the other hand, 
M&E capacity strengthening involves the design and 
implementation of teaching and learning strategies to help 
individuals, groups and organisations learn about what 
constitutes effective, useful and professional M&E practice 
(Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). It reflects an intention to 
increase participants’ knowledge and skills and to generate 
more positive attitudes towards M&E (Preskill & Boyle 2008). 
Sustainable M&E practice also requires the development of 
systems, processes, policies and plans that help embed M&E 
work into the way organisations and governments accomplish 
their mission and strategic goals, the ultimate being the use 
of information and evidence from the M&E system in 
decision-making (Lopez-Acevedo et al. 2012).
Importance of monitoring and evaluation capacity 
strengthening in the development space
Monitoring and evaluation are integral, yet distinct aspects 
of the development programme life cycle (Görgens & Kusek 
2010). They are both critical mechanisms for forward-looking 
strategic positioning, institutional learning and sound 
management. Monitoring and evaluation are intended to 
influence decision-making, including decisions to improve, 
re-orient or discontinue an evaluated intervention or policy; 
decisions about wider organisational strategies or management 
structures and decisions by national and international 
policymakers and funding agencies (Kemerer & Salentine 
2014). As a result, M&E capacity strengthening has grown 
immensely over the years because of the realisation that 
development interventions and programmes need to be 
informed by good evidence of what works and an 
understanding of why it works (Basheka & Byamugisha 2015). 
It has also grown because of the increase in the demand 
for M&E by national and international donors, government 
agencies and others (Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). 
There is a myriad of reasons why individuals, institutions 
and countries engage in M&E capacity strengthening.  
First, this is done to meet accountability requirements and for 
them to be more effective or competitive in seeking  
new and/or increased funding (Farrell 2009). Second, there is 
often a commitment to learning from M&E that focuses 
on programme improvement, developing a culture of 
investigation and institutional effectiveness (Woodhill 2019). 
Third, there is a desire to communicate more effectively 
about a programme’s process, progress and impact with 
external audiences (Weiss 1998). Fourth, there is a need to 
distribute M&E skills, knowledge and attitudes throughout 
an institution or multiple programmes and sites (Preskill 
2008). Fifth, changes in the external environment, such as 
the national economy, increased acceptance of evaluation 
nationwide, new political appointees, etc. Sixth, there may be 
a desire to enlighten and support government policymaking 
and planning (Preskill & Boyle 2008). 
Measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening initiatives is 
critical for ensuring that state and non-state actors can 
effectively meet the increasing demand for monitoring 
and evaluation (Carman & Fredericks 2008). Also, the 
measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening interventions 
is crucial because M&E capacity ensures that individuals, 
institutions and countries can regularly document the 
implementation of their programmes and can interpret 
their results, to understand and strengthen programme 
implementation, improve programme outcomes, and meet 
the accountability requirements of funders, governments 
and citizens, as well as accrediting bodies (Taylor-Ritzler 
et al. 2013).
Current trends in measuring monitoring and 
evaluation capacity strengthening 
The available literature appears to be indicating that M&E 
capacity-strengthening initiatives in Africa have taken the 
form of short-term endeavours, including training offered to 
individuals, technical assistance provided to selected 
ministries and study visits among grantees, funded mainly 
by international development agencies (Engela & Ajam 2010; 
Mackay 2009; Tarsilla 2014). The focus of which has been on 
ensuring the success of and leveraging the impact of their 
respective programmes in various African countries (Basheka & 
Byamugisha 2015). Consequently, these M&E capacity-
strengthening initiatives have not resulted in the promotion 
of a stronger M&E culture within systems but have instead 
resulted in modest improvement of the technical M&E 
capacity among a few local staff members working for the 
same international development partners who fund such 
initiatives (Morkel & Mangwiro 2019). The consequence 
of this is that these initiatives promote the smooth 
implementation of international aid processes, at the expense 
of context-specific learning and ownership of the evaluation 
function, which then hinders development effectiveness 
(Tarsilla 2014). 
Literature indicates that while there is a growing demand for 
M&E capacity to meet the demand for evidence to support 
policy decisions, guide resource allocation, demonstrate 
development results and enhance overall performance; 
the impact of M&E capacity building or development  
(i.e. capacity strengthening) initiatives has yet to be measured, 
particularly in the African context (Mapitsa & Khumalo 2018; 
Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). One of the key reasons for the 
lack of measurement is that there is no consensus on the 
definition of M&E capacity, which is referred to as ‘conceptual 
ambiguity’ around M&E capacity, which therefore results in 
difficulty in measuring the effects of M&E capacity-
strengthening initiatives (Morkel & Ramasobama 2017). 
Significant amounts of resources have been utilised to 
improve African countries’ capacity to monitor and evaluate 
their performance and the impact of their development
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
programmes and policies; however, the literature suggests 
that most M&E capacity-strengthening interventions have 
not yielded the expected results (Mackay 2007; Tarsilla 2014). 
According to Tarsilla (2014), those efforts that do exist have 
been focused on measuring the short-term effects of M&E 
capacity-strengthening initiatives, while the long-term effects 
have been largely neglected. Furthermore, the literature 
indicates that measurement of the effects of M&E capacity-
strengthening initiatives is equally complex, as it can take 
many forms and may occur at an individual, organisational 
or system level (Morkel & Ramasobama 2017).
Methods 
A qualitative research approach was adopted for this study, 
and it enabled us to explore and examine the various M&E 
capacity-strengthening approaches and how they are 
measured from the perspective of those who are funding and 
implementing such initiatives. Semi-structured interviews 
were used to gain an in-depth understanding of capacity-
strengthening approaches and their impacts and to draw out 
information on how the capacity-strengthening activities are 
measured. Participants for the semistructured interviews 
were drawn from the following countries: Botswana, 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda and 
Zambia. These countries were selected because they are key 
targets for M&E capacity strengthening by the institution to 
which the researchers are attached to. The interviews were 
conducted either telephonically or in-person with 
purposively selected participants drawn from entities such 
as national government M&E departments, international 
non-governmental or multilateral institutions and local  
non-governmental institutions. All participants are senior 
level officials within their organisations and are directly 
involved in M&E capacity strengthening, either at country 
or regional level.
The criteria for selecting the participants for the in-depth 
enquiry were involvement and experience in M&E capacity 
development or building and/or presently working in the 
monitoring and evaluation field either in the state sector or 
in the non-state sector. The study targeted to interview 
20 respondents from selected countries; however, saturation 
was reached at fifteen interviews. The categories of the study 
sample are shown in Table 1.
Data analysis
Data analysis was framed around the study objectives and 
research design. Qualitative data from the interviews 
were transcribed and analysed using content analysis. 
The researchers initially coded the data and grouped the 
codes into categories that were grouped into descriptive 
themes. The coding facilitated the research team to make 
sense and meaning of the content and, more importantly, to 
sort data by thematic areas linked to the study objectives. 
Direct quotes were not used in this article because the aim 
was to portray the overall story that the information tells or 
the general perspective it provides.
Limitations
The major limitation of the study is that the findings cannot 
be generalised to the study population or community because 
of the methodology and research design adopted which does 
not allow the findings to be generalised across the countries. 
Although the study findings are not generalisable across 
the selected countries, the researchers engaged an external 
researcher with expertise in M&E in Africa to conduct 
dependability analysis through an inquiry audit to ensure 
that the findings are consistent and could be repeated. 
Despite the inquiry audit, readers have to take caution when 
applying the findings to the overall countries as the study 
might not have been exhaustive. 
Ethical considerations
Ethical clearance to conduct this study was obtained from 
the University of the Witwatersrand Human Research 
Ethics Committee (reference number: H19/11/32).
Results 
Overview of organisations implementing 
capacity strengthening 
There are various institutions that are involved in M&E 
capacity-strengthening activities in the selected countries. 
These institutions can be classified under the following 
categories: state institutions, higher institutions of education 
and learning, multilateral organisations, non-governmental 
organisations, M&E professional associations and individual 
consultants. Multilateral orga nisations such as the World 
Bank, United Nations agencies (United Nations Children’s 
Fund [UNICEF], United Nations Development Programme 
[UNDP], United Nations Population Fund [UNFPA])  and 
the African Development Bank (AFDB) were identified 
as involved in capacity-strengthening activities across 
several African countries; however, their approaches vary 
from country to country. International non-governmental 
organisations and government agencies such as United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID), 
Department for International Development (DFID), Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), 
TABLE 1: In-depth inquiry participants across selected eight countries.
Country Number of key informant 
participants
Category of the respondent
Botswana 1 Government†
Ghana 3 Government and VOPE 
Kenya 2 Government and VOPE
Rwanda 1 VOPE
Region‡ 4 UNICEF, AU, INGO, AFDB
Tanzania 2 Government, VOPE and academic
Uganda 2 Government and CSO
Total 15 -
VOPE, Voluntary Organizations for Professional Evaluation; UNICEF, United Nations Children’s 
Fund; AU, African Union; INGO, International Non Government Organization; CSO, Civil 
Society Organization;  AFDB, African Development Bank.
†, These participants are from government departments, which are specifically responsible 
for coordinating M&E at national level.
‡, Region includes all participants who work in more than one country. Three of the 
participants indicated that Zambia, Botswana and Ethiopia are some of the countries they 
are working in.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ), International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), 
African Development Bank and Centre for Learning on 
Evaluation and Results in Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) 
are also involved in either funding or implementing M&E 
capacity-strengthening initiatives across the eight African 
countries. There are also other sector-specific organisations 
that focus on strengthening the M&E capacities of their staff 
only to meet their M&E accountability obligations and that 
the state sector benefits little from these efforts. Although the 
activities are limited to their staff, they contribute to the 
broad ecosystem of M&E capacity strengthening. 
State departments in Botswana, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda 
are also involved in M&E capacity strengthening, this is in 
addition to their country-level M&E coordination roles. 
Uganda’s Prime Minister’s office, Botswana’s National 
Strategy Office, Tanzania’s Public Service Management and 
Good Governance Office and Kenya’s M&E Department are 
actively involved in M&E capacity strengthening. Their 
involvement should be viewed with the following issues: 
First, multilateral institutions and other organisations play a 
significant role in these countries through providing funding 
that enables these state departments to execute their M&E 
capacity-strengthening activities. In return, the multilateral 
institutions drive the M&E capacity-strengthening agenda. 
Second, state sector capacity-strengthening activities are 
centred around the capacities of government institutions and 
have limited reach in organisations outside the state system. 
The non-state sector only benefits when the trained staff 
leave and join the non-state sector and also through the state 
creating an enabling environment for the practice of M&E.
Higher institutions of education and learning were also 
indicated as providing M&E capacity strengthening across 
all the eight countries covered in this study. These institutions 
offer short M&E courses that are targeted at individuals. A 
review of these institutions shows that M&E course are 
mainly pegged at postgraduate level hence no direct access 
for those who want to study M&E from undergraduate level. 
M&E professional associations (Voluntary Organizations 
for Professional Evaluation [VOPEs]) are also indicated as 
organisations that are active in M&E capacity strengthening 
in all selected countries except Botswana. Participants 
highlighted that although these associations are not yet 
fully developed in some cases, they play a significant role in  
M&E capacity strengthening. 
Country system-level capacity strengthening 
There is a perception by participants that system or country-
level activities such as the development of M&E policies and 
frameworks, creating an enabling environment and 
developing institutional M&E systems do not constitute 
M&E capacity development or building. The participants’ 
definition of capacity is limited to those and focuses on 
activities that strengthen individual skills and knowledge. At 
the country M&E system level, the focus is on developing 
policies, frameworks and M&E systems specifically for state 
institutions and is dominated by multilateral institutions. 
These approaches are being implemented in collaboration 
with other international organisations. The various capacity-
strengthening activities appear to concentrate on the 
formulation of M&E policies and guidelines to guide the 
institutionalisation of these components in the state sector 
rather than on the implementation of M&E guidelines and 
policies within the state sector. 
The institutionalisation of monitoring and 
evaluation (institutional level)
Capacity-strengthening activities at the institutional or 
organisational level are classified into state sector and non-
state sector activities. State sector activities in Botswana, 
Kenya and Tanzania aim to institutionalise M&E within state 
departments through the development and capacitation of 
M&E units within ministries and departments. In Botswana, 
concerted efforts are being made to set up M&E units in 
government departments whilst in Uganda a few of the 
ministries have appointed M&E officers but others still lack 
M&E structures because of resource constraints. In the  
non-state sector, the situation is somewhat different with 
various approaches having been implemented to strengthen  
M&E structures, processes and capacitation of individuals. 
A participant summed up this scenario by saying: 
‘[T]he non-governmental organisations which receive funding 
from international organisations are required to follow stringent 
accountability requirements which a functional organisational 
M&E system can provide and they, therefore, have an obligation 
to build their capacity.’ (Non-state sector, Male, Regional 
organisation)
However, despite having this capacity, the benefits of the 
system do not spill over to the stateside because of the lack of 
platforms and interlinkages to do so.
Approaches to developing individual skills and 
abilities 
At an individual level, several organisations are playing a 
critical role in strengthening individual skills and abilities. It 
is also important to note that because of the perception that 
M&E capacity is mainly individual, participants regarded it 
as the main activity. The focus is on strengthening M&E 
individual activities so that they are able to deliver on 
development projects and improve organisational reporting, 
mainly for accountability purposes. The approaches used at 
the individual level only target M&E practitioners and to a 
lesser extent decision makers. These activities include 
training individuals (M&E practitioners) on specific skills, 
for example, impact evaluation, data analysis and report 
writing; on-the-job M&E training – internships, mentoring 
and coaching; higher training institutions offering training 
(sector-specific M&E courses) and pre-conference training 
workshops to participants.
A common issue that was raised by the study participants 
is that individual M&E capacity strengthening lacks
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
coordination and several entities work in silos. The 
implication is that effectiveness of such approaches becomes 
limited and difficult to measure.
Capacity-strengthening enabling factors 
Strides to institutionalise monitoring and evaluation
There are several factors that enable capacity-strengthening 
in the selected countries. These factors include state-driven 
interventions that seek to institutionalise M&E systems and 
fund it from state budgets. The result for this is that countries 
have formalised M&E units within state departments and 
also developed M&E policies that are linked to the national 
development agendas. This aids the development of an 
enabling environment that furthers the M&E capacities 
within the specific countries. 
Availability of international funding
The role of development funders or donors was highlighted 
as enabling capacity strengthening. Across the eight 
countries, it was highlighted that funding for development 
programmes is now seldom granted without the imposition 
of stringent M&E requirements and the availability of 
funding to capacitate staff of the organisations receiving the 
funding. This has played a significant role in building the 
M&E human capital of the various countries and furthering 
the development of M&E institutional capacity in both state 
and non-state institutions.
Growing demand for monitoring and evaluation
Growing demand for M&E products within state institutions 
was cited as one of the factors that is spurring M&E capacity 
strengthening. Although participants indicated that there are 
challenges in situations where the importance of M&E is 
undervalued and there is a poor appreciation and awareness 
of M&E by politicians, demand for M&E products was 
increasing, thereby opening avenues for capacity 
strengthening within the state. Participants highlighted that 
M&E champions within state institutions have played a 
significant role in creating this demand. Champions at this 
level of authority have a valuable role to play in the 
integration of M&E across the public policy cycle at the 
sectoral and national level.
State and non-state partnerships
As highlighted previously, there are several partnerships 
between state institutions and non-state institutions that aim 
to strengthen M&E capacities in the selected countries. 
Participants reported that partnerships between stakeholders 
such as VOPEs, government departments and donors are 
common in various countries. These partnerships have led to 
the execution of various capacity-strengthening activities 
that include developing M&E policies and frameworks at the 
national level, M&E institutionalisation and development of 
individual skills and abilities. Participants regarded these 
partnerships as important in strengthening M&E capacities; 
however, the partnerships do not extend to the practice of 
M&E. The non-state and state sectors operate in silos with the 
former having developed efficient M&E capacities, while the 
latter is poorly funded and struggles with limited human 
resource capacity. 
Barriers to effective monitoring and evaluation 
systems capacity strengthening 
Scarce resources 
Limited funding for M&E capacity strengthening was 
regarded as the main obstacle to capacity strengthening. The 
state sector allocates limited funding for M&E capacity 
strengthening and implementation of M&E policies. State 
institutions depend too heavily on international donors for 
M&E capacity strengthening. Within the non-state sector, 
the situation is completely different because of funding 
guarantees for M&E system capacity strengthening and the 
setting up of M&E systems to improve accountability and 
performance monitoring. At the individual level, there are 
scarce resources available for the academic and professional 
training for individuals not attached to institutions. 
Limited culture of evaluation
The perennial problem of lack of a culture of evaluation was 
also cited as a barrier to M&E capacity strengthening. Two 
reasons were preferred to support this perspective; first, 
M&E within the public sector is regarded as a policing 
tool and a type of audit; hence, M&E practitioners are 
regarded as performing ‘ police work’ or checking what went 
wrong instead of using it as an opportunity to learn. Second, 
within the non-state sector, M&E is also regarded mainly as 
an accountability tool rather than a tool that can inform 
decision-making. Participants argued that although there is a 
growing demand for M&E, development outcomes might not 
improve if M&E is regarded as a policing and accountability 
tool only. 
Limited understanding of the role of monitoring and 
evaluation by critical stakeholders 
Participants also highlighted that there is a lack of 
appreciation and awareness for M&E especially among the 
state bureaucrats, political actors and some of the funders, 
thereby limiting the M&E capacity-strengthening activities. 
Other study participants argued that although there is a 
growing demand of M&E products, there is a lack of 
understanding of how to use the products there by affecting 
evidence-based decision-making. This has reduced the status 
of M&E and has indirectly affected the availability and drive 
of capacity-strengthening resources.
Mistrust in sharing monitoring and evaluation products 
The development of M&E systems in the selected countries 
has been spearheaded by the international donor community. 
Although the international community and the state sectors 
are addressing the same development problems, there is a 
pervasive nature of relationship on how they share  
M&E products leading to the fragmentation and working in 
silos. The non-state sector is more focused on building 
systems that are primed to report to their funders and not 
their state sector counterparts. This limited sharing of
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
information between non-state sector and state sector in 
more inclusive societies, such as Ghana, is largely because 
of the lack of coordination mechanisms for centralising 
government and civil society-generated data. In other 
countries that are less inclusive, such as Uganda, there tends 
to be mistrust regarding how the data will be used. 
Monitoring and evaluation curricula and training barriers 
The non-availability of M&E courses at the undergraduate 
level is cited as being directly responsible for the human 
capacity shortages across African countries and the poor 
development and adaptation of M&E as a discipline in the 
African context. While professional courses, workshops  
and postgraduate academic courses are being offered across 
Africa, these are frequently beyond the reach of the very 
individuals and institutions in critical need of training. 
Organisations and government departments that lack 
resources have very limited access to these professional 
courses while non-state entities that have the necessary 
funds can afford to capacitate their institutions by sending 
individuals for professional development courses. Also, 
because of the disparity in remuneration between state and 
non-state organisations (INGOs) in Africa, qualified M&E 
individuals tend to migrate to the non-state sector. State 
institutions effectively become a training ground for the  
non-state sector as the most capable and qualified  
M&E human capital moves out of the state.
Unknown monitoring and evaluation capacity needs
Across the eight countries, the M&E capacities of individuals, 
country and institutions are not known. This has been 
identified as a barrier to capacity strengthening. The 
participant perception is that M&E capacity needs and gaps 
are not known and funding organisation focus on capacity 
areas they have an interest in not necessarily the one with the 
most need. The implication of this is that M&E capacity-
strengthening design, approaches and implementation is 
driven and under control of international funders. Participants 
argued that it is prudent for countries to assess their  
M&E capacity needs and prioritise the meagre resources 
towards areas with the greatest need. 
How is monitoring and evaluation system 
capacity strengthening measured?
Given the resources that are invested in M&E capacity 
strengthening in the selected countries and Africa in general, 
it is critical to measure the effectiveness of these activities. 
There is a consensus among the study participants that 
capacity initiatives results are realised in the medium to  
long term. The implication is that the impact of capacity-
strengthening initiatives is noticed after a much longer 
period. The fact that the major players, both funders and 
implementers of capacity-strengthening activities are from 
outside the country means that their interventions are 
targeted at a specific area or level and are limited in time. 
This also means that the resources for measuring the 
effectiveness of M&E capacity strengthening are also 
available for a short period; hence, it is often difficult to 
measure the long-term impacts of the capacity-strengthening 
activities. 
The second issue raised in this study is that capacity-
strengthening activities are viewed as a very process-oriented 
and form a small component of the whole programme cycle. 
There is a perception that these initiatives are not worth 
reporting or evaluating at the end of the cycle. The implication 
is that not much thought is put in the design of the capacity-
strengthening activities making such activities ad hoc . In 
addition, capacity-strengthening activities do not receive 
adequate funding and support by decision-makers from the 
state leading to limited resources for evaluating the activities. 
One participant from one of the state departments 
summarised the implication of not measuring M&E capacity 
development by saying: 
‘Despite significant investment being made in the African 
context to develop evaluation capacity, both state and non-state 
institutions decry the lack of evaluation skills within their 
organisations and the sector still depends on foreign evaluators.’ 
(State department, Male, Public sector)
The participants assigned the blame for the lack of these 
skills for not evaluating the design, processes and outcomes 
of M&E capacity-strengthening activities. The argument is 
that if those funding and implementing M&E system capacity 
development were insisting on measuring the outcomes 
then it will lead to well-thought-out, informed solutions to 
addressing capacity strengthening.
What has been measured and how?
To explore how measurement of capacity-strengthening is 
occurring, participants were asked to list some of the 
approaches that are being used. They listed the following 
commonly used indicators: pre and post training scores, 
number of individuals trained, end of module assessments, 
number of courses held and number of graduates. It is 
pertinent to note that participants listed mainly outputs 
indicators as a form of measurement, and these indicators 
were only revealed after pressing the participants, which 
shows that measuring capacity-strengthening approaches is 
not well thought out. Furthermore, the participants were 
asked about intermediate outcomes, and they identified two 
indicators that are the number of civil society organisations 
with the ability to produce quality data in their programmes 
and ability to perform data quality assurance. Only four 
participants listed wider outcome indicators around changes 
in behaviour or performance that are related to the broader 
goal of capacity strengthening. 
To remedy the lack of measurement and the poorly defined 
measurement metrics, participants proposed the following 
indicators to measure M&E capacity strengthening: quality 
of reporting, quality of evaluations, quality of data produced, 
timeliness of reporting – is reporting aligned to the decision-
making process, evidence use in decision-making by both 
state and non-state actors, use of performance data for
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
programme learning and adaptation at the institutional level 
and uptake of M&E in the decision-making process. 
The results have shown that issues to do with the 
measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening activities are 
not divorced from the broad issues of capacity strengthening. 
The fact that the majority of capacity-strengthening activities 
are focusing at the individual level means that performance-
monitoring indicators are more dominant than the system-
level outcomes. Participants highlighted that compounding 
factors make it difficult to measure outcomes such as 
problems with disjuncture in the design of capacity-
strengthening activities, an unsystematic approach and the 
disjuncture between what the training curriculum offers and 
the M&E sector skills requirements. Given the observations 
presented, it can be argued that for effective measurement of 
the outcomes of M&E capacity-strengthening activities, a 
systematic approach to capacity strengthening is needed, 
and the design should address known capacity needs within 
institutions and at the system level. Such an approach 
addresses the non-availability of resources for measuring 
outcomes and refocuses capacity strengthening to national 
needs.
Discussion
This study has shown that M&E capacity strengthening in 
the selected countries is ad hoc , indiscriminate, haphazard 
and mainly focuses on developing individual skills and 
abilities. These issues are also reflected in how these capacity-
strengthening activities are designed and measured. The 
non-availability of well-planned M&E capacity-strengthening 
initiatives and measurement of these activities limits learning 
and identification of best practices in M&E capacity 
strengthening. Furthermore, it is important to note that for 
these initiatives to achieve positive outcomes, the design and 
implementation of approaches must address the gaps and 
take cognisance of the context in which capacity-strengthening 
activities are to be implemented. Therefore, it can be argued 
that using M&E capacity-strengthening initiatives designs 
from other contexts should be done cautiously and there is 
need to interrogate their sustainability and suitability to the 
local context. Context is also pertinent because it informs the 
capacity needed, the value attached to M&E and the extent to 
which it will influence the decision-making process by both 
state and non-state entities. 
The ad hoc, indiscriminate, haphazard and piecemeal nature 
of M&E system capacity strengthening is as a result of limited 
M&E situational or needs assessment. As an underlying 
principle, M&E capacity strengthening must be preceded 
by a situational and needs assessment of the intended 
beneficiaries, it must be demand driven and must respond to 
specific needs. Without a situational analysis or needs 
assessment, M&E system capacity strengthening will remain 
supply-side driven. Good practice, in this case, demands that 
M&E capacity strengthening be driven from within and 
although there is a greater likelihood of success if the design 
of the interventions is based on demand, attention to the 
incentives behind the demand is essential.
Furthermore, this study has shown that M&E capacity-
strengthening initiatives that go beyond individual skills and 
abilities to include institutional and system-level capacity are 
likely to yield better outcomes. There is a need to dispel the 
commonly held notion that focusing on individual skills-sets 
and abilities automatically lead to significant improvements 
in institutional and system-level capacity. The design for 
M&E system capacity-strengthening initiatives must do 
more than improving individual competencies and improve 
institutional and system-level capacities. 
The findings also revealed several key issues that are 
important to strengthening M&E capacity in the African 
context and are aligned to the available literature. Firstly, 
throughout all eight countries, capacity needs assessments 
and capacity-strengthening plans are lacking. Needs 
assessment has been identified by Watson (2006) and Heider 
(2011) as the first step to understanding the gaps in capacities 
and the various components of the system. In addition, needs 
assessments will lead to the development of contextualised 
strategies to address the gaps. The failure to define country 
capacity needs has led to the narrow perception that capacity 
is limited to the micro-level and a distinct lack of 
understanding of the inherent interconnectedness of all 
levels of capacity. 
Secondly, the issue is that capacity strengthening is not 
aligned with the current contextual factors such as culture, 
socio-economic, political and governance systems. The most 
preferred approach is one size fits all – this approach fails to 
acknowledge that M&E capacity determinants such as 
culture, the value of M&E and the general environment of 
M&E practice are endogenous and context specific (Carter 
2013). It can be inferred that such a scenario results in a 
mismatch between the supply and demand aspects of 
capacity. 
Thirdly, this study revealed that current M&E capacity-
strengthening initiatives do not reiterate the key components 
that are crucial for the comprehensive development of M&E 
systems. Capacity strengthening at a macro level (countries 
and institutions) should be creating an enabling environment 
that enables and values the practice of M&E as stated by 
Mackay (2007). This is achieved through assisting countries 
in developing coherent policies, culture, structures, strategies 
and inducing behaviour change, a process that will bring 
new values at both micro and macro levels of capacity. The 
creation of an enabling environment within the state sector is 
a mammoth task that is further hampered by a lack of human 
capacity, resources, absence of policies and frameworks and 
weaker demand for M&E compared with the non-state 
sector. This has a direct implication on state programmes’ 
effectiveness, accountability and impedes the development 
of a culture of evaluation.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
Fourthly, the findings of this study show that limited 
resources (material, human and financial) are available across 
all levels (individual, institutional and state level) to develop 
M&E capacities. At the state level, the sustainability of M&E 
capacities in government MDAs is affected by the concerted 
dependence on non-state funders. This dependence is also 
problematic because funders have the proclivity to dictate 
the capacity-strengthening goals and approaches to be 
espoused, which means that resources are not utilised where 
they are needed most. While international organisations 
provide sufficient funding for non-state sector institutions to 
build M&E system capacity and establish M&E systems to 
improve accountability and performance monitoring. Yet, 
no funding is given for the measurement of the efficiency, 
effectiveness and impact of these M&E capacity-strengthening 
approaches. Similar findings were reported in a study done 
by Watson (2006), which found that there is little consensus 
on the best way to identify and measure M&E capacity 
development. At the individual level, access to academic and 
professional training by private individuals is hindered 
by the scarcity of resources, particularly in impoverished 
African countries. 
Fifthly, the findings demonstrate that the measurement of 
M&E capacity-strengthening activities is not clearly defined, 
amorphous and ambiguous. In addition, the only stages 
where the M&E capacity strengthening is measured is at the 
input and output stages of the micro-level spectrum. The 
lack of monitoring tools for assessing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of capacity-strengthening activities prevents 
implementers from determine what is working, not working, 
for whom and under what circumstances. Also, the lack of 
evaluation of M&E capacity-strengthening activities means 
that the relationship between these activities and M&E 
capacity outcomes is not defined.
Conclusions and lessons learnt 
The significance of strengthening M&E system capacity in 
Anglophone Africa has been strongly supported by the 
findings from this study, considering the critical impact that 
effective M&E systems have in enabling countries to reach 
their development goals. Additional research is required to 
gain comprehensive understanding of the various approaches 
to country M&E system capacity strengthening, and how the 
design and training curricula can be adapted to specific 
country needs and contexts. Despite the methodological 
confines of this study, four key lessons were identified that 
are important to individuals and organisations with an 
interest in or who are engaged in M&E capacity strengthening 
in Africa.
Firstly, funding should be allocated to M&E capacity needs 
assessments as these are crucial at the country level to 
ascertain the kind of capacity that is available and its effect on 
the M&E practice in the country. In addition, a capacity 
development plan that is tailored to each country context 
is required and should indicate the required capacity 
improvements or provide recommendations on new kinds of 
capacity that might be needed. Also, linked to this first lesson 
is that measurement tools are needed for examining merit, 
effectiveness and M&E capacity-strengthening approaches. 
Implementing the capacity development plan will require a 
robust knowledge management system accessible to both 
state and non-state organisations to source information that 
indicates what is working, what is not working, for whom 
and under what circumstances.
Secondly, funders or implementers of capacity-strengthening 
activities should prioritise the entire M&E system and 
strengthen all levels of capacity, including individual, 
institutional and country levels. The emphasis must 
transcend the monitoring of micro-level technical skills and 
abilities, however, must also incorporate the strengthening of 
macro-level capacity and evaluation skills. 
Thirdly, it is vital to note that countries are heterogeneous; 
thus, M&E capacity is mainly reliant upon on the contextual 
factors and nuances prevalent in each organisation and 
country. The people or institutions engaged in designing 
capacity-strengthening approaches in M&E should create 
approaches that are context-specific, which are of a 
satisfactory standard to the recipients of these initiatives and 
that enable easy adaptation, measurement and sustainability 
of the gained capacity. 
Finally, African governments and international development 
partners implement initiatives addressing the same 
development challenges; however, there are vast differences 
in the M&E capacities of these institutions. Synergies between 
state and non-state sectors are required to remove the  
M&E capacity silos that currently exist and to establish 
opportunities for measuring the effectiveness of approaches, 
mutual learning and sharing to ascertain the kind of strategy 
that works well in their particular country. The government 
should lead the development of these synergies.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge CLEAR-AA staff who contributed 
to conducting the strengthening and measuring M&E 
capacity in selected African programmes research study, 
collected the data and wrote the original research report. 
Special thank you to all sampled staff of organisations 
responsible for M&E system capacity strengthening in 
Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, 
Uganda and Zambia for participating in the research study.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them 
in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
S.M. contributed to the original research study and writing 
the original research report, the conceptualisation of the 
journal article based on the study and the development of
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Page 9 of 9 Original Research
http://www.aejonline.org Open Access
this article. T.F. contributed to reviewing and editing the 
original research report and writing of the journal article.
Funding information
This research received funding from CLEAR-AA.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study can by made 
available by the corresponding author, T.F., upon reasonable 
request.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or 
position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
References
Babu, S.C., 2018, Monitoring and evaluation for capacity strengthening , vol. 2, 
International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Basheka, B.C. & Byamugisha, A.K., 2015, ‘The state of monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) as a discipline in Africa: From infancy to adulthood?’, African Journal of 
Public Affairs 8(3), 75–95, viewed n.d., from https://hdl.handle.net/2263/58169
Carman, J.G. & Fredericks, K.A., 2008, ‘Nonprofits and evaluation: Empirical evidence 
from the field’, New Directions for Evaluation  2008(119), 51–71. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ev.268
Carter, B., 2013, Evaluation capacity development, Helpdesk Research Report, GSDRC, 
viewed n.d., from https://gsdrc.org/docs/open/hdq996.pdf
Engela, R. & Ajam, T., 2010, Implementing a government-wide monitoring and 
evaluation system in South Africa, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Farrell, G.M., 2009, Results-based monitoring and evaluation at the Commonwealth of 
Learning, Commonwealth of Learning (COL), Vancouver.
Görgens, M. & Kusek, J.Z., 2010, Making monitoring and evaluation systems work: 
A capacity development tool kit, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Heider, C., 2011, ‘A conceptual framework for developing evaluation capacities: Building 
on good practice’, in R.C. Rist, M. Boily & F. Martin (eds.), Influencing Change: Building 
Evaluation Capacity to Strengthen Governance, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kemerer, V. & Salentine, S., 2014, A case study to measure national HIV monitoring 
and evaluation system strengthening: Côte d’Ivoire , 1–50, viewed n.d., 
from https://www.measureevaluation.org/resources/publications/sr-14-102.
html
Lopez-Acevedo, G., Krause, P . & Mackay, K., 2012, Building better policies: The nuts 
and bolts of monitoring and evaluation systems , World Bank Publications, 
Washington, DC.
Mackay, K., 2009, ‘Building monitoring and evaluation systems to improve government 
performance’, in M. Segone (ed.), Country-led monitoring and evaluation systems: 
Better evidence, better policies, better development results, pp. 169–174, UNICEF, 
New York.
Mackay, K.R., 2007, How to build M&E systems to support better government , The 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Mapitsa, C.B. & Khumalo, L., 2018, ‘Diagnosing monitoring and evaluation capacity 
in Africa’, African Evaluation Journal  6(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.
v6i1.255
Morkel, C. & Mangwiro, N., 2019, ‘Implications of evaluation trends for capacity 
development’, in C. Blaser-Mapitsa, P . Tirivanhu & N. Pophiwa (eds.), Evaluation 
landscape in Africa: Context, methods and capacity , pp. 184–200, African Sun 
Media, Stellenbosch.
Morkel, C. & Ramasobama, M., 2017, ‘Measuring the effect of evaluation capacity 
building initiatives in Africa: A review’, African Evaluation Journal  5(1), a187. 
https://doi.org/10.18820/9781928480198/08
Nuyens, Y ., 2005, No development without research, a challenge for research capacity 
strengtherning forum 10, October 2006, Report: Combating Diseases And 
Promoting Health, Global Forum For Health Research, Geneva.
Preskill, H. & Boyle, S., 2008, ‘A multidisciplinary model of evaluation capacity 
building’, American Journal of Evaluation  29(4), 443–459. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1098214008324182
Struyk, R.J., Damon, M. & Haddaway, S.R., 2011, ‘Evaluating capacity building for 
policy research organizations’, American Journal of Evaluation  32(1), 50–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1098214010378355
Tarsilla, M., 2014, ‘Evaluation capacity development in Africa: Current landscape of 
international partners’ initiatives, lessons learned and the way forward’, African 
Evaluation Journal 2(1), 13. https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v2i1.89
Taylor-Ritzler, T., Suarez-Balcazar, Y ., Garcia-Iriarte, E., Henry, D.B. & Balcazar, F.E., 
2013, ‘Understanding and measuring evaluation capacity: A model and instrument 
validation study’, American Journal of Evaluation  34(2), 190–206. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1098214012471421
Watson, D., 2006, ‘Monitoring and evaluation of capacity and capacity development’, 
in ECDPM (ed.), Capacity, change and performance, pp. 1–32, ECDPM, The Centre 
for Africa-Europe relations, Maastricht.
Weiss, C.H., 1998, ‘Have we learned anything new about the use of  
evaluation?’, American Journal of Evaluation  19(1), 21–33. https://doi.
org/10.1177/109821409801900103
Woodhill, J., 2019, ‘M&E as Learning: Rethinking the Dominant Paradigm’, in 
Monitoring and evaluation of soil conservation and watershed development 
projects, pp. 83–108, USAS, CRC Press, Florida.