<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343471958
M&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA -A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
Article · August 2020
CITATION
1
READS
215
3 authors, including:
Steven Masvaure
University of the Witwatersrand
25 PUBLICATIONS   53 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Takunda Chirau
University of the Witwatersrand
26 PUBLICATIONS   90 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Steven Masvaure on 06 August 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
M&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING 
APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA  
– A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
Authors:  
Steven Masvaure, Takunda Chirau and Angelita Kithatu-Kiwekete  
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
POLICY BRIEF
AUGUST 2020
This policy brief provides an overview of National Eval-
uation Capacity Development (NECD) across selected 
English-speaking African countries and provides 
recommendations on how to strengthen national 
evaluation capacities. The policy brief is based on 
the Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results for 
Anglophone Africa (CLEAR AA) report Approaches to, 
and measures of M&E Capacity Strengthening in Anglo-
phone Africa which examined M&E systems capacity 
strengthening approaches in English-speaking Afri-
can countries and how the effectiveness of these 
approaches has been measured. 
In these selected African countries, M&E capaci-
ty-strengthening initiatives are provided both inter-
nally and externally and the initiatives range from 
training and technical assistance to coaching and 
mentoring. International organisations with an inter-
est in NECD have been at the forefront of funding 
these initiatives in the region, and have invested 
substantial sums of money. This brief concludes that 
although the literature on the measurement of M&E 
capacity-strengthening initiatives is still nascent, 
state and non-state institutions providing capac -
ity strengthening fail to measure the efficiency, 
ABOUT CLEAR-AA 
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results – Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) is one of six regional 
centres housed in academic institutions across the globe with the purpose of building the capacity of 
countries, people and institutions to plan, measure and report on development programmes – a process 
referred to as monitoring and evaluation (M&E). CLEAR-AA’s work in supporting and improving M&E contributes 
to better governance and improved development outcomes across Africa.
In the past, CLEAR-AA’s approach to supporting and improving M&E in Africa has been to offer discrete interventions, 
for example pieces of training, peer-to-peer learning and technical assistance. But in 2019, we shifted to using country-
based programmes to achieve systematic, systemic results. The positive impact on governance and development can 
be seen not only in individual countries but also in their sub-regions. 
Overview
<<<PAGE=3>>>
CLEAR-AA POLICY BRIEF M&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA – A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
2
impact, effectiveness, relevance, sustainability 
and worthiness of the approaches adequately. 
In cases where measurement has been done, 
knowledge management systems do not capture 
the measurement information effectively. This is 
tantamount to missing opportunities for reflec-
tion on the worthiness of capacity-strengthen-
ing approaches and the loss of potential lessons 
that could have been learnt during the process 
of implementation. 
The policy brief makes four recommendations, 
namely: (1) Know your capacity needs and be 
systematic – countries and organisations provid-
ing funding for capacity strengthening must 
prioritise country-level M&E capacity needs 
assessments and formulate country capacity 
development plans according to the identified 
needs. The plans should include specific measure-
ment indicators to measure achievement levels. 
(2) Strengthen capacity at all levels – individual, 
institutional and country. (3) Be fully cognisant of 
the context, applicability and demand for M&E 
capacity-strengthening approaches. To ensure 
maximum impact and sustainability, situations 
with the most pressing needs and potential for 
effective outcomes should be prioritised and 
not simply be provided with a ‘tick the box’ or 
‘one-size-fit-all’ approach to capacity-building; 
(4) Create synergies and networks as synergies 
between state and non-state sectors dispel the 
silo mindset frequently adopted for M&E capac-
ity-strengthening and create opportunities for 
mutual benefit by learning, sharing experiences, 
and identifying what works best in a particu-
lar country. Most importantly, it is emphasised 
that these recommendations will be ineffective 
in meeting the overall objective of ensuring 
measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening 
approaches, if equal attention is not paid to the 
enabling environment, for example, allocation of 
resources, not only for capacitation but also for 
measurement. 
 
Background
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and 
Results in Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) is 
one of six regional centres in the CLEAR Initia-
tive working globally to strengthen capacity for 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and the use of 
evidence to improve programmes and support 
policymakers and implementers to make better 
decisions. In 2019, the Centre undertook an 
exercise to examine the approaches to and 
measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening 
initiatives in Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, 
Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. To accomplish 
that, a mixed-method research approach was used. 
Respondents were drawn from government depart -
ments or ministries, non-governmental organisations, 
not-for-profit organisations (both local and interna-
tional), public training institutions, parliamentary staff, 
and Voluntary Organizations for Professional Evalua-
tion (VOPEs). Respondents were drawn from all eight 
selected countries. 
In this brief, M&E capacity strengthening is defined as the 
process of improving the ability of individuals, institu-
tions and the overall M&E system to meet its M&E objec-
tives and expectations. Capacity strengthening is not 
restricted to the process of development of individual 
technical skills and abilities but also includes the devel-
opment of the capacity of institutional and national 
M&E systems, thereby fostering a culture that values 
evidence and programme learning based on evaluative 
thinking. Furthermore, M&E capacity is conceptualised 
as consisting of three interconnected levels – individual, 
institutional, and country levels. At the individual level, 
capacity relates to individual technical skills and abili-
ties (Babu, 2018), whilst at an institutional level, capac-
ity relates to having an internal M&E system defined by 
the existence of M&E structures, processes, resources, 
management and governance frameworks (Struyk, 
Damon and Haddaway, 2011). At the country level, 
coherent policies, culture, structures, behaviour and 
strategies amongst state and non-state entities create 
an enabling environment for the development and 
use of M&E system information and evidence (Nuyens, 
2005). The individual and institutional capacities are 
regarded as ‘micro’ level whilst the country capacity is 
regarded as ‘macro’ level.
M&E capacity contributes towards sustaining and help-
ing government officials, development managers, civil 
society organisations, and funding entities to improve 
the planning of their projects, improve progress, 
increase impact, and enhance learning (Segone, 2008). 
In addition, M&E capacity can identify what works, 
what does not work, and the reasons for each outcome. 
Despite significant investments in strengthening M&E 
capacity in the African context, evidence shows that 
monitoring and evaluation (measurement) of the initia-
tives is non-existent. This is despite the value of the 
measurement of these initiatives which allows countries 
to be aware of their capacity needs and enables them to 
plan how to address the needs. At the funder and imple-
menter level, measurement presents the opportunity to 
understand the efficiency, effectiveness and impact of 
the initiatives whilst drawing lessons on what works. 
Findings 
Stakeholders active in M&E capacity strengthening.
The general trend across all the eight countries shows 
that multilateral organisations (World Bank, United
<<<PAGE=4>>>
CLEAR-AA  POLICY BRIEFM&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA – A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
3
Nations organisations, African Development Bank) focus 
on funding and/or strengthening capacity at coun-
try/system level – due largely to their mandate which 
dictates that their engagement with countries is at a 
national level. Multilateral institutions focus on develop-
ing country M&E policies and frameworks and, in some 
cases, they also second M&E personnel to government 
departments to strengthen M&E capacity and systems. 
Although CLEAR-AA is not a multilateral organisation, it 
is active in strengthening capacity at the country level, 
by supporting countries to develop M&E policies and 
frameworks, at both country and institutional levels. 
CLEAR-AA’s support also extends to supporting the 
VOPEs with the aim of strengthening their influence on 
organisational and national evaluation policies for the 
benefit of society at large.
International non-governmental organisations, such as 
DFID, 3ie, USAID, GIZ, etc., which are active in the devel-
opment space, are also involved in strengthening indi-
vidual and institutional M&E capacity. Their main aim 
is to strengthen organisational accountability mecha-
nisms but their efforts also spill over to the state sector. 
With the aid of funding and technical support from 
external organisations, state institutions are also actively 
strengthening their capacity through their designated 
M&E units. Higher education institutions, VOPEs and 
individual consultants are also active in strengthening 
M&E capacity. 
Predominant M&E capacity-strengthening 
approaches and their target group
Across all   eight countries in this study, the predomi-
nant approach to strengthening M&E capacity is to 
focus on the micro level (individual and institutional) 
with a range of short-term individual technical training 
initiatives whilst, at the institutional level, the focus is 
on strengthening internal functioning of institutions, 
structures, processes, resources and strategies but 
information on how these institutions interact with 
other institutions is lacking. These approaches are more 
evident in the non-state sector. The non-state sector 
has benefited from external pressure from donors 
and funders to institutionalise M&E systems. This has 
played a significant role in strengthening M&E capacity 
within organisations funded by external organisations. 
However, this is accountability-driven i.e. developing 
capacities to demonstrate that programme work has 
been conducted in compliance with agreed standards 
or to report on results vis-à-vis plans. 
M&E CAPACITY STRENGTHENING 
APPROACHES 
Individual level approaches
• Short term courses - training individuals (M&E 
practitioners) on specific skills e.g. impact 
evaluation, data analysis, report writing etc.
• In-house M&E training (includes internships, 
mentoring and coaching)
• Higher training institutions offering training 
(sector-specific M&E courses)
• Stakeholders such as VOPEs offering 
pre-conference training workshops to 
participants.
Institutional level approaches
• Setting up M&E units in government departments 
• Secondment of M&E personnel in government 
departments by external organisations
• Improving internal institutional functioning by 
developing M&E systems, processes, resources, 
management and governance of M&E – more 
pronounced in the non-state sector.
Country/system level approaches
• Developing national M&E policies and frameworks 
ETHIOPIA
UGANDA
RWANDA KENYA
TANZANIA
BOTSWANA
GHANA
ZAMBIA
In 2019, the Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results 
in Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) undertook an exercise 
to examine the approaches to and measurement of M&E 
capacity-strengthening initiatives in eight countries.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
CLEAR-AA POLICY BRIEF
4
Within the state sector, approaches to strengthen insti-
tutional capacity are limited because of poor funding 
for institutionalisation and insufficient human capacity, 
coupled with the perception that M&E is not relevant, 
but is merely a fault-finding tool – all of which result in 
a poor appreciation of the value and effectiveness of 
M&E. The state sector also faces the challenge of high 
turnover of M&E skilled personnel who move to the 
non-state sector where remuneration is better. 
The approaches at micro level are skewed towards the 
performance monitoring capacity at the expense of 
the capacities needed to support the ability to plan, 
conduct, learn from and sustain evaluations within 
institutions. There are also limited initiatives focusing 
on the development of national policies, strategies, and 
enabling environments for the practice of M&E. The 
approaches also neglect the macro-level capacity i.e. 
the M&E culture, behaviour, context, and structures at 
country level. 
Key lessons from M&E 
capacity strengthening in 
African countries.
Firstly, throughout all eight countries, the capacity 
needs assessments and capacity-strengthening plans 
are lacking. The implication is that capacity-strength-
ening initiatives are haphazard, unsystematic, ad hoc, 
inadequate, and ineffective. The failure to define coun-
try capacity needs 
has led to the narrow perception that capacity is limited 
to the micro level and a distinct lack of understanding of 
the inherent interconnectedness of all levels of capacity. 
The second issue is that capacity strengthening is 
frequently divorced from the prevailing contextual 
factors (culture, socio-economic, political and gover -
nance systems), with the approach to strengthening 
capacity being that of a generic one-size-fits-all solu-
tion which fails to acknowledge that M&E capacity 
determinants such as culture, the value of M&E, and the 
general environment of M&E practice, are endogenous 
and context-specific. The implication is that there is a 
mismatch between the supply and demand aspects of 
capacity. 
Thirdly, study findings show that current M&E capac -
ity-strengthening initiatives do not emphasise the key 
elements which are crucial for the holistic development 
of M&E systems. Capacity strengthening at a macro level 
(country level) should be creating an enabling environ-
ment which enables and values the practice of M&E. 
This is achieved through assisting countries in develop-
ing coherent policies, culture, structures, strategies and 
inducing behaviour change, a process which will bring 
new values at both micro and macro levels of capacity. 
In state institutions the creation of an enabling environ-
ment is an immense task which is exacerbated by a lack 
of human capacity, resources, absence of policies and 
frameworks, and a weaker demand for M&E compared 
to the non-state sector. This has a direct implication on 
state programmes’ effectiveness and accountability and 
impedes the development of a culture of evaluation. 
Fourthly, the findings of this study show that there is 
a general shortage of resources (material, human and 
financial) across all levels (individual, institutional and 
state level) to develop M&E capacities. At the state 
level, there is a heavy dependence on non-state capac-
ity-strengthening funders and this, in turn, affects the 
sustainability of such approaches. In several countries, 
funders dictate the capacity-strengthening goals and 
approaches to be adopted thereby depriving state enti-
ties of the opportunity to utilise the resources where 
they are needed most. Non-state sector institutions 
receiving funding from international organisations have 
guaranteed funding for M&E system capacity strength-
ening and setting up of M&E systems with the objective 
of improving accountability and performance monitor-
ing. However, these funds do not extend to measure -
ment activities to assess the efficiency, effectiveness, and 
impact of these capacity-strengthening approaches. At 
the individual level, the resources available to individu-
als not attached to institutions are scarce for academic 
and professional training. 
Fifthly, the study shows that across all the eight coun-
tries, the measurement of M&E capacity-strengthening 
activities is amorphous and vague. Measurement only 
exists at the input, process and output stages of the 
micro-level spectrum. Absence of monitoring tools 
for capacity-strengthening activities implies that the 
efficiency and effectiveness of capacity-strengthen-
ing activities are unknown hence implementers are 
deprived of the opportunity to reflect on what is work-
ing, not working, for whom and under what circum-
stances. Also, the absence of evaluations means that the 
relationship between capacity-strengthening interven-
tions and M&E capacity outcomes is not defined.
Policy implications and 
recommendations
The recommendations are targeted at both national 
institutions and organisations that are funding M&E 
capacity development in the eight selected countries. 
The success of the suggested recommendations is 
based on the creation of effective synergies between 
state and non-state sectors and recognising, at the 
policy level, that such networks and synergies are perti-
nent to addressing the M&E capacity challenges holis-
tically. When implementing these recommendations, 
there is a need to ensure sufficient flexibility and scope 
to enable adaptation to the specific country context.
M&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA – A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
CLEAR-AA  POLICY BRIEF
5
• Recommendation 1 – Know your capacity needs 
and be systematic 
 
Capacity-strengthening funding initiatives for 
countries and organisations need to prioritise 
country-level M&E capacity needs assessments 
in order to determine the capacity that exists at 
the time of the assessment and how it affects 
the overall practice of M&E within the country. 
The follow-up step is to develop a country-spe-
cific capacity development plan which details 
the necessary capacity improvements or makes 
recommendations on new types of capacity which 
may be required. It is also important to develop 
measurement tools for assessing the impact, effec-
tiveness, and merit of M&E capacity-strengthening 
approaches. Key to implementation of the plan is 
a robust knowledge management system where 
state and non-state institutions mine knowledge/
evidence to enable productive reflection on what 
is working, not working, for whom, and under 
what circumstances.
• Recommendation 2 – Improve the 
strengthening of capacity at all levels –
individual, institutional, and country  
 
Stakeholders who fund or implement capacity-
strengthening initiatives must focus on the M&E 
system as a whole and strengthen all levels of 
capacity, including individual, institutional and 
country levels. The focus should not be limited to 
the monitoring of micro-level technical skills and 
abilities but should include the strengthening of 
macro-level capacity and evaluation skills
• Recommendation 3 – Context matters  
 
Countries are not homogenous and M&E capacity 
depends largely on the contextual factors/nuances 
prevalent in each organisation and country. 
Individuals or stakeholders responsible for the 
design of M&E capacity-strengthening approaches 
should devise context-specific approaches, 
which are acceptable to the recipients of such 
interventions and permit them to adapt easily and 
sustain the gained capacity. 
• Recommendation 4 – Extend capacity 
strengthening to decision-makers and create 
an enabling environment  
 
The lack of capacity-strengthening approaches 
targeted at creating an enabling environment 
and developing the capacities of decision-makers 
creates obstacles for the development of a culture 
of evaluation and use of M&E information and 
evidence within organisations. Those who are 
funding, designing, and implementing capacity 
strengthening need to extend their focus to these 
aspects to optimise programme effectiveness
• Recommendation 5 – Create synergies and 
networks 
 
The state and other development partners are 
implementing development interventions which 
are targeted at addressing the same or similar 
development challenges in the various entities 
but which have significant differences in M&E 
capacities. It is recommended that synergies be 
developed between state and non-state sectors to 
do away with the M&E capacity silos that currently 
exist and to create opportunities for mutual 
learning and sharing to determine what strategy 
works in their particular country. The state should 
be leading the development of these synergies.
References
Babu, S. C. (2018) Monitoring and evaluation for capacity 
strengthening. Intl Food Policy Res Inst.
Nuyens, Y. (2005) ‘No development without research: a 
challenge for research capacity strengthening’ . Geneva, 
Switzerland Global Forum for Health Research.
Segone, M. (2008) Evidence-based policy making and the role of 
monitoring and evaluation within the new aid environ-
ment. UNICEF.
Struyk, R. J., Damon, M. and Haddaway, S. R. (2011) ‘Evaluating 
capacity building for policy research organizations’ , 
American Journal of Evaluation. SAGE Publications Sage 
CA: Los Angeles, CA, 32(1), pp. 50–69.
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
CLEAR Anglophone Africa
@CLEARAA1
CLEAR Anglophone Africa
The Oval Building, University of the Witwatersrand
2 St David’s Place, Parktown, Johannesburg
CLEAR.AnglophoneAfrica@wits.ac.za
www.wits.ac.za/clear-aa
 Telephone: +27 11 717 3157
  
5
Disclaimer: The views expressed herein are those of the author/s; 
they do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of CLEAR AA
M&E CAPACITY-STRENGTHENING APPROACHES AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
IN ANGLOPHONE AFRICA – A POLICY PERSPECTIVE.
View publication stats