<<<PAGE=1>>>
This chapter summarizes the transformation theory of adult learning,
explains the relationship of transformative learning to autonomous,
responsible thinking (viewed as the central goal of adult education),
and discusses practical implications for educators.Transformative Learning: 
Theory to Practice
Jack Mezirow
A defining condition of being human is that we have to understand the mean-
ing of our experience. For some, any uncritically assimilated explanation by an
authority figure will suffice. But in contemporary societies we must learn to
make our own interpretations rather than act on the purposes, beliefs, judg-
ments, and feelings of others. Facilitating such understanding is the cardinal goal
of adult education. Transformative learning develops autonomous thinking.
Transformative Learning Theory
Transformative learning (Mezirow, 1991, 1995, 1996; Cranton, 1994, 1996)
is the process of effecting change in a frame of reference. Adults have acquired
a coherent body of experience—associations, concepts, values, feelings, con-
ditioned responses—frames of reference that define their life world. Frames of
reference are the structures of assumptions through which we understand our
experiences. They selectively shape and delimit expectations, perceptions, cog-
nition, and feelings. They set our “line of action.” Once set, we automatically
move from one specific activity (mental or behavioral) to another. We have a
strong tendency to reject ideas that fail to fit our preconceptions, labeling those
ideas as unworthy of consideration—aberrations, nonsense, irrelevant, weird,
or mistaken. When circumstances permit, transformative learners move toward
a frame of reference that is more inclusive, discriminating, self-reflective, and
integrative of experience.
A frame of reference encompasses cognitive, conative, and emotional com-
ponents, and is composed of two dimensions: habits of mind and a point of view.
Habits of mind are broad, abstract, orienting, habitual ways of thinking, feeling,
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR ADULT AND CONTINUING EDUCATION, no. 74, Summer 1997 © Jossey-Bass Publishers 5
<<<PAGE=2>>>
6 TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING IN ACTION
and acting influenced by assumptions that constitute a set of codes. These codes
may be cultural, social, educational, economic, political, or psychological. Habits
of mind become articulated in a specific point of view—the constellation of belief,
value judgment, attitude, and feeling that shapes a particular interpretation.
An example of a habit of mind is ethnocentrism, the predisposition to
regard others outside one’s own group as inferior. A resulting point of view is
the complex of feelings, beliefs, judgments, and attitudes we have regarding
specific individuals or groups (for example, homosexuals, welfare recipients,
people of color, or women).
Frames of reference are primarily the result of cultural assimilation and
the idiosyncratic influences of primary caregivers. Habits of mind are more
durable than points of view. Points of view are subject to continuing change as
we reflect on either the content or process by which we solve problems and
identify the need to modify assumptions. This happens whenever we try to
understand actions that do not work the way we anticipated. We can try out
another person’s point of view and appropriate it, but we cannot do this with
a habit of mind. Points of view are more accessible to awareness and to feed-
back from others.
Jürgen Habermas (1981) has helped us to understand that problem solv-
ing and learning may be instrumental— learning to manipulate or control the
environment or other people to enhance efficacy in improving performance;
impressionistic— learning to enhance one’s impression on others, to present one-
self; normative— learning oriented to common values and a normative sense of
entitlement (members of the group are entitled to expect certain behavior); or
communicative— learning to understand the meaning of what is being com-
municated. Communicative learning involves at least two persons striving to
reach an understanding of the meaning of an interpretation or the justification
for a belief. Ideally , communicative learning involves reaching a consensus.
In instrumental learning, the truth of an assertion may be established
through empirical testing. But communicative learning involves understanding
purposes, values, beliefs, and feelings and is less amenable to empirical tests. In
communicative learning, it becomes essential for learners to become critically
reflective of the assumptions underlying intentions, values, beliefs, and feelings.
If someone claims he loves you, how authentic is the expression of affec-
tion? Is the intent of a friendly stranger to sell you something, to proselytize,
or make a sexual overture? Is an acquaintance being truthful? Is what is com-
municated only a rationalization? Is it meant to be taken literally or as a
metaphor? Is the message of a play what you interpret it to be? To resolve these
questions of assumption, we rely on a tentative best judgment among those
whom we believe to be informed, rational, and objective. We engage in dis-
course to validate what is being communicated. Our only other recourse is to
turn to an authority or tradition to make a judgment for us.
Discourse, as used here, is a dialogue devoted to assessing reasons pre-
sented in support of competing interpretations, by critically examining evi-
dence, arguments, and alternative points of view. The more interpretations of
<<<PAGE=3>>>
7TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING: THEORY TO PRACTICE
a belief available, the greater the likelihood of finding a more dependable inter-
pretation or synthesis. We learn together by analyzing the related experiences
of others to arrive at a common understanding that holds until new evidence
or arguments present themselves.
We transform our frames of reference through critical reflection on the
assumptions upon which our interpretations, beliefs, and habits of mind or
points of view are based. We can become critically reflective of the assump-
tions we or others make when we learn to solve problems instrumentally or
when we are involved in communicative learning. We may be critically reflec-
tive of assumptions when reading a book, hearing a point of view, engaging in
task-oriented problem solving (objective reframing), or self-reflectively assess-
ing our own ideas and beliefs (subjective reframing). Self-reflection can lead
to significant personal transformations.
Critically explored assumptions may be in the autobiographical context
of a belief, or they may be supporting a social, cultural, economic, political,
educational, or psychological system. Transformations in frames of reference
take place through critical reflection and transformation of a habit of mind, or
they may result from an accretion of transformations in points of view.
There are four processes of learning. Referring to the ethnocentric exam-
ple, one process is to elaborate an existing point of view—we can seek further
evidence to support our initial bias regarding a group and expand the range or
intensity of our point of view.
A second way we learn is to establish new points of view. We can
encounter a new group and create new negative meaning schemes for them by
focusing on their perceived shortcomings, as dictated by our propensity for
ethnocentricity .
A third way we learn is to transform our point of view. We can have an
experience in another culture that results in our critically reflecting on our mis-
conceptions of this particular group. The result may be a change in point of
view toward the group involved. As a result, we may become more tolerant or
more accepting of members of that group. If this happens over and over again
with a number of different groups, it can lead to a transformation by accretion
in our governing habit of mind.
Finally , we may transform our ethnocentric habit of mind by becoming
aware and critically reflective of our generalized bias in the way we view groups
other than our own. Such epochal transformations are less common and more
difficult. We do not make transformative changes in the way we learn as long
as what we learn fits comfortably in our existing frames of reference.
Autonomous Thinking
Thinking as an autonomous and responsible agent is essential for full citizen-
ship in democracy and for moral decision making in situations of rapid
change. The identified learning needs of the workforce implicitly recognize the
centrality of autonomous learning.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
8 TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING IN ACTION
The U.S. Department of Labor’s SCANS report (1991) identifies acquir-
ing and using information, identifying and organizing resources, working with
others, interpreting information, and understanding complex interrelationships
as essential competencies and skills.
Similarly , the “key competencies” for workforce preparation identified by
the Australian government, employers, and academics include analyzing infor-
mation, communicating ideas, planning and organizing activities, using math-
ematical ideas and technology , working in teams, solving problems, and using
cultural understandings (Gonzi and others, 1995).
The common presumption in these lists is that the essential learning
required to prepare a productive and responsible worker for the twenty-first
century must empower the individual to think as an autonomous agent in a
collaborative context rather than to uncritically act on the received ideas and
judgments of others. Workers will have to become autonomous, socially
responsible thinkers.
As we move into the next century and more technologically sophisticated
industry and service sectors, work becomes more abstract, depending on
understanding and manipulating information rather than merely acquiring it.
New forms of skill and knowledge are required. There is a growing consensus
pertaining to the essential understandings, skills, and dispositions required for
an adult learner to become an effective member of the workforce of the future.
Economists recognize that resources should be directed toward creating a
workforce that can adapt to changing conditions of employment, exercise crit-
ical judgement as it manages technology systems, and flexibly engage in more
effective collaborative decision making.
Adult learners themselves view learning to think as autonomous, respon-
sible persons as an important educational objective. For example, the U.S.
National Institute for Literacy (Stein, 1995) found that those who participate
in literacy programs do so to (1) gain access to information so they can orient
themselves in the world; (2) give voice to their ideas, with the confidence they
will be heard; (3) make decisions and act independently; and (4) build a bridge
to the future by learning how to learn.
Their goal is to become autonomous, responsible thinkers. Often, adult
learners’ immediate focus is on practical, short-term objectives—to be able to
qualify for a driver’s license, get a job or promotion, or teach a child to read. It
is crucial to recognize that learning needs must be defined so as to recognize
both short-term objectives and long-term goals. The learner’s immediate objec-
tives may be described in terms of subject matter mastery , attainment of spe-
cific competencies, or other job-related objectives, but his or her goal is to
become a socially responsible autonomous thinker.
The adult educator must recognize both the learner’s objectives and goal. The
educator’s responsibility is to help learners reach their objectives in such a way
that they will function as more autonomous, socially responsible thinkers. Help-
ing people learn to achieve a specific short-term objective may involve instru-
mental learning. For them to achieve their goal requires communicative learning.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
9TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING: THEORY TO PRACTICE
Autonomy here refers to the understanding, skills, and disposition neces-
sary to become critically reflective of one’s own assumptions and to engage
effectively in discourse to validate one’s beliefs through the experiences of oth-
ers who share universal values.
Transformation theory holds that moral values are legitimized by agree-
ment through discourse. The universality of such values as truth, justice, and
freedom is based on the claim that they have been found to result in more ben-
eficial action than their alternatives. The Declaration of Human Rights by the
United Nations attests to this. The claim is that if everyone could participate
in a discourse, under the ideal conditions of discourse, there would be a uni-
versal rational consensus concerning these values.
There is an egregious assumption that the acquisition of knowledge or
attainment of competencies will somehow automatically generate the under-
standings, skills, and dispositions involved in learning to think autonomously .
However, there are different processes of learning involved and different forms
of appropriate educational intervention.
Foundations
Children commonly acquire a foundation of the specific learning required to
think autonomously . This includes the ability and disposition to (1) recognize
cause-effect relationships, (2) use informal logic in making analogies and gen-
eralizations, (3) become aware of and control their own emotions, (4) become
empathic of others, (5) use imagination to construct narratives, and (6) think
abstractly . Adolescents may learn to (7) think hypothetically , and (8) become
critically reflective of what they read, see, and hear.
In adulthood, the task is to strengthen and build on this foundation in
order to assist the learner to understand new subject content, but, in the
process of doing so, to become (1) more aware and critical in assessing
assumptions—both those of others and those governing one’s own beliefs, val-
ues, judgments, and feelings; (2) more aware of and better able to recognize
frames of reference and paradigms (collective frames of reference) and to imag-
ine alternatives; and (3) more responsible and effective at working with others
to collectively assess reasons, pose and solve problems, and arrive at a tenta-
tive best judgment regarding contested beliefs.
Becoming critically reflective of the assumptions of others is fundamental
to effective collaborative problem posing and solving. Becoming critically
reflective of one’s own assumptions is the key to transforming one’s taken-for-
granted frame of reference, an indispensable dimension of learning for adapt-
ing to change.
Education for Transformative Learning
Adult educators need to understand that transformative learning can take several
forms involving either objective or subjective reframing. Transformative learning
<<<PAGE=6>>>
10 TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING IN ACTION
is rooted in the way human beings communicate and is a common learning
experience not exclusively concerned with significant personal transformations.
To facilitate transformative learning, educators must help learners become
aware and critical of their own and others’ assumptions. Learners need practice
in recognizing frames of reference and using their imaginations to redefine prob-
lems from a different perspective. Finally , learners need to be assisted to partic-
ipate effectively in discourse. Discourse is necessary to validate what and how
one understands, or to arrive at a best judgment regarding a belief. In this sense,
learning is a social process, and discourse becomes central to making meaning.
Effective discourse depends on how well the educator can create a situa-
tion in which those participating have full information; are free from coercion;
have equal opportunity to assume the various roles of discourse (to advance
beliefs, challenge, defend, explain, assess evidence, and judge arguments);
become critically reflective of assumptions; are empathic and open to other
perspectives; are willing to listen and to search for common ground or a syn-
thesis of different points of view; and can make a tentative best judgment to
guide action. These ideal conditions of discourse are also ideal conditions of
adult learning and of education.
Transformative learning requires a form of education very different from
that commonly associated with children. New information is only a resource
in the adult learning process. To become meaningful, learning requires that
new information be incorporated by the learner into an already well-developed
symbolic frame of reference, an active process involving thought, feelings, and
disposition. The learner may also have to be helped to transform his or her
frame of reference to fully understand the experience.
Educators must assume responsibility for setting objectives that explicitly
include autonomous thinking and recognize that this requires experiences
designed to foster critical reflectivity and experience in discourse.
Education that fosters critically reflective thought, imaginative problem
posing, and discourse is learner-centered, participatory , and interactive, and it
involves group deliberation and group problem solving. Instructional materi-
als reflect the real-life experiences of the learners and are designed to foster
participation in small-group discussion to assess reasons, examine evidence,
and arrive at a reflective judgment. Learning takes place through discovery and
the imaginative use of metaphors to solve and redefine problems.
To promote discovery learning, the educator often reframes learner ques-
tions in terms of the learner’s current level of understanding. Learning con-
tracts, group projects, role play , case studies, and simulations are classroom
methods associated with transformative education. The key idea is to help the
learners actively engage the concepts presented in the context of their own
lives and collectively critically assess the justification of new knowledge.
Together, learners undertake action research projects. They are frequently chal-
lenged to identify and examine assumptions, including their own.
Methods that have been found useful include critical incidents, metaphor
analysis, concept mapping, consciousness raising, life histories, repertory
grids, and participation in social action (Mezirow and Associates, 1990).
<<<PAGE=7>>>
11TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING: THEORY TO PRACTICE
These methods encourage critical reflection and experience in discourse. The
focus is on discovering the context of ideas and the belief systems that shape
the way we think about their sources, nature, and consequences, and on
imagining alternative perspectives.
In fostering self-direction, the emphasis is on creating an environment in
which learners become increasingly adept at learning from each other and at
helping each other learn in problem-solving groups. The educator functions
as a facilitator and provocateur rather than as an authority on subject matter.
The facilitator encourages learners to create norms that accept order, justice,
and civility in the classroom and respect and responsibility for helping each
other learn; to welcome diversity; to foster peer collaboration; and to provide
equal opportunity for participation. The facilitator models the critically reflec-
tive role expected of learners. Ideally , the facilitator works herself out of the
job of authority figure to become a colearner by progressively transferring her
leadership to the group as it becomes more self-directive. These are familiar
concepts in adult education.
Transformative learning is not an add-on. It is the essence of adult edu-
cation. With this premise in mind, it becomes clear that the goal of adult edu-
cation is implied by the nature of adult learning and communication: to help
the individual become a more autonomous thinker by learning to negotiate his
or her own values, meanings, and purposes rather than to uncritically act on
those of others. This goal cannot be taken for granted; educational interven-
tions are necessary to ensure that the learner acquires the understandings,
skills, and dispositions essential for transformative learning. Critical reflection,
awareness of frames of reference, and participation in discourse become sig-
nificant elements in defining learning needs, setting educational objectives,
designing materials and methods, and in evaluating learner growth using non-
traditional methods such as portfolios.
Conclusion
From the perspective of transformation theory , the nature of adult learning
implies a set of ideal conditions for its full realization that may serve as stan-
dards for judging both the quality of adult education and the sociopolitical
conditions that facilitate or impede learning. From the perspective of trans-
formation theory , there are ideal conditions for the full realization of adult
learning; these conditions can serve as standards for judging both the quality
of adult education and the sociopolitical conditions that facilitate or impede
learning. The position here is that there is an inherent logic, ideal, and pur-
pose in the process of transformative learning. The process involves trans-
forming frames of reference through critical reflection of assumptions,
validating contested beliefs through discourse, taking action on one’s reflec-
tive insight, and critically assessing it. This understanding of the nature of sig-
nificant adult learning provides the educator with a rationale for selecting
appropriate educational practices and actively resisting social and cultural
forces that distort and delimit adult learning.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
12 TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING IN ACTION
References
Cranton, P. Understanding and Promoting Transformative Learning: A Guide for Educators of
Adults. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994.
Cranton, P. Professional Development as Transformative Learning: New Perspectives for Teach-
ers of Adults. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996.
Gonzi, A., and others. Key Competencies in On the Job Training. Sydney: University of Tech-
nology and Science and Department of Industrial Relations, Employment and Training,
1995.
Habermas, J. The Theory of Communicative Action. Vol. 1: Reason and the Realization of Soci-
ety. Boston: Beacon Press, 1981.
Mezirow, J. Transformative Dimensions of Adult Learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991.
Mezirow, J. “Transformative Theory of Adult Learning.” In M. Welton (ed.), In Defense of
the Lifeworld. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995.
Mezirow, J. “Contemporary Paradigms of Learning.” Adult Education Quarterly,1996, 46 (3),
158–172.
Mezirow, J., and Associates (eds.). Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 1990.
Stein, S. Equipped for the Future: A Customer Driven Vision for Adult Literacy and Lifelong
Learning. Washington, D.C.: National Institute for Literacy, 1995.
U.S. Department of Labor. What Work Requires of Schools: A SCANS Report for America 2000.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991.
JACK MEZIROW is emeritus professor of adult education, Teachers College, Columbia
University.