<<<PAGE=1>>>
Success Factors  
for Women’s and 
Children’s Health
RWANDA
Ministry of Health, Rwanda
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2
Suggested citation: Ministry of Health Rwanda, PMNCH, WHO, World Bank, AHPSR and 
participants in the Rwanda multistakeholder policy review (2014). Success Factors for Women’s 
and Children’s Health: Rwanda.
“Success factors for women’s and children’s health: Rwanda” is a document of the 
Ministry of Health, Rwanda. This report is the result of a collaboration between the 
Ministry of Health and multiple stakeholders in Rwanda, supported by the Partnership 
for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (PMNCH), the World Health Organization, 
other H4+ and health and development partners who provided input and review.
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health is a three-year multidisciplinary, 
multi-country series of studies coordinated by PMNCH, WHO, World Bank and the 
Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research, working closely with Ministries of 
Health, academic institutions and other partners. The objective is to understand how 
some countries accelerated progress to reduce preventable maternal and child deaths.
The Success Factors studies include: statistical and econometric analyses of data from 
144 low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) over 20 years; Boolean, qualitative 
comparative analysis (QCA); a literature review; and country-specific reviews in 10 
fast-track countries for MDGs 4 and 5a.
1, 2 For more details see the Success Factors 
for Women’s and Children’s health website:  
available at http://www.who.int/pmnch/successfactors/en/
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Success factors for women’s and children’s health: Rwanda
I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 150908 4 
Subject headings are available from WHO institutional repository
© World Health Organization 2015
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the 
WHO web site (www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health 
Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; 
fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications –whether for sale or 
for non-commercial distribution– should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO 
website (www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health 
Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on 
maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply 
that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference 
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the 
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify 
the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being 
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility 
for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the 
World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.  
Printed in Switzerland
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3
Index
1. Executive Summary ......................................................................................................4
2. Introduction  .................................................................................................................7
3. Country Context ...........................................................................................................8
4. Key Trends, Timelines and Challenges ...........................................................................10
5. Health Sector Initiatives and Investments .......................................................................12
6. Initiatives and Investments Outside the Health Sector ......................................................16
7. Key Actors and Political Economy ................................................................................. 21
8. Governance and Leadership .........................................................................................22
9. Challenges and Future Priorities ....................................................................................23
10. References ................................................................................................................24
11. Acronyms ..................................................................................................................26
12. Acknowledgements .....................................................................................................27
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
1. Executive Summary
Under 5 child mortality
Reductions in mortality are associated with 
both improved coverage of effective 
interventions (e.g. full child immunization 
coverage increased from 69.8% to 90.1%; exclusive 
breastfeeding rate increased to 85%) to prevent and 
treat the most important causes of child mortality 
and with improvements in socioeconomic conditions. 
Rwanda’s 2015 MDG goal for child mortality is 52 
deaths per 1000 live births (LB). According to the 
United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation, Rwanda had already achieved an under 
5 year mortality rate (U5MR) of 54/1000 LB in 
2013, a reduction of more than 70%. The Rwanda 
Demographic and Health Survey (RDHS 2010) 
indicated a rate of 76 U5MR per 1000 LB. Rates of 
newborn mortality have been slower to decline, and 
form about one third of all child mortality.
Overview
Rwanda has made significant progress in improving the health of women and children and is on the fast track 
in 2013 to achieve Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 4 (to reduce child mortality) and 5a (to reduce 
maternal mortality). A combination of factors has played a key role in driving progress. This review provided 
an opportunity for the Ministry of Health in Rwanda and other key stakeholders to synthesize and document 
how these improvements were made, focusing on policy and programme management best practices.
Maternal mortality
Rwanda’s maternal mortality ratio (MMR) 
has trended down at a rapid rate (50% 
between 2000 and 2010) achieving an 
MMR of 340/100 000 LB according to 
the Atlas of African health statistics modelled data. 
RDHS data showed a rate of 476/100 000 LB in 
2010. Declines in maternal mortality are associated 
with improvements in the contraceptive prevalence 
rate and skilled birth attendance. Between 2000 
and 2010, the modern contraceptive prevalence 
rate increased from 4% to 45%; the presence of a 
skilled provider during child birth increased from 
31% to 69%.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5
Rwanda
Health sector initiatives and 
investments
In response to a severe health workforce shortage 
(especially of midwives), limited health infrastructure, 
and very high rates of maternal and child mortality, 
the Government of Rwanda prioritized reproductive, 
maternal, newborn and child health (RMNCH) 
throughout its policies and major health sector 
reforms within a context of strong national ownership 
and health sector decentralization. With the goal of 
providing universal health care, the country has 
focused on health systems strengthening; 
government-led coordination and planning; increased 
national spending on health; evidence-based policy 
making; strong community involvement; innovative 
health financing mechanisms; health workforce and 
infrastructure development; a community-based 
health insurance (CBHI) scheme and a performance-
based financing (PBF) system. The complementarity 
of these various supply- and demand-side interventions 
has enabled marked improvements in coverage and 
equity in access to health services. 
Investments and initiatives outside 
the health sector
In recognition of the strong links between health and 
sustainable development, the Government of 
Rwanda has prioritized multipronged approaches 
encompassing the health sector and other areas 
such as education, nutrition, and water and 
sanitation. Free primary education is available and 
special attention has been paid to eliminate gender 
disparities resulting in 90% of primary school age 
girls being enrolled in school. Coordination between 
government, donors and other stakeholders has 
aligned efforts in education, based on national 
development priorities. Since Rwanda’s adoption of 
the National Nutrition Policy in 2005, an 
interministerial, coordinated and district-based 
approach to addressing malnutrition has been led 
by the President and operationalized by the Prime 
Minister’s Office. Though progress has been made 
in undernutrition, stunting (short height for age) in 
children under 5 remains high at 44%. The 
availability of and access to services has also 
improved through the construction and equipping of 
district hospitals and health centres. Rwanda has 
also prioritized access to clean water and sanitation 
as well as expansion of its rural roads. The institution 
of social protection programmes and economic 
empowerment of women have also been a focus. 
Rwanda has led regionally in the use of innovation 
and mobile technology as evidenced by its RapidSMS 
programme which links community health workers to 
pregnant women, enabling monitoring of antenatal 
care and referrals in an emergency. The tool is also 
used to report births and deaths. Several other 
homegrown solutions developed in Rwanda provide 
an additional safety net and supports for the poor.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Challenges and future priorities
Despite notable improvements in RMNCH, 
maternal and newborn mortality and 
morbidity remain high in Rwanda. Key 
priority actions to accelerate progress are to: 
•	increase the number and improve the 
distribution of skilled birth attendants; 
•	improve the quality of health services; 
•	improve geographical access to health 
facilities; and 
•	strengthen efforts in the areas of family 
planning, newborn health and nutrition. 
Key actors and political economy
The Government of Rwanda has employed innovative 
and evidence-based reforms to develop a coordinated 
response to improving reproductive, maternal, 
newborn and child health (RMNCH) outcomes. It 
has aligned all ministries and development partners 
under the Vision 2020 Strategy and its subsequent 
policies, and established intersectoral collaborations, 
such as the Joint Action Development Forum at the 
district level, which have been an essential driver in 
the improvement of RMNCH outcomes. Both the 
president and the first lady have taken key roles in 
promoting improvements that have affected 
women’s and children’s health.
Governance and leadership
Good governance has been prioritized through its 
integration into Rwanda’s overarching country 
development policies, and is the first pillar of the 
country’s Vision 2020 Strategy. The government’s 
emphasis on crosssector collaboration, decentralization 
and the sector-wide approach (SWAp) framework 
has promoted accountability between the local and 
national level. Rwanda’s performance-based 
environment and zero tolerance policy on corruption 
has further strengthened accountability among actors 
and institutions. The Government of Rwanda has 
also instituted a national gender policy, structures to 
empower women and to prevent gender-based 
violence. Female representation within the parliament 
is high, with women currently holding a majority of 
seats (64% in the lower house and 40% in the 
Senate). Rwanda has been continually improving in 
securing political stability, rule of law, control of 
corruption, and government effectiveness.
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7
Rwanda
a In addition to MDGs 4 and 5a, other targets discussed in this analysis, where relevant, include MDG 3a (to eliminate gender 
disparity in primary and secondary education), MDG 5b (to achieve universal access to reproductive health), and MDG 7c 
(to halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking-water and basic sanitation).
2. Introduction
It was recognized that it can be difficult to establish 
causal links between policy and programme inputs 
and health impact. For this reason, plausibility 
criteria were used to identify key policy and 
programme inputs and other contributing factors 
that could be linked to potential mortality 
reductions. These criteria included, the potential 
impact of the policy or programme on mortality 
reduction, that it had been implemented long 
enough to have influenced mortality, and it had 
reached a large enough target population to explain 
national-level reductions in mortality. Following this, 
stakeholders reviewed the identified policies and 
programmes to reach consensus on the key inputs 
that could have likely influenced mortality. Research 
is needed to better quantify how policies and 
programmes contribute to improved health 
outcomes. More data in this area would enable the 
analysis to be further refined.
The first draft was developed by local and 
international experts. Interviews and group 
meetings with stakeholders were conducted 
between February and March 2014 to further 
review, revise and achieve consensus on findings. 
Findings were presented and discussed at the 
Maternal and Child Health Review meeting in June 
2014. A final draft was developed and approved by 
the MoH also in June 2014.
Rwanda is one of 10 low-and middle-income 
countries (which also include Bangladesh, Cambodia, 
China, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic, Nepal, Peru and Viet Nam) with a high 
maternal and child mortality burden that in 2012 were 
on the fast-track to achieve MDGs 4 (to reduce child 
mortality) and 5a (to reduce maternal mortality).
3, a 
The primary objective of this document and 
accompanying review process was to identify factors 
both within and outside the health sector that have 
contributed to reductions in maternal and child 
mortality in Rwanda – focusing on how improvements 
were made, and emphasizing policy and programme 
management best practices and how these were 
optimized and tailored to Rwanda’s unique context. 
Methods used for the Success Factor review in 
Rwanda included:
•	A literature review based on peer-reviewed and 
grey literature, policy documents, programme 
evaluations and sector strategies and plans; 
•	A review of quantitative data from population-based 
surveys, routine data systems, international 
databases and other sources; 
•	Interviews and meetings with key stakeholders to 
inform and help validate findings and to identify 
factors based on local knowledge and experience; 
•	A review of the draft document by stakeholders 
and local experts to finalize findings.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
3. Country Context
Overview
Rwanda is a landlocked country in central east 
Africa with both mountainous terrain and plateaus. 
Following decades of unrest, up to a million lives 
were lost during the 1994 genocide, which left a 
further two million homeless. After this, the 
government began to rebuild the country with 
policies to support equitable economic development. 
Policies emphasized investment in major 
infrastructure, commercial and agricultural 
productivity and skills development. Agriculture and 
the service sector became key contributors to 
economic growth.
The gross domestic product per capita rose from 
(purchasing power parity, PPP , Int$) $707 in 1990 to 
$1167 in 2012 (see Table 1: Key country indicators).
4 
Further social and political reform led to higher 
living standards and increased life expectancy. As 
the overall Success Factors studies show, 
improvements in gross domestic product per capita, 
together with progress across health and other 
sectors, have contributed to improvements in health 
and development.
2 The total fertility rate (TFR) is at 
4.6 births per woman, and 41% of the population 
are below 15 years of age; despite urbanization, 
over 81% of the population lives in rural areas 
(see Table 1: Key country indicators).
4, 5
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9
Rwanda
Table 1: Key country indicators*+ 
INDICATOR 1990-1999 2000-2009 2010-PRESENT
Population
TOTAL POPULATION 
(millions)
7
(1990)
8
(2000)
10.5 m  
(2012, Rwanda Census)
TOTAL FERTILITY
(births per woman)
7
(1990)
6
(2000)
5
(2011)
Health Financing
TOTAL HEALTH EXPENDITURE PER CAPITA  
(PPP, constant 2005 international $)
21
(1995)
25
(2000)
135
(2011)
OUT-OF-POCKET HEALTH EXPENDITURE
(as % of total expenditure on health)
26
(1995)
25
(2000)
21
(2011)
Economic  
Development
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT PER CAPITA
(PPP, constant 2005 international $)
707
(1990)
631
(2000)
1167
(2012)
FEMALE PARTICIPATION IN LABOR FORCE  
(% of females age 15-64)
90
(1990)
88
(2000)
88
(2012)
GINI INDEX
(0 equality to 100 inequality income distribution)
N/A 52 (2000)
51 (2000, EICV)*
52 (2005, EICV)
51 (2011)
49 (2011, EICV)
Health  
Workforce
PHYSICIANS  
(per 1000 population)
0.04
(1993)
0.02
(2002)
0.06 (2010)
1 doctor/16,001
NURSES AND MIDWIVES
(per 1000 population) N/A 0.43
(2004)
0.69 (2010)
1 nurse/1291
Education
GIRLS’ PRIMARY SCHOOL NET ENROLLMENT
(% of primary school age children)
82
(1999)
81
(2004)
90
(2010)
ADULT LITERACY RATE
(% of males (M) and % females (F) aged 15 and above) N/A 71(M) 60(F)
(2000)
82 (M) 77(F)
(2010, RDHS)
Environmental 
Management
ACCESS TO CLEAN WATER 
(% of population with access to improved source)
62
(1990)
66
(2000)
74 (DHS, 2010)
74.2 (EICV3, 2010/11)
ACCESS TO SANITATION FACILITIES 
(% of population with improved access)
32
(1990)
47
(2000)
75 (DHS, 2010)
74.5 (EICV3, 2010/11)
Urban Planning/  
Rural Infrastructure
POPULATION LIVING IN URBAN AREAS
(% of total population)
5
(1990)
14
(2000)
19
(2012)
ELECTRIC POWER CONSUMPTION
(kilowatt hours per capita) N/A N/A N/A
Human Development 
Index  
(Composite of life expectancy, 
literacy, education, standards of 
living, quality of life)
VALUE
(reported along a scale of 0 to 1; values nearer to 1 
correspond to higher human development)
.23
(1990)
.31
(2000)
.43
(2012)
COUNTRY RANK (2012) 167
Good Governance  
(Reported along a scale of -2.5 
to 2.5; higher values correspond 
to good governance)
CONTROL OF CORRUPTION 
(extent that public power is used for private gain)
-0.93
(1996)
-0.65
(2000)
0.66
(2012)
* EICV-Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey
<<<PAGE=10>>>
10
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Table 2: Key RMNCH coverage indicators
Prepregnancy DEMAND FOR FAMILY PLANNING SATISFIED
(% of women age 15-49 with met need for family planning)
73
(2010) RDHS 2010
Pregnancy  
to  
Postnatal
ANTENATAL CARE
(% of women attended at least four times during pregnancy 
by any provider)
35
(2010) RDHS 2010
SKILLED ATTENDANCE AT BIRTH 
(as % of total births)
 69
(2010) WDI
ANTIRETROVIRALS FOR WOMEN
(% of HIV infected pregnant women receiving ART prophylaxis) 93 UNAIDS Report of the Global AIDS Epidemic, 
2012; Rwanda MOH Annual Report, 2011-12
POSTNATAL CARE FOR MOTHERS
(% of mothers who received care within two days of childbirth)
19
(2010) RDHS 2010
INFANT FEEDING
(Exclusive breastfeeding for first six months)
85
(2010) RDHS 2010
Newborn  
to  
Childhood
IMMUNIZATION
(% of children ages 12-23 fully immunized)
90
(2011)
WHO and UNICEF Estimates of National 
Immunization Coverage (WUENIC) 2012
PNEUMONIA
(Antibiotic treatment for pneumonia)
63  
(2010) RDHS 2010
4. Key Trends, Timelines and Challenges
In the last decade, Rwanda has made dramatic 
improvements in RMNCH. It has achieved MDG 4 
and is considered on the fast track toward achieving 
MDG 5a according to several UN sources.3, 4, 6 
Rwanda’s 2015 MDG goal for child mortality is 52 
deaths per 1000 live births (LB). As of 2010, it had 
achieved 76/1000 LB according to the 2010 
Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey (RDHS).
7 
(See Figure 1.) However, according to the UN Inter-
agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation, it had 
already achieved an under 5 year mortality rate 
(U5MR) of 54/1000 LB, a reduction of more than 
70%.
3, 4, 8 Reductions in mortality are associated 
with both improved coverage of effective 
interventions (e.g. full child immunization coverage 
increased from 69.8% to 90.1%; exclusive 
breastfeeding rate was 85%) to prevent and treat the 
most important causes of child mortality and with 
improvements in socioeconomic conditions. Rates of 
newborn mortality have been slower to decline and 
form about one third of all child mortality in Rwanda.
Rwanda’s maternal mortality ratio (MMR) has also 
trended down at a rapid rate (50% between 2000 
and 2010) to a rate of 340/100 000 LB according 
to modelled data.
6 However, RDHS data showed an 
MMR of 476/100 000 LB in 2010.7 (See Figure 2.) 
Declines in maternal mortality are associated with 
improvements in the contraceptive prevalence rate 
and skilled birth attendance. Between 2000 and 
2010, the modern contraceptive prevalence rate 
increased from 4% to 45%; the presence of a 
skilled provider during child birth increased from 
31% to 69%. (See Table 2.) However, the total 
fertility rate is still quite high at 4.6.
To achieve the much-needed progress in RMNCH 
outcomes in post-genocide Rwanda, the government 
had to overcome a number of challenges. Rwanda 
faced a severe health workforce shortage, especially 
of midwives. Other challenges included its limited 
health infrastructure, poor access to institutional 
and skilled care during pregnancy and child birth, 
inadequate coverage of emergency obstetric and 
newborn care (EmONC) services, as well as an 
improved but still extremely low uptake of family 
planning services in a context of rapid demographic 
growth. There are also both socioeconomic and 
geographic barriers to health care that prevent 
women from accessing essential RMNCH services.
9
In response, the Government of Rwanda prioritized 
RMNCH throughout its policies and major health 
system reforms (see Timeline of key policy inputs). 
On its road to universal health care, the country 
has focused on health systems strengthening, 
government-led planning, evidence-based policy 
making, strong community involvement, innovative 
health financing, health workforce and infrastructure 
development, a community-based health insurance 
(CBHI) scheme and a performance-based financing 
(PBF) system. The complementarity of these 
various supply- and demand-side interventions has 
enabled marked improvements in coverage and 
access to health services (see Table 2: Key RMNCH 
coverage indicators).
9, 10
<<<PAGE=11>>>
11
Rwanda
Figure 1: Trends in childhood mortality rates, Rwanda DHS data
Figure 2: Fertility rate and maternal mortality ratio, Rwanda DHS data
Timeline of key policy inputs
Pre 1990 1991-2000 2001-2010 2011 to present
1980 Expanded Programme 
on Immunization (EPI) 
Strategy
1985 Health system 
decentralization; 
Development of a 
decentralized primary 
health care system 
post-genocide
1996 Mutual health 
insurance
1999-2000 CBHI pilot 
project
2000 Vision 2020 Strategy; 
Integrated 
Management of 
Childhood Illnesses 
(IMCI) Strategy
2001 Performance Based Financing 
pilot project
2002 Revitalization of the EPI strategy 
and campaign
2003 National Reproductive Health 
Policy 
2003 Education Sector Policy
2004 National Health Policy
2004 Mutuelles Health Insurance 
Policy
2005 Nationwide implementation of 
PBF system
2005 National Nutrition Policy
2006 Nationwide implementation of 
Community Based Health 
Insurance system
2006 Community Health Desk 
established
2008 National Community Health 
Policy of Rwanda 
2008 National Family Planning Policy 
2009 Institutionalization of maternal 
death audits 
2008 Girls Education Policy
2009 National Policy on Child Health 
2010 Education Sector Strategic Plan
2010 National Policy and Strategy for 
Water Supply and Sanitation 
Services
2011 Gender-Based Violence Policy
2011 Neonatal and child death review 
instituted
2008-2012 Strategic Plan for Acceleration 
of Child Survival 
2008-2012 National Strategic Plan to 
Accelerate the Reduction of Maternal 
and Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality 
2008-2012 Economic Development and 
Poverty Reduction Strategy of 
Rwanda 
2009-2012 National Health Sector 
Strategic Plan II (HSSPII) 
2011 Pro-poor adaptation of CBHI scheme; 
Human Resource Strategic Plan 
2011 Home-based Management of Mother 
and Newborn
2012 Rwanda Family Planning Policy; 
Rwanda Family Planning Strategic 
Plan 
2012-2016 Policy on Reproductive Health
2012 Strategy on Adolescent Sexual and 
Reproductive Health and Rights
2013 Moving to Maternal Death 
Surveillance and Response approach
2013-2018 National Health Sector 
Strategic Plan III
2013-2018 National Strategic Plan to 
Accelerate Progress towards 
Reducing Maternal and Neonatal 
Morbidity and Mortality
2013-2018 National Child Survival 
Strategic Plan
<<<PAGE=12>>>
12
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Health financing and donor alignment
The Government of Rwanda has strong oversight and 
ownership over its national development agenda.10 
Any health system spending and decision-making in 
Rwanda is steered by the central and local 
government and guided by the Vision 2020 Strategy, 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy of Rwanda 2 (EDPRS 2) and Health Sector 
Strategic Plan III (HSSP III) and organized under a 
sector-wide approach (SWAp) framework. A SWAp 
framework has helped improve aid effectiveness and 
facilitated greater coordination across government 
health priorities and plans. Domestic and external 
partners are required to align to the government’s 
legislation, policies and strategies. The health sector 
is governed through a decentralized system, where 
30 districts are responsible for implementing health 
financing policies and for delivering equitable and 
efficient health services. The community-based 
health insurance (CBHI) scheme is the main 
organizing and financing mechanism for health care.
In line with the Government of Rwanda’s objective 
to be independent from development aid by 2020, 
there has been a decrease in external funding (as a 
proportion of the total health expenditure), from 
52% in 2000 to 42.6% in 2008.
11 However, from 
2003 to 2010, official development aid for RMNCH 
has increased annually by US$ 7.4 million, which 
equates to a 29.5% mean annual increase.
12 The 
health sector’s budget as a percentage of the total 
government expenditure has also seen continual 
increase, from 8.2% in 2000 to 16.5% in 2013-14 
according to the Ministry of Finance. (see Table 1: 
Key country indicators).
Human resources for health
Delivering quality RMNCH services requires 
an adequate number of skilled health workers. 
Decades of instability in the region have greatly 
reduced Rwanda’s health workforce through 
emigration and mortality.
10, 11 As of 2012, there was 
one doctor per 16 001 population, one nurse per 
1291 population, and one midwife per 66 749 
population.13 Prior to 1997, no midwifery cadre was 
trained in Rwanda. Since 2005, the government of 
Rwanda has increased its efforts to address the 
challenge of the human resource shortage through 
various reforms and initiatives, such as the 
decentralization of human resource management 
and the increase in the number and quality of skilled 
birth attendants (especially midwives). Rwanda has 
also established new norms and professional 
standards to improve quality of care.
14–17 All nurses 
are being upgraded through additional training and 
bachelor’s degree training is also being promoted. 
Specialized residency training programs are being 
developed for doctors. 
To mitigate the workforce shortage in Rwanda,  
45 000 community health workers (CHWs) provide 
essential health services at the village level, an 
initiative that started in 1995.
16 One of Rwanda’s 
strategies has been to create new positions and roles. 
Rwanda established two types of community health 
workers: binomes (a male and a female) in charge of 
integrated case management of childhood illness 
(IMCI) and family planning, and female community 
health workers in charge of maternal and newborn 
care. Health facility staff and CHWs receive financial 
incentives in addition to their monthly salaries 
5. Health Sector Initiatives and Investments
<<<PAGE=13>>>
13
Rwanda
based on Rwanda’s national 
performance-based financing (PBF) 
system (see Health sector spotlight). 
The goal of offering incentives is to 
enhance staff commitment to high 
quality standards,
18 where rewards and 
incentives are allocated based on health 
service delivery.
Outcomes monitored using 
evidence
To ensure effective decision-making 
within the health sector, the government 
has prioritized evidence-based policies 
and strategies.
10 Since 2007, Rwanda 
integrated maternal and child health 
services; namely emergency, obstetric 
and neonatal care (EmONC), essential 
newborn care (ENC), integrated 
community case management (iCCM), clinical IMCI, 
family planning and HIV services under a national 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework.
16 
This comprehensive system has enabled the close 
monitoring and analysis of RMNCH for improved 
priority setting, planning, and resource allocation.
15, 16
Rwanda’s web-based Health Management Information 
System integrates data from a breadth of sources, 
such as the CHW Information System, the CBHI 
Monthly Indicator Reporting System, and data from 
private health facilities.
16 Data from the health 
management information system are reviewed 
regularly to inform health sector strategic plans, 
monitor results, assess progress and facilitate 
priority setting, planning and resource allocation.
Since 2009, maternal death reviews have been 
scaled up at the national level in three forms: 
facility-based audits, verbal autopsies (community-
based reviews) and confidential enquiries into 
maternal deaths. As of 2013, Rwanda adopted 
WHO updated guidance to use the maternal death 
surveillance and review approach. The findings are 
used to understand causes of deaths and to inform 
health sector planning.
13 Rwanda also has a 
systematic and functional community reporting 
system in place, where CHWs are employed to 
record births and maternal and child deaths.16 
Training for child and newborn death reviews is 
currently being scaled up. Various community 
committees participate in M&E activities, through 
the verification of facility activity reports and by 
providing feedback on health service provision.
18 
Rwanda has made health information publically 
accessible to enable a wider range of stakeholders 
to use information to improve health services, 
thereby facilitating transparency of results.
Political prioritization of essential 
health interventions
The numerous health sector reforms that have taken 
place in the last decade confirm the government’s 
prioritization of MDGs 4 and 5. The government’s 
sustained focus on health systems strengthening 
has been a key factor in providing effective RMNCH 
services. Instead of implementing vertical and 
disease-specific programmes, the government has 
been pooling these funds (i.e. The US President’s 
Emergency Fund for AIDS Relief and Global Fund to 
fight AIDS, TB and Malaria) to finance the 
integration of primary health care services.
11 
All health facilities whether public, private or not-for-
profit (mainly faith-based) are integrated within the 
public health system and governed by the Ministry 
of Health (MoH). Although some faith-based health 
centres may not offer modern methods of family 
planning, they are obliged under the Family Planning 
Policy to provide clients with information on all 
family planning options and to refer them to family 
planning outlets (postes secondaires) where they 
can access the required services;
19 this is another 
example of service integration.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
14
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
The overall objective of the latest Health Sector 
Strategic Plan III (2012–2018) is to ensure 
universal accessibility (in geographical and financial 
terms) of quality health services for all Rwandans. 
~ Health Sector Strategic Plan III, 201216
Until recently, Rwanda had administratively heavy 
and very restrictive abortion laws that only 
permitted abortion to protect a woman’s physical 
health or to save her life. In May 2012, the 
government made a step towards securing women’s 
reproductive rights by including cases of rape, 
incest, forced marriage and fetal impairment as 
legal grounds for abortion.
Legal and financial entitlements, 
especially for underserved populations
In the Vision 2020 Strategy and throughout the 
government’s policies and strategies there is a 
commitment to securing equitable social and 
economic development.10, 20 The government’s 
objective of providing universal health 
care is an indication of its readiness to 
address economic and social barriers to 
accessing health services.
16, 21
Rwanda has implemented various initiatives since 
2000 to improve financial and geographic access 
to RMNCH services such as the innovative CBHI 
scheme known as Mutuelles.
9, 21–24 A measure of its 
impact is that between 2000 and 2007, growth in 
utilization of health services was greatest among 
the poorest quintile.7 Such schemes were further 
reformed in 2011 to a three-tiered system of 
premiums to enable the poorest households to pay 
a lower premium or no premium at all.21, 24
Mutuelles de santé is an innovative CBHI scheme 
that was established in line with the government’s 
National Health Strategy to provide universal health 
care to the Rwandan population.
21 The scheme was 
piloted in 1999 and extended nationwide in the 
mid-2000s with the objective of providing a long-term 
solution to financial barriers to accessing primary 
health care, focusing on RMNCH services.
9, 10 The 
scheme intends to provide financial risk protection 
by lowering catastrophic out-of-pocket payments 
and ensuring access to health care for vulnerable 
populations through a network of 30 district-based 
mutuelles,
22 managed by the district and central 
governments. Community committees play a key 
role in the scheme as they are responsible for 
mobilizing and registering members, collecting fees 
and clearing bills from health facilities.
9, 21, 22
<<<PAGE=15>>>
15
Rwanda
IMPROvING ACCESS TO RMNCH SERvICES
Health sector spotlight
The impact of performance-based financing: 
Since 2005, a PBF system has been 
implemented nationwide, covering both public 
and faith-based facilities as well as CHW 
cooperatives. This innovative results-based 
financing system has increased political 
prioritization of RMNCH at the district and 
village level, since all health facilities and CHW 
cooperatives are rewarded financially based on 
a number of indicators (mainly RMNCH-
related). Examples of indicators are: the 
proportion of women delivering at health 
facilities; the percentage of children receiving a 
full course of basic immunizations; and other 
qualitative measures such as the correct use of 
a partograph.
13, 16 The community-based PBF 
system incentivizes health services and referrals 
provided by CHWs.27 The PBF system fosters 
competition between facilities and districts, as 
users of the PBF web database can monitor 
their targets against the performance of other 
service providers.
9 To minimize 
manipulation of data and corruption, 
government and community-based verification 
and audit systems have been put into place.
Several studies show that PBF increases 
utilization of maternal health services, boosting 
family planning coverage15 and numbers of 
institutional deliveries,15,18 and reducing out-of-
pocket health expenditure.15 The contractual 
approach also improves health facility 
performance
14 and promotes the increase of 
district health budgets through involvement of 
district officials.
9
The full impact of PBF is, however, difficult to 
measure as other parallel initiatives within the 
health system tend to confound the results, 
especially in terms of outcome indicators. A 
next step would be to assess the impact of PBF 
on RMNCH health outcomes.
Annual premiums are based on wealth categories plus 
a 10% copayment for each episode of illness.9, 10 
CHWs transfer premiums to district-level mutuelles 
funds, which are 50% subsidized by external 
donors.
21, 23 Funds are used to pay healthcare 
providers on a payment per case basis. A standard 
set of RMNCH services is covered by the scheme, 
such as antenatal care (ANC), deliveries, EmONC, 
family planning, laboratory tests and essential 
drugs.
25 Members are entitled to ambulance 
transport, a minimum service package at a health 
centre and a complementary package at district 
facilities and national referral hospitals.21
The insurance scheme was made compulsory in 
2008.
21, 23 By June 2012, 90% of the Rwandan 
population was enrolled.10 The scheme enhanced 
the performance of primary healthcare providers 
and improved medical care utilization.21, 23 
Furthermore, the scheme was shown to reduce 
excessive out-of-pocket payments and was significantly 
associated with a higher degree of financial risk 
protection.23, 24 The mutuelles system is promoted 
and supported by the government, international 
agencies and nongovernmental organizations.
A key initiative promoting access to RMNCH care is 
the CHW strategy. These elected community 
members broaden the reach of the health system by 
connecting communities (especially in remote areas) 
to health services and monitoring health at the village 
level. Each village elects three volunteers who are 
then trained by the MoH: a male and female 
community member for integrated community case 
management (iCCM) and an additional woman for 
RMNCH services. They provide curative services, e.g. 
for malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoeal diseases, and 
play a key role in expanding the coverage of family 
planning, antenatal care and childhood immunization; 
when required, they refer patients to health centres.
26
<<<PAGE=16>>>
16
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Education
Women’s level of education has an impact on a 
variety of factors such as fertility rates, childbearing 
age and modern contraceptive use.7 Improved 
educational status in women has been shown to be 
related to lower infant mortality rates and improved 
performance on other health indicators. Under 5 
mortality in Rwanda is almost twice as high for 
children born to women with no education than 
women with at least secondary education (63 
versus 125 deaths per 1000 live births).
7 In 2008, 
Rwanda developed a Girls’ Education Policy with 
the aim to improve girls’ enrolment, retention, 
completion and transition to higher levels of 
education. This has contributed to progressively 
eliminating gender disparities in education. 
Rwanda has made great efforts in attaining 
MDG 2 and is on track to achieving universal 
primary education. Currently, 90% of primary 
school age girls are enrolled in school (see 
Table 1). The Government of Rwanda is implementing 
a Nine Year Basic Education programme which 
provides free primary education to all Rwandan 
children. As of 2012, the 12-year basic education 
programme is also being rolled out.
28, 29 Furthermore, 
an increasing number of schools have adopted the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) child-friendly 
initiative promoting the integration of gender-sensitive 
initiatives to support retention of girls in schools. An 
innovative program known as One Laptop per Child 
has been initiated in Rwanda to promote computer 
literacy and better preparation for jobs in the 21
st 
century. Rwanda also provides opportunities for young 
men and women who have dropped out of school to 
catch up and complete their secondary education as 
well as pursue technical and vocational training.
Coordination between government, donors and other 
stakeholders has aligned efforts in education based 
on national development priorities. This collaboration, 
based on multi stakeholder partnerships, a SWAp 
framework and comprehensive policies and 
strategies, was identified as critical to improving 
educational outcomes. All activities are aligned under 
the Vision 2020 Strategy, the 2003 Education Sector 
Policy, the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy and the 
Education Sector Strategic Plan 2010–2015. In line 
with the Government’s multisectoral approach, the 
MoH contributes to various health promotion 
programmes in schools in the area of hygiene, 
nutrition, promotion of immunizations, reproductive 
health, and HIV prevention.
27 
6. Initiatives and Investments Outside the Health Sector
<<<PAGE=17>>>
17
Rwanda
Figure 3: Nutrition status of children, Rwanda DHS data
Nutrition
Achieving MDG 1 (to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger) and addressing malnutrition is a priority area 
within Rwanda’s multisectoral approach.16 The political prioritization, commitment and establishment of 
national plans, strategies and laws to reduce malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies are well-documented 
in Rwanda.
The integration of nutrition programmes 
and alignment of policies, stakeholders 
and donors across sectors to improve 
nutrition has been effective. Since 
Rwanda’s adoption of the National 
Nutrition Policy in 2005, an 
interministerial and coordinated 
approach to addressing malnutrition 
has been led by the President and 
operationalized by the Prime Minister’s 
Office, through: the implementation of 
the National Emergency Plan to 
Eliminate Malnutrition; a National 
Protocol for the Treatment of 
Malnutrition; a National Strategy for the Elimination 
of Malnutrition; and the District Plan for the 
Elimination of Malnutrition.
16 These strategic 
documents have promoted a district-based national 
scale up of various nutrition interventions from 
national level interventions such as fortification of 
maize and a National Food and Nutrition Summit, to 
community-based nutrition programmes promoting 
balanced nutrition for pregnant women and children 
under 2 years; kitchen gardens; nutrition activities in 
schools; and improved management of malnutrition 
cases within health facilities and at the community 
level. CHWs have been involved in active screening 
of children for malnutrition since 2009
16 as well as 
promoting healthy diets. 
Although Rwanda needs further progress to reduce 
the proportion of people who suffer from hunger by 
2015,
30 it has improved some key nutrition-related 
indicators. Between 2005 and 2010, the 
percentage of underweight children reduced from 
18% to 11%. However, continued focus is needed 
since the rate of stunting in children under 5 
remains high at 44% (see Figure 3). From 2005 to 
2010, the prevalence of anaemia among children 
decreased from 52% to 38%, and from 33% to 
17% among women aged 15–49. There has also 
been an increase in Vitamin A supplementation 
coverage, from 87% to 93% for children aged 6–59 
months and from 34% to 52% for mothers in the 
postpartum period.
7, 31
<<<PAGE=18>>>
18
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Infrastructure, water supply and 
sanitation
After the 1994 conflict, the government focused on 
rebuilding the country’s infrastructure, including the 
health system. Today, 60% of the population lives 
within a 5 km radius of a health facility and 85% 
within 10 km.
32 The 2005 National Health Sector 
Policy prioritized the development of health 
infrastructure in response to gaps in geographical 
accessibility to health services. The availability of 
and access to services improved during the second 
and third heath sector strategic plans (HSSP II and 
III, 2005–2009 and 2009–2012) through the 
construction and equipping of district hospitals and 
health centres. In 2012, there were five national 
referral hospitals, 40 district hospitals, 450 health 
centres, and 157 private health facilities. On average, 
each district has at least one district hospital and 
one health centre per 20 000 population.
13, 16
Access to safe drinking water and 
improved sanitation are associated with 
better health outcomes. With its high 
population density and growth, Rwanda 
has faced challenges in securing environmental 
health and sustainability. Although 74% of the 
population has access to an improved water source, 
continued efforts are needed to increase access to 
clean water. Rwanda needs to continue to improve 
sanitation facilities for its population.
30 However, a 
number of policies and programmes have been 
elaborated to achieve the MDG targets for water and 
sanitation, under the umbrella of the Vision 2020 
strategy which aims for universal access to clean 
water and sufficient sewage and disposal systems 
by 2020.
20 These initiatives include promotion of 
hand washing stations, known as kandagira ukarabe 
for restaurants, schools and public places. 
Other infrastructure development efforts such as 
Rwanda’s rural feeder roads program have 
improved access to health care as well as to 
markets thus improving economic development. 
The national commitment to providing fibre optic 
connectivity to every district has also meant 
increased access to information for staff at health 
centres, hospitals and schools as well as for district 
leadership. A focus on crosscutting factors, including 
innovation and research as well as governance and 
leadership, has provided an important platform to 
stimulate further progress on women and children’s 
health in Rwanda.
Social protection
Rwanda has taken seriously the provision of social 
protection and safety to its citizens, particularly 
women. This includes a Policy and Strategy Against 
Gender Based Violence implemented in 2011 by the 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion. The First 
Lady has been a key champion in promoting gender 
equity and prevention of gender-based violence. In 
addition, Rwanda’s focus on security and combating 
crime has contributed to the health and safety of 
women and children.
Coordination and communication in a 
decentralized system
In order to address the challenges inherent in 
decentralization, Rwanda created the Social Affairs 
Cluster of Ministries which includes the Ministries of 
Education, Health, Gender and Family Promotion, 
Local Government, Agriculture, and Public Works. 
The District Council brings together all these sectors 
and is the decision making and coordinating body at 
the district level. Additionally, the monthly Joint 
Action Development Forum provides a coordinating 
as well as reporting mechanism bringing all 
partners, local and international, and sectors
<<<PAGE=19>>>
19
Rwanda
together to report on progress against targets as 
well as to plan. This level of coordination is repeated 
at the cell level enabling strengthened partnerships 
and better use of available funds, which has 
contributed to Rwanda’s ability to scale up key 
interventions within and outside of the health sector. 
Innovation and research
There is high political commitment for the promotion 
of research and innovation in Rwanda, which is 
emphasized across Rwanda’s policy framework.
10, 20 
In 2012, a specific Health Sector Research Policy 
was developed to further promote and streamline 
the linkages between health research, policies and 
programmes within the health sector, as well as 
reinforce country ownership of the research agenda.
Rwanda has engaged in a number of innovations in 
the RMNCH field, with its pioneering health financing 
policies (PBF and mutuelles), its focus on health 
systems strengthening and its investment in 
expanding the use of information and communication 
technology. Since 2010, an innovative application 
developed by UNICEF, called RapidSMS, has been 
scaled up at the national level and is now an integral 
part of the health system. RapdSMS is an information 
tracking tool that collects data from mobile users 
through short message service (SMS) text messages. 
All 15 000 CHWs responsible for RMNCH promotion 
were given mobile phones which are linked to a 
central MoH server. They use the tool to stay 
connected with pregnant women, monitor ANC, 
identify and refer women at risk and alert the 
nearest health facility in case of an emergency. 
CHWs also use the tool to report births and 
maternal and child deaths.
17 An initial evaluation of 
the RapidSMS pilot in Musanze district revealed an 
increase in ANC visits and facility deliveries.33
Promotion of women’s economic 
empowerment
Rwanda has promoted women’s economic 
empowerment by fostering women’s cooperatives 
which provide access to low interest loans without 
collateral. This has had the effect of improving women’s 
control of and access to income, enabling them to pay 
their mutuelle/CBHI contribution, feed their children 
and send them to school, all of which ultimately 
influence the health of women and children.
34 
The Ministry of Gender and Family Protections in 
collaboration with the Business Development Fund 
and the Rwanda Cooperative Agency have put in 
place mechanisms to improve access to financing 
for women. These include capacity building, credit 
guarantees, microloans and business advisory services.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
20
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
Spotlight of a sector outside of health
RWANDA’S HOMEGROWN SOLUTIONS
Rwanda has implemented a number of 
innovative solutions outside of the health sector 
that have impacted women’s and children’s 
health. Several of these are based on historical 
traditions and others are new interventions. 
These include:
1. Imihigo—Under Imihigo which is 
championed by the President, each district 
has an annual performance contract with the 
President based on their district plans. The 
districts contract with the President to 
achieve the targets they set for themselves 
and present results at an annual meeting 
with the President. This approach has 
strengthened Rwanda’s overall development 
and therefore had an impact on improving 
services and infrastructure. 
2. Girinka—is a local solution to improving 
nutrition and economic stability. Families are 
given a cow and when the cow has a calf 
they are to pass on the gift to another family 
in their community, focusing on families with 
the most need.
3. Ubudehe—builds on traditional culture in 
which inequities are addressed and social 
supports are provided for the poorest families 
through community members helping to 
cultivate land and/or build a house. The 
program promotes hygiene and sanitation. 
4. Umuganda—is a monthly community day of 
service during which everyone is expected to 
volunteer to contribute to and improve their 
community and country through cleaning the 
environment and promoting healthy practices.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
21
Rwanda
7. Key Actors and Political Economy
Rwandans have a sense of pride in what has been 
accomplished in their country and acknowledge the 
role of community members and CHWs as well as 
the important role of each component of the district 
and national system, including national leadership. 
The First Lady and the President have both 
championed causes affecting women’s and 
children’s health. The President strongly supports 
the work of community health workers as 
evidenced by his authorizing the distribution of 
mobile phones to each CHW to enable 
implementation and scale up of the RapidSMS 
system. The First Lady of Rwanda started the 
Imbuto Foundation which addresses the problems 
of widows and orphans and HIV/AIDS, as well as 
providing scholarships for girls. She has also 
championed other causes such as the prevention of 
gender-based violence and promotion of immunization 
against the human papilloma virus (HPV). The 
President has led the country in tackling malnutrition 
as well as overall efforts at ensuring coordination 
and accountability.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
22
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
8. Governance and Leadership
Good governance has been prioritized through its 
integration into Rwanda’s overarching country 
development policies, and is the first pillar of the 
country’s Vision 2020 Strategy.20 The government’s 
emphasis on crosssector collaboration, 
decentralization and the SWAp framework has 
promoted accountability between the local and 
national level; Rwanda’s performance-based 
environment and zero tolerance policy on corruption 
has further strengthened accountability among actors 
and institutions. The MoH and development 
partners participate in Bi-annual Joint Health 
Sector Reviews and Health Sector Working Groups 
(including a RMNCH working group), which promote 
active collaboration within the health sector.
16 
Female representation within the parliament is very 
high, with women currently holding a majority of 
seats (64% in the lower house and 40% in the 
Senate). According to the Worldwide Governance 
Indicators, Rwanda has been continually improving 
in securing political stability, rule of law, control of 
corruption, and government effectiveness (see table 1: 
Key country indicators).
35 Rwanda also has developed 
its own Governance Scorecard which it produces 
and monitors annually.
The Government of Rwanda has also 
instituted structures to empower women: 
•	the Women’s Council was established in 1996 
and includes organized structures from the 
grassroots to the national level. It plays a key role 
by sensitizing women in all domains of health 
including their basic rights; 
•	The Rwanda Women Parliamentarian Forum (FFRP) 
strongly advocates for policies that improve the 
welfare of women. In 2006, the FFRP introduced 
a bill on gender-based violence and two years 
later, the bill passed the Parliament. 
A national gender policy has been put in place to 
guide planning processes across sectors. This policy 
facilitates equal opportunities between women and 
men, boys and girls in every sector.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
23
Rwanda
9. Challenges and Future Priorities
Through an effective combination of innovative and 
evidence-based reforms within and beyond the 
health sector, Rwanda has made significant 
progress in attaining MDGs 4 and 5. Rwanda 
prioritized sectoral collaboration and alignment of 
donor support for its national priorities. It has 
addressed human resource shortages in several 
ways including creating a cadre of CHWs to 
promote healthy behaviours and provide a range of 
community-based services to improve access to 
key primary health services for women and children. 
It has reduced financial barriers to services through 
an innovative insurance scheme and has improved 
quality and coverage of services through performance 
based financing. It also created accountability 
mechanisms from the community to the President 
as well as instituting reforms which empower 
women, educationally, politically and financially. 
Further accelerating this progress, however, will 
require addressing the following challenges:
Strengthen the midwifery workforce: 
The critical shortage and poor distribution of 
midwives in Rwanda requires investment to be 
made in training and in supplementary midwifery 
schools. Rwanda needs 586 additional midwives to 
attain 95% skilled birth attendance by 2015.
17 
Improve geographical access: 
Currently, 40% of patients live more than an hour 
away from a health facility. To further increase 
access to RMNCH services, investments in 
infrastructure and equipment should be prioritized 
in underserved areas. 
Improve quality of care: 
The various health sector reforms have increased 
the utilization of RMNCH health services. 
Interventions should continue to focus on continuous 
improvement and monitoring quality of care and 
health outcomes.
Sustain the focus on family planning: 
With Rwanda’s rapid demographic growth and high 
fertility rate, focus should be sustained on addressing 
unmet need for family planning. An integrated 
approach to providing family planning services, 
including to young people, will be necessary to 
further curb maternal mortality in Rwanda.
Intensify efforts in mother and child malnutrition: 
Although nutrition is an interministerial priority 
within the government, progress in several key 
indicators is lagging behind. Today, 44.2% of 
children are classified as stunted (51% in 2005) 
and severe anaemia among children and women is 
on the increase.
7 Better coordination between 
sectors and ministries and greater budget allocation 
will be necessary to make further progress.
Greater focus on newborn health: 
Although infant and child mortality rates have fallen 
dramatically, the reduction in neonatal mortality is 
slow: it currently accounts for 39% of all deaths 
among children.
36
<<<PAGE=24>>>
24
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
10. References
1. Success factors for women’s and children’s health: multisector pathways to progress [website]. Geneva: The 
Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health.  
http://www.who.int/pmnch/knowledge/publications/successfactors/en/ (accessed 25 April 2014).
2. Kuruvilla S, Schweitzer J, Bishai D, Chowdhury S, Caramani D, Frost L, et al. Success factors for reducing maternal 
and child mortality. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2014;92(7):533–44.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.14.138131
3. Atlas of African health statistics 2014: Health situation analysis of the African Region. Brazzaville: World Health 
Organization. Regional Office for Africa, 2014.  
http://www.aho.afro.who.int/sites/default/files/publications/921/AFRO-Statistical_Factsheet.pdf (accessed 20 
May 2014).
4. World Development Indicators [online database]. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2013.  
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators (accessed November 2013).
5. Rwanda Fourth Population and Housing Census - 2012 [website]. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.  
http://www.statistics.gov.rw/survey-period/fourth-population-and-housing-census-2012 (accessed 24 May 2014).
6. WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, The World Bank and the United Nations Population Division. Trends in maternal mortality: 
1990 to 2013. Geneva: WHO; 2014.  
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-mortality-2013/en/ (accessed 26 June 2014). 
7. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) [Rwanda], Ministry of Health (MOH) [Rwanda], and ICF International. 
2010 Rwanda demographic and health survey. Calverton, Maryland, USA: NISR, MOH, and ICF International, 2012. 
http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publications/demographic-and-health-survey-2010-final-report (accessed 25 April 2014).
8. UNICEF, WHO, World Bank, UN-DESA Population Division. Levels & trends in child mortality, report 2013. 
Estimates developed by the UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. New York: UNICEF; 2013. 
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/levels_trends_child_mortality_2013/en/ (accessed 26 
June 2014).
9. Bucagu M, Kagubare JM, Basinga P, Ngabo F, Timmons BK, Lee AC. Impact of health systems strengthening on 
coverage of maternal health services in Rwanda, 2000-2010: a systematic review. Reprod Health Matters. 2012 
Jun; 20(39):50-61. doi: 10.1016/S0968-8080(12)39611-0. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22789082 
(accessed 25 April 2014).
10. Farmer PE, Nutt CT, Wagner CM, Sekabaraga C, Nuthulaganti T, Weigel JL, et al. Reduced premature mortality in 
Rwanda: lessons from success. BMJ. 2013 Jan; 346(65):1-7. doi.org/10.1136/bmj.f65.  
http://www.bmj.com/content/346/bmj.f65 (accessed 25 April 2014).
11. World health statistics 2011. Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2011.  
http://www.who.int/whosis/whostat/2011/en/ (accessed 25 April 2014).
12. Hsu J, Pitt C, Greco G, Berman P, Mills A. Countdown to 2015: changes in official development assistance to 
maternal, newborn, and child health in 2009-2010, and assessment of progress since 2003. Lancet. 2012 Sep; 
380(9848):1157-68. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61415-9.  
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(12)61415-9/fulltext (accessed 24 May 2014).
13. Ministry of Health Annual Report 2011-2012. Republic of Rwanda, Ministry of Health.  
http://www.moh.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/MOH-Reports/MoH-Annual-Report-July-2011-June-2012.pdf 
(accessed 24 May 2014).
14. Meessen B, Soucat A, Sekabaraga C. Performance based financing: just a donor fad or a catalyst towards 
comprehensive health-care reform? Bull World Health Organ. Feb 1 2011; 89(2): 153-156.  
http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/89/2/10-077339.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
15. Soeters R, Habineza C, Peerenboom PB. Performance-based financing and changing the district health system: 
experience from Rwanda. Bull World Health Organ. 2006 Nov; 84(11): 884-889.  
http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/84/11/06-029991.pdf?ua=1 (accessed 24 May 2014).
16. Third Health Sector Strategic Plan (HSSP III) July 2012-June 2018. Republic of Rwanda, Ministry of Health,2012 Mar.
17. State of the world’s midwifery 2011: Rwanda country data and profile. New York: UNFPA, 2012.  
http://www.unfpa.org/sowmy/report/home_fr.html (accessed 24 May 2014).
18. Basinga P, Gertler PJ, Binagwaho A, Soucat AL, Sturdy J, Vermeersch CM. Effect on maternal and child health 
services in Rwanda of payment to primary health-care providers for performance: an impact evaluation. Lancet. 
2011 Apr; 377 (9775):1421-8. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60177-3.  
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(11)60177-3/fulltext (accessed 24 May 2014).
<<<PAGE=25>>>
25
Rwanda
19. Family Planning Policy. Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Health, December 2012.  
http://www.moh.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/Docs/Rwanda-Family-Planning-Policy.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
20. Rwanda Vision 2020. Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, July 2000.  
http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/fileadmin/General/Vision_2020/Vision-2020.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
21. Lu C, Chin B, Lewandowski JL, Basinga P, Hirschhorn LR, Hill K, et al. Towards universal health coverage: an evaluation 
of Rwanda mutuelles in its first eight years. 2012 PLoS ONE 7(6): e39282. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0039282. 
http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0039282 (accessed 15 May 2014).
22. Rwanda Community Based Health Insurance Policy. Kigali: Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Health, April 2010. 
http://www.moh.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/Docs/Mutual_policy_document_final1.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
23. Saksena P, Antunes AF, Xu K, Musango L, Carrin G. Mutual health insurance in Rwanda: evidence on access to care 
and financial risk protection. Health Policy. 2011 Mar; 99(3):203-9. doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2010.09.009. 
http://www.healthpolicyjrnl.com/article/S0168-8510(10)00270-8/abstract (accessed 24 May 2014).
24. Makaka A, Breen S, Binagwaho A. Universal health coverage in Rwanda: a report of innovations to increase 
enrolment in community-based health insurance. Lancet. 2012 Oct; 380:S7.doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60293-7. 
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(13)60293-7/abstract (accessed 24 May 2014).
25. Priedman Skiles M, Curtis SL, Basinga P, Angeles G. An equity analysis of performance-based financing in Rwanda: 
are services reaching poorest women? Health Pol and Plan. 2012 Dec; 27(4): 1-13.  
http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/content/28/8/825 (accessed 24 May 2014).
26. Mugeni C. Rwanda’s community health system: from policy to action. First Annual International Community Health 
Summit; 25 January 2011; Kigali, Rwanda. 
27. Education Sector Strategic Plan 2010-2015. Republic of Rwanda Ministry of Education, 2010.  
http://www.unicef.org/rwanda/events_9492.html (accessed 24 May 2014).
28. Logie DE, Rowson M, Ndagije F. Innovations in Rwanda’s health system: looking to the future. Lancet. 2008 Jul; 
372 (9634):256-61. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60962-9.  
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(08)60962-9/fulltext (accessed 24 May 2014).
29. UNICEF: Rwanda, basic education [web page]. http://www.unicef.org/rwanda/education.html (accessed 24 May 2014).
30. MDG country report 2007: towards sustainable social and economic growth. Republic of Rwanda, National 
Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2007.  
http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publications/millennium-development-goals-rwanda-country-report-2007 (accessed 
24 May 2014).
31. Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda (INSR) and ORC Macro. Rwanda demographic and health survey 
2005. Calverton, Maryland, U.S.A.: INSR and ORC Macro; 2006.  
http://microdata.statistics.gov.rw/index.php/catalog/14/download/62 (accessed 24 May 2014).
32. Strategic Plan to Accelerate the Reduction of Maternal and Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality 2005-2015. 
Republic of Rwanda, Ministry of Health, 2007 Feb.
33. Kalach, J. Saving mothers and newborn lives in the community using RapidSMS technology - experience from 
Musanze District of Rwanda, International Conference on Community Health, Kigali, Rwanda, 2011 25-28 Jan.
34. Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for the Advancement of Women. 2009 world survey on the 
role of women in development: women’s control over economic resources and access to financial resources, 
including microfinance. New York: United Nations; 2009.  
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/public/WorldSurvey2009.pdf (accessed 6 June 2014).
35. Worldwide Governance Indicators: Country Data Report for Rwanda, 1996-2012 [webpage]. Washington, DC: 
World Bank Group, 2012. http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/pdf/c188.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
36. United Nations Children’s Fund, World Health Organization, World Bank, United Nations Population Division. 
Levels and trends in child mortality: report 2012. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund, 2012.  
http://www.unicef.org/videoaudio/PDFs/UNICEF_2012_child_mortality_for_web_0904.pdf (accessed 24 May 2014).
<<<PAGE=26>>>
26
Success Factors for Women’s and Children’s Health
11. Acronyms
ANC Antenatal Care
ART Antiretroviral Therapy
CBHI Community-Based Health Insurance
CHW Community Health Worker
EmONC Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care
EDPRS Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
EICV Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey
ENC Essential Newborn Care
EPI Expanded Programme on Immunization
FFRP Rwanda Women Parliamentarian Forum
GDP Gross Domestic Product
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/ Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
HPV Human Papilloma Virus
HSSP Health Sector Strategic Plan
iCCM Integrated Community Case Management
IMCI Integrated Management of Childhood Illness
LB Live Births
LMIC Low- and Middle-Income Countries
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MMR Maternal Mortality Rate
MOH Ministry of Health
PBF Performance-Based Financing
PMNCH Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
PPP Purchasing Power Parity
QCA Qualitative Comparative Analysis
RapidSMS Rapid Short Message Service
RDHS Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey
RMNCH Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
SWAp Sector-wide Approach
TFR Total Fertility Rate
U5MR Under 5 Mortality Rate
UN United Nations
UNAIDS Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
WDI World Development Index
WHO World Health Organization
<<<PAGE=27>>>
27
Rwanda
Photo credits: Cover page, Ivo Posthumus/Flickr Creative Commons License; page 4, © UNICEF/RWAA2011-
00386/Shehzad Noorani; page 5, Flickr Creative Commons License/Catherine Nomura; page 6, Flickr Creative 
Commons License/Rwanda Government; page 7, © UNICEF/RWAA2011-00075/Shehzad Noorani; page 8, 
© UNICEF/RWAA2007-00037/Pirozzi; page 12, © 2008 Virginia Lamprecht, Courtesy of Photoshare; page 13, 
© 2013 SC4CCM/JSI, Courtesy of Photoshare; page 14, © UNICEF/RWAA2011-00388/Shehzad Noorani; 
page 16, © 2011 Pacifique/Youth Service Organization, Courtesy of Photoshare; page 17, © Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation; page 18, © UNICEF/RWAA2007-00163/Pirozzi; page 19, © UNICEF/RWAA2011-00479/
Noorani; page 20, Tiggy Ridley/Department for International Development; page 21, © 2013 Todd Shapera, 
Courtesy of Photoshare; page 22, © 2013 SC4CCM/JSI, Courtesy of Photoshare; page 23, © 2008 Virginia 
Lamprecht, Courtesy of Photoshare.
12. Acknowledgements
Country multistakeholder review participants
MoH focal point: Fidele Ngabo 
WHO country office focal point: Maria Mugabo
Lead national consultant: Jean Bosco Ahoranayezu
Participants in multistakeholder review (alphabetical order): 
Gloriose Abayisenga Jhpiego
Gideon Bahimbayandi Ministry of Gender, Prime Minister’s Office
Clara Anyangwe UN Women
Sharon Arscott-Mills ICF International
K Ayinkamiye Hopital Mugonero
Lizet Boerstra Consultant
Mohamed Cisse UNICEF
Angelique Furaha CHAI
Karinda Viateur R. Rukoma Hospital
Tracy Kelly Clinton Health Access Initiative
Guillain Lwesso Nyanza DH
Emmanuel Manzi UNICEF
Victor Mivumbi MCH /MOH
Cassien Ndahayo Kabgayi Hospital
Deo Ndekezi Ruhengeri Hospital
Patrick Ntunga Gender Monitoring Office
Jean Bosco Sahaha MNINIDH
Jean Marie Sinari Rulindo/SPIV
Emile Tuyishime Gitwe Hospital
Thomas Ugiruwatuma Kibungo Hospital
Christiane Umuhire Ministry of Gender, Prime Minister’s Office
Philomene Uwimana CMHS
Valens Habimana Ruhango
Regional and international technical support for the 
country multistakeholder reviews
Lead international consultant: Sharon Arscott-Mills, ICF International
Draft country brief for the multistakeholder review : Carolyn Blake, Sarah Bandali 
and Louise Hulton: Options Consultancy
Editing: Carol Nelson 
Design and Graphics: Roberta Annovi and MamaYe-Evidence for Action
Overall coordination and technical support (alphabetical order): 
Rafael Cortez World Bank
Bernadette Daelmans WHO HQ
Andres de Francisco PMNCH
Jennifer Franz-Vasdeki Consultant
Rachael Hinton PMNCH
Shyama Kuruvilla PMNCH
Blerta Maliqi WHO HQ
Tigest Mengestu WHO AFRO
Triphonie Nkurunziza WHO AFRO
Seemeen Saadat World Bank
27
<<<PAGE=28>>>
For further information: 
The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health
World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia, CH-1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland 
Telephone: + 41 22 791 2595
Email: pmnch@who.int 
Web: www.pmnch.org
ISBN 978 92 4 150908 4