<<<PAGE=1>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 65 
1Department of Health System and Policy, Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Gondar, Ethiopia, 2HealthLab Ethiopia, Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Gondar, Ethiopia, 3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatics, College of Public Health, Jimma University, Ethiopia, 4De-
partment of Health Informatics, Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, 
Ethiopia 
 
*Corresponding author: E-mail: amarebdr@gmail.com  
 
ORIGINAL ARTICLE 
 
HOW TO STRENGTHEN THE MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEMS TO 
IMPROVE COMPASSIONATE, RESPECTFUL, AND CARING SERVICES IN  
ETHIOPIA: AN IMPLEMENTATION STUDY 
 
Amare Minyihun1,2*, Masrie Getnet3, Binyam Tilahun2,4 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Background: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) practices have a key role in encouraging the performance of Compassionate, 
Respectful and Caring (CRC) initiatives. However, during the last five years, CRC implementation was given less attention, and 
caused to a lack of integration and oppression. Therefore, this study aimed on assessing how to strengthen the M&E system to 
improve the CRC. 
Methods: An implementation study with a qualitative approach was conducted in three regions of Ethiopia (Oromia, SNNP,  
and Sidama) and FMOH from 01 March to 30, 2021. Twenty -six key informants were interviewed using an interview guide and 
analyzed using open code version 4.02 . Additionally, 15 health institutions were observed. The data were coded, and thema-
tized. 
Result: The finding of this research indicated that the program didn’t have scope, structure, and M&E frame works during the 
strategy development. Additionally, the program’s document didn’t have standardized indicators for the M & E plat forms. 
Besides this, the current M&E systems and current practices different from region to region and facility to facility. The finding 
also revealed that there are barriers to the M&E systems of the program’s implementation. The most affecting barriers are: 
organizational barrier (absence of standard indicators and lack of resources), behavioral barrier ( bad behavior, poor atti-
tudes), and technical barrier (poor knowledge and difficulty in measuring). On the other hand, the finding indicated that the re 
are good opportunities to enhance the M&E of the CRC program, such as good government commitment, availability of sys-
tems and materials, and availability of funders.  
Conclusion: The M&E platforms and practices of the CRC program were not uniform across regions and facilities. Besides, 
the current reporting and feedback mechanisms are also different from region to region and facility to facility. Therefore, e s-
tablishing a clear structure, ownership, scope, M&E framework, and standardized indicators of the CRC program is important 
at the national level. Moreover, preparing working documents and guidelines is also crucial for improving the program.  
Keywords: CRC, Monitoring and evaluation, Phenomenological, Ethiopia 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
Compassionate and Respectful care (CRC) is defined 
as,“ A means of serving patients, being ethical, prac-
ticing the professional oath, and being a model for 
young professionals and students” [1].  CRC is also 
defined as, “Mercy and sympathy actions and cares 
which are considered as essential principles of pa-
tient-centered care”[1, 2]. The role of compassion -
based care has become significant to health profes-
sionals, and to patients in recent times[3]. Compas-
sion lies at the intersection of empathy (in this case, 
understanding patients’ concerns) and sympathy 
(feeling patients’ emotions). Health professionals’ 
care to their patients without compassion cannot be
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 66 
 considered as patient -centered care delivery. Simi-
larly, the word respectful care is the kind of care in 
any setting which supports and promotes patients’ 
respect regardless of any differences[1].  
 
Research evidences suggested that compassionate 
and respectful care improves the effectiveness of 
treatment outcomes. For instance, patients who 
treated by a compassionate caregiver tend to share 
more information about their symptoms and concerns 
which helps the care giver for more accurate under-
standing and diagnoses[4]. In addition, compassion-
ate behavior reduces patient anxiety[6]. On the other 
hand, anxiety and fear delay healing[5], and As a 
result, compassionate care can positively affect pa-
tients’ rate of recovery and probability to be healed. 
In general, many studies indicated that a patient -
centered care approach which involves the delivery 
of a compassionate, respectful model of care indi-
cates the care deliverers’ high quality professional 
life. This research indication prompted policy -
makers to advance this approach. The positive inter-
action between health care professionals and patients 
is extremely influential in patient treatment outcomes
[7].  
 
Compassionate and Respectful Care (CRC) service is 
a new program in the Ethiopian health system that 
was launched in 2015 as one of the four transforma-
tional agendas in the health sector transformational 
plan I (HSTP -I). Following this, all levels of health 
systems started implementing different CRC initia-
tives in the last five years. For example, the Estab-
lishment of CRC councils in all levels of the health 
systems, mass clinical and non -clinical staffs’ train-
ing, preparation of different implementation manuals, 
guidelines, protocols, incorporation of CRC compo-
nents in different health disciplines’ curriculum, and 
designing monitoring and evaluation systems are 
being implemented so far[8, 9]. 
Even though considerable health gains have been 
achieved through the implementation of CRC, there 
are still different challenges. The lack of adequate 
data on the status of CRC monitoring and evaluation 
is the most affective challenge that boldly initiated 
the need for this implementation research to be con-
ducted.  The integrated and coordinated CRC imple-
mentation approach is one of the priority transforma-
tion agendas among the six pillar agendas in the new 
Health Sector Transformation Plan (HSTP -II) which 
are planned to be achieved by 2030[8, 10]. To 
achieve this specific transformation agenda, four 
major strategic interventions were identified: enhanc-
ing ethical competences and practices for health care 
providers, strengthening policies, systems, and prac-
tices for health workforce job satisfaction to increase 
their, performance, and efficiency, strengthening 
person-centered care, and strengthening community 
Stakeholders Engagement. However, we do not have 
comprehensive evidence on how to achieve these 
interventions[11]. 
 
Monitoring and evaluation practices have key roles 
in the effective performance of the CRC initiatives
[12]. Monitoring is the process of regular and sys-
tematically collecting, analyzing, and reporting infor-
mation about a project’s inputs, activities, outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts. Therefore, monitoring is a 
way of improving the efficiency and effectiveness of 
a project by providing the management and stake-
holders with project progressive development and 
achievement of its objectives within the allocated 
funds[13]. It therefore, keeps the CRC initiatives and 
the management on the right track. 
 
Evaluation is a means of checking a project’s effi-
ciency, effectiveness, and impact. Evaluation in-
volves: looking at what the project intended to 
achieve, assessing progress towards what was to be
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 67 
 completed and impact on targets, looking at the ef-
fectiveness of the project’s strategy, looking at the 
efficient use of resources, opportunity costs, and sus-
tainability of the project, and the implications for the 
various stakeholders[14, 15]. 
 
Monitoring and, some times, evaluation fall under 
project management’s control functions. It provides 
regular feedback that helps the organization to be on 
the track on: costs, personnel, implementation time, 
organizational development, economic and financial 
results, and it compares plans with actual perform-
ance. Effective monitoring and evaluation systems 
are mainly determined for tracking performance and 
providing instant information for management deci-
sion-making[16, 17]. Although they are very essen-
tial in improving performance, they are also very 
complex, multidisciplinary, and they involve skill -
intensive processes. Building effective M&E systems 
is very important requirement for the growing de-
mand to enhance performance which is also one of 
the NGOs’ and donors’ to check the effective use of 
the donor’s funds, impact, and benefits brought by 
the projects[18]. Hence, there is a need to establish 
rules and regulations of preparing minimum parame-
ters for monitoring and evaluation tasks that can be 
used to track progress and effectiveness[19]. 
 
Adequate and skilled staff and financial resources are 
vital ingredients in developing an effective M&E 
systems. Failure to allocate a reasonable proportion 
of resources on this aspect of project management 
impedes internal learning, and it resulted in effective 
practices of the M&E systems [20, 21]. 
 
During the last five years, CRC implementation was 
given less attention except few trials here and there 
that lack integration and responsiveness[9, 22]. So, 
this remains a major challenge in the CRC imple-
mentation. Thus, the current study aimed to answer 
this question on how to strengthen the monitoring 
evaluation systems to improve the CRC service. It is 
also important for the improvement of the program. 
 
METHOD 
 
Study setting: The study was conducted in some 
purposively selected Ethiopian health institutions 
from 01 to 30 February 2021.  Ethiopia is the second 
populous country in Africa, next to Nigeria with 
more than one hundred ten million people. It is bor-
dered by Eretria, South Sudan, Sudan, Djibouti, and 
Somalia (14). Ethiopia is divided into ten geographi-
cal regions (Tigray, Afar, Amhara, Oromia, Somali, 
Benishangul-Gumuz, SNNPR, Gambelia, Harari, and 
Sidama) and two administrative cities, Addis Ababa 
and Diredawa. The country has three level health 
care delivery systems. The first level comprises a 
district hospitals, health centers, and satellite health 
posts. District hospitals and health centers focused on 
curative and preventive health services, while health 
posts concerned on providing preventive services. 
The second level in the tier is General Hospitals, and 
the third is a Specialized Hospitals, both of them 
exclusively focusing on curative health services (15). 
  
The institutions were selected purposively based on 
their current CRC implementations. According to the 
ministry of health report, South Nations Nationalities 
and Peoples Region and Sidama region were selected 
for the study due to their relatively better implemen-
tation practices. On the contrary, the Oromia region 
was selected due to the lower current performance of 
the CRC.  
 
Study design: Implementation research with qualita-
tive design was applied to understand situations in 
their uniqueness as part of a particular context and
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 68 
 interactions. This design helped the researchers to 
examine the data closely at the surface and deep lev-
els. It helped to describe the essence of phenomenon 
by exploring them from those who experienced prac-
tically, and it helped to understand the meanings 
which participants ascribed to that phenomenon. 
 
Study population and sample size: The study par-
ticipants were selected from FMOH and from all 
health institutions in the four selected regions such as 
Amhara, SNNP, Sidama & Oromia RHB . The data 
were collected from CRC focal persons, M&E direc-
tors, quality directors, and heads of all health institu-
tions. S tudy participants who worked at least for 
more than six months in a specific position were in-
cluded in the study. A total of 26 key informants 
were interviewed using an interview guide. More-
over, a desk review on 15 health institutions was 
conducted on their M&E processes using guided by 
observational checklist. The level of information 
saturation was used to determined the sample size. 
The information was considered as saturated when 
the research questions were adequately answered, the 
information generated redundancy, and when there is 
no new response given from the participants. 
 
Data collection tools and procedures: A qualitative 
research data collection tools (Key informant inter-
view, observation, and document review) were used 
to address all the research questions. Furthermore, 
document reviews and observation checklists were 
employed to cross check the information that was 
collected from study participants. Before executing 
the practical data collection process, the key infor-
mant guide was tested out from health institutions 
which are not included in the study. Errors or am-
biguous wordings were identified and rectified based 
on the pilot findings. The pilot was conducted in the 
Amhara regional health bureau. An audio recorder 
was used for recording the participants’ information 
to avoid potential mistakes during data collection.   
   
The semi -structured interview guide was prepared 
with multiple probes to get relevant information
(Annex-1). Checklists were also prepared for data 
collection from document reviews and from observa-
tions to assess the implementation status of the pro-
gram(Annex-2) in the included institutions and re-
gions. The data were collected from study subjects 
using interviews and checklists. The data collection 
which included audios, photos, and other documents 
was taken after permission from the head of the or-
ganization and written consent of the participants 
completed using a participant consent note/form 
which was developed for this purpose. In addition, 
primary data (textual data) in the form of expanded 
field notes and transcripts were collected. 
 
Data quality management: The data collectors gave 
information to the participants about the purpose of 
the study before they collected the data. Audio data 
were recorded using an audio recorder, and they were 
transcribed to the Amharic language verbatim. Be-
sides, expanded field notes were collected during the 
data collection period to support the audio informa-
tion. Two teams of data collectors which included 
two interviewers and two recorders per team re-
cruited to collect the data. The data collectors are 
mastered with public health science, they are well 
experienced with qualitative data collection. Two 
supervisory teams were assigned to control the over-
all data collection process. The first supervisory team 
controlled the data collected from the Oromiya re-
gion and the health ministry. The second supervisory 
team also controlled the data collected from the 
Sidama and SNNP regions. A three -day training was
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 69 
 given to data collectors before the data collection 
was started.  A supervisory checklist was developed 
to check the quality of the data collection process. 
 
Data analysis: The observed data and the document 
interviewed data were transcribed into the textual 
data. Likewise, the interviewed data were also made/
changed into text (field notes and transcripts). The 
audio recorded interview was firstly transcribed to 
Amharic language and then translated into English. 
Codes were given based on original terms used by 
participants. In the same way, codes were also ana-
lytically developed or inductively identified in the 
data, and they were affixed with sets of notes or tran-
scripts. In addition, they were transformed into cate-
gorical labels or themes. Materials were sorted out 
according to these categories. This sorting included: 
identifying similar phrases, patterns, relationships, 
and commonalities or disparities. Besides, sorted out 
materials were examined to identify meaningful pat-
terns and processes. These identified patterns were 
evaluated in light of previous research and theories. 
Finally, a small set of generalizations were estab-
lished. The transcript and notes were analyzed using 
open code version 4.02,and the data were qualified 
and saved in a plain text file form —a descriptive 
phase of identifying meaning units and assigning 
codes that were compared and reorganized into tenta-
tive categories. 
 
Ethical Consideration: Ethical clearance was given 
from the Review Board of the University of Gondar 
using the Ref. No.V/P/RCS/05/676/2021 and on the 
date of 21 January 2021. Similarly, written permis-
sion was given from FMOH and respective RHBs. 
Informed consent was taken from study facilities and 
study respondents. All data were categorized based 
on codes instead of by mentioning the name of the 
respondents to avoid an indication of any personal 
characteristics. The data were secured in the Univer-
sity repository, and they were prevented from any 
access to an unauthorized person. 
 
Data collection procedures were done abiding to the 
four ethical principles. Participation was entirely on 
voluntary based. The consent form was given to par-
ticipants before they proceeded to the interview. 
They were allowed to read the consent form thor-
oughly, and to sign on it to ensure their voluntary 
participation. The interviewees were informed about 
the purpose of the study, and about the benefit they 
may get in doing so.  Their personal information was 
kept anonymous, and contextualization to some iden-
tifiers was avoided to protect the personal identities 
of study subjects. The participants have the right to 
accepted or declined participation. Furthermore, they 
have the right to cease the participation at any time 
and stage in the course of the interview whenever 
they want to stop. The interview avoided any nega-
tive effect or reduce inflicting harm on study partici-
pants. It was non -maleficence to reduce psychologi-
cal and emotional fatigue which may result from the 
participation. Quite places were selected for the in-
terview during data collection to ensure privacy and 
avoid the discomforts of respondents. The research-
ers were very honest and genuine to the findings 
which are found from this research. The result of the 
study was reported as it was taken from study sub-
jects. Subject involvement was minimized as much 
as possible during data collection and write-up. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Characteristics of study participants: A total of 26 
participants, ten from FMOH, six from RHBs, and 
ten from primary health workers were participated in
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 70 
Table 1: Characteristics of study participants of M&E system of CRC program in Ethiopia, 2021  
 Variables FMOH RHB and 
lower level 
Total 
Sex Male 7 10 17 
Female 3 6 9 
Age 20-30 years 0 3 3 
31-40 years 5 6 11 
41- 50 4 4 8 
Above 50 years 1 3 4 
Educational status First degree 0 8 8 
Second degree 9 8 17 
Third degree 1 0 1 
Working experience Less than 10 years 2 7 9 
10-20 years 5 5 10 
Greater than 20 years 3 4 7 
 
 the study. Most of the participants were Male (17), 
and they were 30 years old and above (23). Likewise, 
the majority of the participants have second degree 
and above (17) educational status, and they have ten 
years and above working experiences (Table1). 
The study participants’ responses were analyzed us-
ing thematic analysis, and six themes were identified 
from the collected data. These themes were: the CRC 
program M& E platform , the Current practice of 
M&E of CRC program , current reporting and feed-
back mechanisms of the M&E systems for CRC , 
barriers and enablers of the M&E systems of CRC 
program, and the proposed strategies for the M&E 
systems of CRC. 
 
CRC Program M& E Platform: The respondents’ 
responses to CRC program M&E platforms were 
analyzed using four subthemes. The subthemes were: 
the framework of the CRC for the M& E systems, 
integration of the CRC program to the M&E systems, 
structure of CRC program, and ownership of the 
CRC program. 
 
The framework of the CRC for M&E Systems: 
The monitoring and evaluation framework a ssists in 
understanding and analyzing a program, and it helps 
to develop sound monitoring and evaluation  plans. It 
also helps to improve implementation of  monitoring 
and evaluation  activities. Additionally, it can facili-
tate achieving program’s goals and measuring short, 
medium, and long -term objectives . The respondents 
explained that there was no any monitoring and 
evaluation framework during the development of the 
CRC program. But, most of the study participants 
agreed that during the development of the strategy, 
the program didn’t have monitoring and evaluation 
frameworks.  
 
Among the participants, a 44 years old who is Minis-
try of health staff stated that: 
“…in the beginning, there was no m& E frame-
work. However, some institutions and managers 
who accepted the strategy and the issues as it is 
useful for the community, may reported voluntar-
ily and evaluated their implementations.”
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 71 
  
Additionally, a32 years old who is a regional health 
bureau staff said that:  
“…. for the last five years, CRC was one of the 
four transformation agendas. . This transforma-
tion agenda was designed to achieve different 
objectives and goals in different areas. But the 
program didn’t have clear monitoring and 
evaluation frameworks.” 
 
Integration of CRC program to the M&E sys-
tems: The majority of study participants articulated 
that the CRC program monitoring and evaluation 
system should be integrated into the main institu-
tional monitoring and evaluation systems. It 
is essential in helping program managers, planners, 
implementers, policy -makers, and donors to get the 
right information, and to make informed decisions 
about the program’s operations.  In addition, the par-
ticipants stated that the monitoring and evaluation 
systems of the CRC program, and the main institu-
tional monitoring and evaluation systems work dif-
ferently and independently in all the health systems. 
“…we tried to invest much effort to integrate it 
with our systems, but we didn’t make it practical. 
because at the initial phase, the planning of our 
system and the program of CRC were planned to 
be done independent. As a result, we didn’t have 
any harmonization or alignment of the programs. 
The two programs have different priorities and 
focus areas, and we didn’t integrate their moni-
toring and evaluation systems.” 
(A32 years old, Ministry of Health staff) 
 
However, In some facilities, the monitoring and 
evaluation systems of the CRC program were inte-
grated into the facility’s main M & E systems. Re-
spondents stated that the CRC program was also inte-
grated with other programs. This was understood 
when some health facility heads present their plans 
and activities. But the observational and document 
review showed no evidence of integration of the 
CRC program and the M& E system of the facilities. 
“…we have one system for our hospital to moni-
tor and evaluate our hospital’s performances. 
The CRC program has a focal person, and he/she 
is part of the management team who are assigned 
to integrate the CRC with our facility’s main 
monitoring and evaluation. Even though the CRC 
has no its own indicator, our facility developed 
an indicator to monitored the program, and it is 
considered as  one of our strategic activities.” 
(A31 years old, CRC focal) 
 
Structure of CRC program: The study revealed 
that the structure of the CRC’s  program implementa-
tion is implemented differently. In addition, the 
structure of the CRC program’s national, and re-
gional, institutions has a different composition. The 
majority of participants stated that the CRC program 
at the national level is mainly coordinated by the 
ethics case team. In the same way, some regions fol-
lowed this structural alignment. For instance, Oromia 
and SNNP regions followed this structure. In con-
trary to this, some regions do not follow this struc-
ture, but they have already assigned one focal person 
from the quality of the clinical service directorate.  
“…at the national level, this transformation 
agenda was mainly coordinated by the ethics case 
team. At the same time, some regions may follow 
this structural alignment, but some other re-
gional's do not follow this structure, and they have 
already assigned one focal person from the quality 
of the clinical service directorate. For instance, 
Oromia and SNNP regions are examples for the 
first which established one case team for this pro-
gram. However, some facilities integrate this issue
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 72 
 with the quality audit and thrive on these achieve-
ments.” 
(A 44 years , Ministry of Health staff) 
 
Likewise, most of the facilities and lower -level 
health institutions whose heads participant stated that 
running the CRC’s program was responsible for one 
focal person who is also a members of the quality 
improvement team of the health facilities. 
“Generally, the monitoring and evaluation system 
of the CRC program in our hospital is closely ad-
ministered by a CRC focal person, CRC commit-
tees, and CRC quality improvement team which 
has four members. The CRC committees round two 
times per month to identify the gaps, and to give 
feedback on CRC implementation to each depart-
ment of the hospital. ….” 
(A 28 years old who is a Quality improvement 
focal) 
 
Ownership of the CRC program: The finding of 
this study revealed that the ownership of the program 
is not clearly stated by the concerned body, and each 
department and directorate doesn’t have defined 
roles and responsibilities of the tasks. Most of the 
participants stated that the ownership of the CRC 
program was not well defined and the department 
employees have no defined responsibility. In addi-
tion, the participants also stated that some default 
activities like providing the training, and monitoring 
cascading of training were the responsibilities of the 
human resource directorate, but other additional pro-
gram’s activities like providing the CRC service 
which help the community are the duties of the clini-
cal service directorate. 
“…to be frank, the ownership of this program is 
not clearly assigned to a particular section in the  
department. There is no clearly defined ownership 
at the regional and facility -level since the CRC 
focal person does the activities. The assigned focal 
person considered the CRC program’s activities as 
an additional responsibility, and he doesn’t give 
attention to monitoring the CRC program.” 
(A 34 years old  who is Ministry of Health staff) 
 
In contrast, some participants articulated that the 
ownership of the program is clearly known. It is 
given to the case team who regularly monitor and 
evaluate the program, and who are accountable for 
the program. 
“… in our region, we assigned the ownership of 
the CRC program for specific case teams in the 
lower level of the health system which was not 
applicable in the previous structure. We also tried 
to allocate a particular budget for CRC as much 
as possible in our region.” 
(A 38 years old who is a Regional Health Bureau 
Staff) 
 
The current practice of the M&E of CRC pro-
gram: The current practice of the monitoring and 
evaluation of CRC program according to the respon-
dents was analyzed using four subthemes. The sub-
themes were: current planning, monitoring, evalua-
tion, supervision, and mentorship practices. When 
integrated into the more comprehensive health sys-
tem, planning efforts can deliver Quality Strategies 
mandated to the National Health Care in Ethiopia 
which emphasizes on the need to treat people with 
dignity and respect. 
 
Planning: The finding of this research indicated that 
the program’s planning of the organizations was one 
component of the monitoring and evaluation of the 
program. Having common planning of the institu-
tions helps to make rational decisions by choosing 
the best possible alternative of the programs.  The
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 73 
 majority of the participants stated that the program’s 
CRC program of the M&E was not aligned with the 
institution’s main M& E systems. This indicated 
poor monitoring and evaluation practices of the pro-
gram. Furthermore, during the document review of 
each institution, the researchers confirmed that the 
plan of the CRC program was not aligned with the 
main system of the M& E of the institutions. 
 
A 38 years old is a ministry staff described the issues 
as : 
“We imputed much effort to align all systems in 
our ministry, but practically we didn’t material-
ized since at the initial phase, the planning of our 
system and the CRC program had different and 
independent plans. We didn’t have any plan 
alignment of the program. The two program plans 
had different priorities, and they focused on areas 
of the intervention. When it comes to the regions, 
the gap of plan alignment severe, and they 
seemed as if they were tin dependent departments 
of an institution.” 
 
On the other hand, few participants stated that they 
had a plan alignment of CRC programs and other 
different activities in their institution especially in the 
lower level of the health system. In the same way, 
they stated that they had a common plan for each 
activity including the CRC programs within their 
facilities. 
“…from the very beginning, we had a strategic 
plan and yearly plan for our hospital. The yearly 
plan is divided into quarterly, and our activities 
are done based on this plan. Hence, each activ-
ity’s performance is evaluated based on our plan 
which includes also the CRC service, but there 
are still budget constraints.” 
(A 26 years old who is a CRC focal from HC) 
Monitoring: Monitoring of the program was found 
to be an important tool in this study. Even though 
many participants stated that the CRC program had 
no standardized indicator to monitor the program’s 
achievements, they all also stated that they follow a 
common approach to monitoring the program. Addi-
tionally, they stated that they frequently monitor the 
CRC service program’s achievements based on their 
plans. 
 
A regional health bureau staff said that: 
“…Basically, we didn’t have any standardized 
indicator to monitor the CRC program, but we 
have a common approach to monitoring the pro-
gram. The main thing that we follow and monitor 
is whether the institution or the region has 
achieved the planned activities or not. Practi-
cally, the monitoring may be qualitatively or 
quantitatively, and it depends on the planned ac-
tivities. For example, we frequently monitored the 
community satisfaction level based on the CRC 
initiatives….” 
 
On the other side, few participants stated that the 
CRC program didn’t have a standardized indicator, 
and they do not monitor the program’s achievements 
due to different reasons. They also stated that some-
times in exceptional cases, they monitor and follow 
the program using the review meeting of the pro-
gram. Still, this depends on the fund of the program 
and the follow-up of the higher officials. 
 
A facility health practitioner who is a CRC focal said 
that: 
“CRC program has no indicator to monitor the 
program. Mainly we have monitored the pro-
gram’s achievements using different review meet-
ing programs, and by following other proxy indi-
cation of the program’s performance. But, the
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 74 
 budget for conducting the review meeting maters 
the performance of the program.” 
 
Evaluation: The study also indicated that evalua-
tions helped to differentiate what works were well 
done and what could be to improved in a CRC pro-
gram or initiatives. The evaluation of the program 
was conducted by using different supporting tools 
such as observational checklist, regular report, and 
participatory review meeting. The majority of the 
participants stated that the CRC program’s evalua-
tion was conducted by observing the institutions’ 
work performances directly using the checklist and 
checking the regular reports. However, during the 
document review of the institutions using observa-
tional checklist, the researchers assured that the 
evaluation system of each institution varies from 
institution to institution. 
“The performance of CRC program implementa-
tion was regularly evaluated based on the quar-
terly reports. We have also evaluated the perform-
ance of the CRC program implementation by the 
checklist which we prepared, and by discussing 
with the communities who get the health services 
from our health facilities. There is also an obser-
vational field checklist to evaluate the program of 
the CRC implementations….” 
(A 42 years old who is a Regional Health Bureau 
staff) 
 
The other way of evaluating the CRC program was a 
participatory review meeting. During the review 
meeting of the CRC program, all stakeholders and 
focal persons of the program participated. According 
to the majority of the participates’ respond, a partici-
patory review meeting of the program was used to 
evaluate the program’s achievement seven though 
the period of the review meeting and the list of par-
ticipants were different from institution to institution. 
The variation of the period was from once a year to 
twice per a year. 
“…the review meeting was conducted at least an-
nually, and the participants were all the regional 
focal persons, heads, and incubation center dele-
gates.” 
(A 32 years old who is a Ministry of Health staff) 
 
Similarly, another participant who is 28 years old, 
and who participated in the study from Oromia re-
gional health bureau also stated that:  
“The other way through which we support the re-
gion was in the form of participatory review meet-
ings. In this review meeting, the supervisor filed 
the report, the regular report findings and the 
feedbacks, and he also presented them. In the re-
view meetings, these  issues discussed intensively. 
The review meeting is conducted at least once per 
year, or sometimes also twice per year.” 
 
Supervision and mentorship: Supervision and men-
torship were also important to provide a safe and 
supportive opportunity for individuals to engage in 
critical reflections, to raise issues, to explore prob-
lems, and to discover new ways of handling the CRC 
program’s general progress and them selves during 
the study. The finding of this study indicated that the 
supervision and mentorship program of CRC was 
conducted through integrated or through program -
specific ways. The time and the supervisor of the 
supervision and mentorship program varied from 
institution to institution depending on the program’s 
focus. The majority of the participants stated that the 
CRC program was supervised and mentored by pro-
gram-specific professionals at least once a year. 
Likewise, the integrated supportive supervision of 
the program was also conducted once a year as stated
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 75 
 by the majority of respondents. On the other hand, 
the observational checklist and the document review 
result showed that the majority of the observed 12
(15) institutions lack the CRC program’s compost in 
the integrated supportive supervisor checklist.  
“The supervision and mentorship program was 
given in two ways. The one way was given 
through technical committee composed a team, 
and who deliver technical support for the region 
and for the facilities through the integration of 
technicians from our office and regional experts. 
The other way is as other activities we give like 
integrated supportive supervision of SIS in which 
we participated as a member, and we incorpo-
rated our activities in the checklist.” 
(A 36 years old, who is Ministry of Health staff) 
 
The current reporting and feedback giving  
mechanisms of the CRC program 
Report mechanisms: Participants explained that 
there is no standardized report format or indicators to 
trace the activities of the CRC program. However, 
the health facilities prepared their reports which is 
reported to the higher officials and stakeholders 
mainly every quarter or by the end of the year based 
on their own report format.. Review meetings and 
creating telegram accounts are also means of report-
ing mechanisms as underlined by the study partici-
pants.  
“… Our support and supervisions are conducted 
in every quarter based on the checklists. We re-
ceived reports and we crosscheck, whether or not 
the activities mentioned in the reports are really 
done on the ground in our field observation. Our 
feedback mechanism is mainly based on after -the-
field supervision and giving it on the spot. The 
Regional and Federal Ministries of Health also 
give us feedbacks via report and telegram ac-
counts to integrated with other programs. We 
have no regular meetings specifically for the CRC 
program, but there are meetings integrated with 
other programs held by the Federal Ministry of 
Health.” 
(A 55 years old who works in Zone Health De-
partment) 
 
Feedback mechanisms: Participants emphasized 
that the other transformational agendas have their 
own indicators, and we can give the feedback based 
on the indicators. But, there are no indicators for the 
feedback mechanisms, and they are not uniform 
across the health facilities. However, field supervi-
sion, report, review meeting, observational checklist, 
and patient group discussions serve as feedback 
mechanisms. Besides, the feedback is not given for 
the CRC program independently; instead it is given 
in collaborative with the other programs.  
“… we provided feedback in two mechanisms. 
First, during the final day of the supervision in 
which we give oral and informal feedback based 
on the discussion and action plan agreement 
forms. After completing all supervision reports and 
reviewing the activities, we also give comprehen-
sive and written feedback for the supervised insti-
tutions and regions by the institutional e -mail to 
support formal letters.” 
(A 39 years old ho is a Ministry of Health staff) 
 
Barriers of M& E systems of CRC program 
Organizational barriers: This study revealed that 
one of the monitoring and evaluation barriers for 
CRC program implementation was the organizational 
barrier which includes the absence of the standard-
ized indicator, un integrated standardized indicators, 
lack of human resources, lack of budget, poor infra-
structure, and lack of government commitment. A 44
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 76 
 years old man who participated in the study from the 
Ministry of Health supported this barrier as: 
“…the other point is that things are resource -
intensive to implement and to follow the M&E 
frameworks. The major one is also poor collabora-
tion work with other transformation agendas. As a 
plan, there may be four in one and one into four. 
But practically, it is not supported with the moni-
toring and evaluation frameworks.” 
 
Behavioral Barriers: This study also showed that 
bad behavior of professionals who considered CRC 
program as a political instrument, and who have bad 
attitudes towards their profession are other challeng-
ing barriers to monitor and evaluate CRC program 
implementation. A 39 years old man who partici-
pated in this study from the Federal Ministry of 
Health explained this barrier as: 
“…now the major problem is related to the atti-
tude of the health professionals who say like, “why 
not we disrespect because our mothers delivered 
their child in the home so why we focus on the re-
spect of the service?”” rather than delivering the 
service accordingly. The measurement by itself is 
also a challenge which includes the attitude, skill, 
behavior of the profession, the availability of ser-
vice, and others.” 
 
Technical Barriers: The participants replied that 
technical barriers such as being unskilled for their 
professions, not having proper knowledge about their 
professions, and poor attitude of the professionals are 
the main identified barriers.  A 32 years old man who 
participated in the study from the Federal Ministry of 
Health supported this point as: 
“…most of the problem is the capacity mostly re-
lated to the technical knowledge and skills. It is 
very difficult to measure, and to prepare an indica-
tor for the attitudes of the health workers regard-
ing the companionate, respectful and caring ser-
vice. The other challenge is the focus of the pro-
gram. If the government’s focus about the pro-
gram’ evaluation changed,  we could develop an 
indicator in the proxy and direct indicators....” 
 
Enablers of M& E systems of CRC program 
Government commitment: Even though many bar-
riers are identified in this study; there are also good 
opportunities to enhance the monitoring and evalua-
tions of CRC program implementation. These in-
cludes: good government commitment such as in-
cluding CRC program as a transformational agenda, 
the establishment of national team to develop the 
CRC program indicators and the establishment of 
national monitoring and evaluation team which the 
deputy prime minister leads. A 44 years old man who 
participated in the study from the Federal Ministry of 
Health listed these enabler as: 
“…For the last five years, CRC has been one of 
the themes of  the transformation agendas. These 
transformation agendas were designed to achieve 
different objectives and goals in different sectors. 
Likewise, inter -professional collaboration to em-
bed the pre -service education stage demands a 
collaborative attitude among health workers which  
result in more respectful relationships within 
health care teams. In the regions, the council isled 
by the regional president even though most of the 
councils are not functional, and they are not much 
strong. However, few regions and institutions have 
accomplished substantial achievements. 
 
Availability of systems and materials: The stud 
also publicized the availability of systems and mate-
rials such as availability of DHIS2 system, availabil-
ity of the national monitoring and evaluation system,
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 77 
 the easily accessible CRC program indicators, avail-
ability of electronic media records, and availability 
of trainings are the enablers for monitoring and 
evaluation of CRC program implementation.   
“As an opportunity, the availability of electronic 
medical records and the DHIS2 system are good 
opportunities. There is also an opportunity to 
measure the CRC program globally. The commit-
ment of the ministry to make CRC a transforma-
tional agenda is also an other enabling opportu-
nity. The availability of capacity-building activities 
and the platform of integrated supervision can also 
be mentioned as enabling opportunities.” 
(A 39 years old who participated in the study from 
Federal Ministry of Health) 
 
Availability of funders: The participants assured the 
availability of funders as another good opportunity 
for the monitoring and evaluation of CRC program 
implementations. Since accomplishing all the trans-
formational health agendas only by government is 
impossible because of budget restriction, there are 
other alternative good opportunities to the implemen-
tation of the programs. A 50 years old woman who 
participated in the study  from the Federal Ministry 
of Health supported this point as: 
“… The ministry of health seemed as it is commit-
ted to the program in cooperating with funders and 
stakeholders. In addition,  there are also different 
initiatives such as initiative from the regions to 
take the ownership of CRC program, at higher 
institutions the health science students are joining 
on their own interests, there is initiative of 
strengthening the ethics education at the lower 
class, there is initiative of creating the integration 
with other stakeholders, and others.” 
 
Proposed strategies for the M&E systems of CRC: 
The finding also identified potential strategies to 
improve the CRC program monitoring and evalua-
tion systems, and explored using two subthemes: 
System-level and program -level recommended sub-
themes. 
 
System-level suggested strategies: The study also 
discovered a system -level improvement strategy for 
the better implementation of the M&E systems of the 
CRC program. The study revealed that the structure, 
ownership, scope and M&E frameworks, and stan-
dardized indicator of the CRC program should be 
clearly indicated in the HSTP documents. The major-
ity of participants pointed that the CRC program of 
M&E systems should be started in both at the system 
and at the national levels. Additionally, they pointed 
out that the CRC program should have a clear struc-
ture, ownership, scope, M&E frameworks, and stan-
dardized indicator at a national level. Similarly, they 
also stated that for the improvement of the program, 
the program of CRC should be integrated into the 
main systems of M&E of the institutions’. A 39 years 
old man who took part in the study from the Federal 
Ministry of Health supported this idea as: 
“If CRC is considered as one transformation 
agenda, it should have an M&E frameworks. How-
ever, , till now it doesn’t have any responsible per-
son or structure for this activity. If this is guided 
by the state ministry across different directorates 
like HRH, quality, clinical service, and other di-
rectorates there would be a better result and fol-
low-up of the program.” 
 
Similarly, a 36 years old participant from the woreda 
health office stated that:  
“Firstly, the top management should be reliable 
and give a direction for the integration of the pro-
gram. The other thing is the budget should be 
pooled and integrated into all programs. Further-
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 78 
 more, the plan should be aligned and led by a 
strong committee who review all the team’s pro-
gram activities chaired by the state minister. In 
addition to this, at a national level, there should be 
a clear M&E frameworks, ownership, and stan-
dardized indicator.” 
 
Program level suggested strategies: The study also 
pointed out the program level improvise of the M& E 
system of the CRC program. The majority of the 
participants agreed that there should be a plan align-
ment of the program and guidelines of working docu-
ments at the departments’ program level. Addition-
ally, they pointed out that for the better success of the 
M& E program, there should also bean incentive 
mechanism and collaborative work with other depart-
ments and other stakeholders. A 40 years old partici-
pant who was selected from the Federal Ministry of 
Health supported this finding: 
“I have recommended three things. First, the pro-
gram should be mainstreamed in to all the ministry 
and other concerned bodies. Second, we should 
develop standardized measurement tools Thirdly, 
based on the standardized measurement tool, we 
have to develop an index and assess the current 
performance of the CRC program. After that, we 
can decide and follow the program even the facili-
ties can access their performance like other pro-
grams.” 
 
Similarly, a 46 years old participant who was se-
lected from SNNP Regional Health Bureau sup-
ported the above idea: 
“Firstly, the main listed activities should have a 
standardized indicator to follow, monitor, and do 
activities accordingly. Otherwise, it is complicated 
to track and manage them. The possible option 
may be the four transformation agendas should be 
lead and coordinated in one indicator. The other 
option may be specifically for the CRC program to 
develop an indicator which helps to monitor and 
follow the activities and prepare guidelines and 
working documents. The last option is the program 
level strategy can support to develop an incentive 
mechanism, and to work collaboratively with other 
departments.” 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This study indicated that the CRC program hasn’t 
specific scope, ownership, structure, and M&E 
frameworks during the strategy development. Addi-
tionally, the CRC program has no a standardized 
indicator to monitor and evaluate the program. Be-
sides, different health institutions’ performance var-
ies from institution to institution. The CRC program 
of Ethiopia in general has no M&E frameworks dur-
ing the strategy development. This hinders the moni-
toring and evaluation practices. However, the moni-
toring and evaluation framework a ssists in under-
standing and analyzing a program, and it helps to 
develop sound monitoring and evaluation plans in the 
implementation of  monitoring and evalua-
tion activities. In addition, it can also facilitate pro-
gram’s goals to be achieved. Furthermore it helps to 
measure short, medium, and long -term objectives. 
Not only this, the M& E framework also can help to 
monitor and evaluate the program effectively. This 
concept is similar with the recent studies which were 
conducted in different countries[23, 24]. 
 
The structure of the CRC program of Ethiopia in 
different institutions has a different structure. Having 
a uniform structure is  essential in helping program 
managers, planners, implementers, policy -makers, 
and donors to get the right information, and to make
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 79 
 informed decisions about program operations. On the 
other hand, the variability of the program structure 
affects the performance of the CRC program, and it 
lacks well defined ownership, responsibility, and 
accountability of the program performance. This may 
be because the top managements give less attention 
during the development of the strategy, and they do 
not give a direction to have a common practice of the 
program. This finding is similar to the previous stud-
ies which were conducted in different countries and 
programs[23]. 
 
The finding also showed that the CRC program of 
the M&E of the program of Ethiopia is not aligned 
with the institutions’ main M&E systems. As indi-
cated from different studies, the program’s plan is an 
important input for the implementation of the pro-
gram and the monitoring and evaluation of the pro-
gram. However,, for the better success of the pro-
gram and follow -up of the program’s plans, align-
ment is very crucial issue.  Having common planning 
of the institutions’  helps to make rational decisions 
by choosing the best possible alternative of the pro-
grams. This poor monitoring and evaluation of the 
program and related concepts is similar with the pre-
vious studies conducted in different countries of the 
world[25, 26]. 
 
The finding stated that the CRC program has no stan-
dardized indicator to monitor the program’s achieve-
ments, but it simply has a common approach to 
monitoring and evaluating the program.  On the other 
hand, to monitor the program of each activity, having 
a standard indicator is mandatory. During the HSTP 
plan of the sector, the CRC program hadn’t a stan-
dardized indicator. This may affect the effectiveness 
of the M&E systems of the program’s initiative. This 
is similar supported by other findings conducted on 
other programs[27-29]. 
In addition, the finding indicated that the evaluation 
system of the CRC program is conducted using dif-
ferent tools: observational checklist, regular report, 
or participatory review meeting. However, the time 
of frequency and the method of evaluation is not 
standardized. This is due to fact that they do not have 
a common indicator to evaluate the program. Addi-
tionally, this variation might be due to the program’s 
difference in structure and ownership across regions 
and facilities. This finding is parallel with other find-
ings of the previous studies[30]. 
 
The finding also pointed out that the supervision and 
mentorships are also important to provide a safe and 
supportive opportunity for individuals to engage in 
critical reflections to explore problems, and discover 
new ways of handling both for the situation and for 
their own CRC program during the study. The time 
of using supervision and mentorship program is var-
ied from institution to institution depending on the 
program’s focus. Hence, the integrated supportive 
supervision of the program is conducted once a year 
which is in contrast with the WHO standard that is 
four times per year. This variation might have oc-
curred due to the difference in focusing on the pro-
gram and ownership of the program. This finding is 
also consistent with other studies[31, 32]. 
 
Similarly, the study found that the absence of the 
standardized indicator, un integrated standardized 
indicators, lack of human resources, lack of budget, 
poor infrastructure, and lack of government commit-
ment are some barriers to monitoring and evaluating 
CRC program implementation. An evidence which 
found from a similar qualitative study conducted, in 
international development partners supported that the 
lack of standardized indicators was the main chal-
lenge of monitoring and evaluation of health systems 
[33]. Similarly, a study which was done in Ghana
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 80 
 also supported this finding that weak linkage of indi-
cators, technical barriers like the gap of knowledge, 
limited resources and budget, and absence of com-
prehensive national database are some of the major 
barriers to monitoring and evaluating of projects[34]. 
Likewise, a similar study found that limited re-
sources and budget, lack of ownership, weak support, 
and supervision are some barriers to monitoring and 
evaluating the program[35].  
 
The M&E platform and the current practice of the 
CRC program are not uniform across regions and 
facilities. Similarly, the current practice of reporting 
and feedback mechanisms is also different from re-
gion to region and facility to facility. Therefore, es-
tablishing a clear structure, ownership, scope, M&E 
framework, and standardized indicator of the CRC 
program is important at a national level. Moreover, 
plan alignment of the programs and preparing work-
ing documents and guidelines are also crucial for the 
improvement of the M&E system of the program.  
 
List of Abbreviations  
CRC: Compassionate Respectful and caring (CRC); 
FMoH: Federal Ministry of Health; Health Sector 
Transformation Plan; HSTP -1: Health sector trans-
formation plan I, M&E: Monitoring and Evaluation; 
NGOs: Non -Governmental Organizations; and 
SNNP: South Nation Nationalities and Peoples: 
 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they 
have no any competing interests.  
 
Funding: This study was supported by the Alliance 
for Health Policy and Systems Research. (Alliance) 
The Alliance is able to conduct its work thanks to the 
commitment and support from a variety of funders. 
These include long -term core contributors from na-
tional governments and international institutions as 
well as designated funding for specific projects. For 
the full list of Alliance donors, please visit:https://
ahpsr.who.int/about-us/funders.    
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We extend our gratitude to the Federal Ministry of 
Health for their commitment and support throughout 
the initiative, and to all stakeholders contributing 
their time to participate in the study. We thank the 
University of Gondar for coordinating the initiative, 
and Marta Feletto for providing technical guidance 
and support through research protocol and manu-
script development. 
 
REFERENCE 
 
1. FMOH, Training HW, Manual P. FEDERAL 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 
2017;(June). 
2. Berhe, H., et al., Status of caring, respectful and 
compassionate health care practice in Tigrai 
regional state: patients’ perspective.  2017. 10
(3): p. 1119. 
3. FMOH, Health Sector Transformation Plan of 
2015 to 2020. August 2015. 
4. Epstein, R.M., et al., Measuring patient-centered 
communication in patient –physician consulta-
tions: theoretical and practical issues.  Social 
science & medicine, 2005. 61(7): p. 1516-1528. 
5. Cole-King, A. and K.G. Harding, Psychological 
factors and delayed healing in chronic wounds.  
Psychosomatic medicine, 2001. 63(2): p. 216 -
220. 
6. Gilbert, P. and S. Procter, Compassionate mind 
training for people with high shame and self ‐
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 81 
 criticism: Overview and pilot study of a group 
therapy approach.  Clinical Psychology & Psy-
chotherapy: An International Journal of Theory 
& Practice, 2006. 13(6): p. 353-379. 
7. Turner, J.C., et al., Self and collective: Cognition 
and social context.  Personality and social psy-
chology bulletin, 1994. 20(5): p. 454-463. 
8. FMOH, National Compassionate, Respectful 
and Caring Health Services Implementation 
Strategy 2020/21-2024/25. May 2020. 
9. Berhe, H. and H. Berhe, Barriers Towards Im-
plementation of Caring, Respectful and Compas-
sionate Healthcare Practice in Tigray Regional 
State, Ethiopia: A Qualitative Study. 
10. Berhe, H., et al., Status of caring, respectful and 
compassionate health care practice in Tigrai 
regional state: patients’ perspective. Int J Caring 
Sci, 2017. 10(3): p. 1119. 
11. Lown, B.A., J. Rosen, and J.J.H.A. Marttila, An 
agenda for improving compassionate care: a 
survey shows about half of patients say such 
care is missing. 2011. 30(9): p. 1772-1778. 
12. Dalvandi, A., et al., The importance and extent 
of providing compassionate nursing care from 
the viewpoint of patients hospitalized in educa-
tional hospitals in Kermanshah-Iran 2017. 2019. 
7(6): p. 1047. 
13. Raimondo, E., What difference does good moni-
toring & evaluation make to World Bank project 
performance? 2016: The World Bank. 
14. Ile, I.U., C. Eresia -Eke, and O. Allen -Ile, Moni-
toring and evaluation of policies, programmes 
and projects. 2012: Van Schaik. 
15. Neumann, J., et al., Monitoring and evaluation 
of strategic change programme implementa-
tion—Lessons from a case analysis.  2018. 66: p. 
120-132. 
16. Lankester, T., Community health as part of the 
health system , in Setting up Community Health 
Programmes in Low and Middle Income Set-
tings. Oxford University Press. p. 37-54. 
17. Jolivet, R.R., J. Gausman, and A. Langer, Rec-
ommendations for refining key maternal health 
policy and finance indicators to strengthen a 
framework for monitoring the Strategies toward 
Ending Preventable Maternal Mortality 
(EPMM). Journal of Global Health, 2021. 11. 
18. O’Neill, K., et al., Monitoring, evaluation and 
review of national health policies, strategies and 
plans. Strategizing national health in the 21st 
century: a handbook. Geneva: World Health 
Organization, 2016: p. 1-39. 
19. Crawford, P. and P.J.I.j.o.p.m. Bryce, Project 
monitoring and evaluation: a method for en-
hancing the efficiency and effectiveness of aid 
project implementation. 2003. 21(5): p. 363-373. 
20. Diaz, T., et al., Framework and strategy for inte-
grated monitoring and evaluation of child health 
programmes for responsive programming, ac-
countability, and impact. 2018. 362: p. k2785. 
21. Kamau, C.G. and H.B. Mohamed, Efficacy of 
monitoring and evaluation function in achieving 
project success in Kenya: a conceptual frame-
work. 2015. 
22. Abate, M., et al., Compassionate and respectful 
care among outpatient clients at public health 
facilities in Northwest Ethiopia: A mixed -
methods study.  Plos one, 2021. 16(6): p. 
e0252444. 
23. Teshome, S.B. and P.J.D.S.R. Hoebink, Aid, 
ownership, and coordination in the health sector 
in Ethiopia. 2018. 5(sup1): p. S40-S55. 
24. Hsiao, W. and C. Burgess. Building on health 
systems frameworks for developing a common
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Ethiop. J. Health Biomed Sci., March 2022. Vol.12, Special Issue 
 82 
 approach to health systems strengthening . in 
Prepared for the World Bank, the Global Fund 
and the GAVI Alliance Technical Workshop on 
Health Systems Strengthening Washington, DC . 
2009. Citeseer. 
25. Higginbotham, E.J., K.C.J.T.o.t.A.C. Church, 
and C. Association, Strategic planning as a tool 
for achieving alignment in academic health cen-
ters. 2012. 123: p. 292. 
26. Ershadi, M.J., et al., Strategic alignment of pro-
ject management with health, safety and envi-
ronmental management. 2019. 
27. Cornescu, V., R.J.P.E. Adam, and Finance, Con-
siderations regarding the role of indicators used 
in the analysis and assessment of sustainable 
development in the EU. 2014. 8: p. 10-16. 
28. Sheldon, T.J.Q.i.H.C., Promoting health care 
quality: what role performance indicators?  
1998. 7: p. 45-50. 
29. Ramos, T. and S.M. Pires, Sustainability assess-
ment: the role of indicators , in Sustainability 
assessment tools in higher education institutions. 
2013, Springer. p. 81-99. 
30. Martin-Moreno, J.M.J.W.H.O., Europe, A sys-
tematic approach to public health operations 
and services: Towards positive coordination 
with health care and other services. 2011. 
31. Hamad, A.B.Q.D.N. and Z.S.I. Ahmed, Role of 
monitoring and supervision to improve health 
service delivery in basic health units of Punjab, 
Pakistan. 2016. 
32. Madede, T., et al., The impact of a supportive 
supervision intervention on health workers in 
Niassa, Mozambique: a cluster -controlled trial.  
2017. 15(1): p. 1-11. 
33. Wisniewski, J.M., et al., Exploring the barriers 
to rigorous monitoring and evaluation of health 
systems strengthening activities: qualitative evi-
dence from international development partners.  
2016. 31(4): p. e302-e311. 
34. Callistus, T. and A.J.P.e. Clinton, Evaluating 
barriers to effective implementation of project 
monitoring and evaluation in the Ghanaian con-
struction industry. 2016. 164: p. 389-394. 
35. Lahey, R., Common issues affecting monitoring 
and evaluation of large ILO projects: Strategies 
to address them. i-eval THINK Piece (9). 2015.