<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
SA Journal of Human Resource Management 
ISSN: (Online) 2071-078X, (Print) 1683-7584
Page 1 of 7 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Author:
P . Harry Munzhedzi1
Affiliation:
1Department of Public and 
Development Administration, 
University of Venda, 
South Africa
Corresponding author:
Harry Munzhedzi,  
harry.munzhedzi@univen.
ac.za
Dates:
Received: 16 Sept. 2016
Accepted: 29 Aug. 2017
Published: 22 Nov. 2017
How to cite this article:
Munzhedzi, P .H. (2017). A 
reflection on the relationship 
between performance 
management and training in 
the South African public 
service. SA Journal of Human 
Resource Management/SA 
Tydskrif vir 
Menslikehulpbronbestuur, 
15(0), a864. https://doi.
org/10.4102/sajhrm.
v15i0.864
Copyright:
© 2017. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License. Introduction
Public Service Regulations of 1999 provide that both present and prospective public servants ought 
to be trained so as to achieve an efficient, effective, non-partisan and career-oriented public 
service, which is ‘broadly representative’ of the South African community in terms of section 195 
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Du Toit, Knipe, Van Niekerk, Van der Waldt 
& Dolve, 2002). Such Regulations also provide that programmes to educate, train and develop 
public servants should be demand-driven and that they must seek to address the identified 
challenges of lack of skills and capacity among others. That is, the public service should at all cost 
avoid trainings that are not aligned with the skills gap identified. However, proper measures of 
identifying this lack of skills and capacity must be designed so as to address the existing challenges. 
In the context of South Africa, the Department of Higher Education and Training (2016) compiled 
a report on the skills supply and demand in government departments and reported that there is a 
dire shortage of skills in the country, needless to say that only 20 % have a tertiary qualification, 
32% have completed secondary education and close to half of the workforce do not have a grade 
12 certificate. This lack of requisite skills has a negative impact on the provision of basic services. 
Orientation: Performance management plays a pivotal role in the realisation of many facets of 
public administration, including service delivery, good governance and organisational 
productivity through setting of performance targets and regular assessments of performance. 
In search of improved quality and productivity in the public service, the South African 
government introduced several legislative and policy interventions, including but not limited 
to the Public Service Act, 1994 (Proclamation 103 of 1994), Public Service Regulations of 2001 and 
the White Paper on Transforming Public Service Delivery of 1997.
Research purpose: The main thrust of this conceptual paper was to explore the relationship 
between performance management and training in the South African public service.
Motivation for the study: The lack of sufficient literature on the relationship between 
performance management and training. To also prove that the two are inseparably linked, 
meaning that one cannot exist without the other.
Research design, approach and method: This article, which is conceptual in nature, reviewed 
existing literature on performance management and training in the public service extensively 
so as to arrive at a definitive conclusion.
Main findings: The article contends that as much as training underpins the process of 
performance management, training is also fortified by performance management. Precisely, 
there cannot be performance management without training and vice versa.
Practical/managerial implications: As much as training is imperative in the management of 
performance in the public service, such training must be need-based and it must be underpinned 
by performance management through identification of skills gap in the assessment of 
performance.
Contribution: It is proposed that to enhance the knowledge, capacity, effectiveness and 
efficiency of the public service performance, needs-based training that seeks to close the skills 
gap, is developed and adequately implemented.
A reflection on the relationship between 
performance management and training in the 
South African public service
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Note: This article is partially based on the author’s thesis of the degree of Master of Administration in Public Administration at the 
University of South Africa, South Africa, with supervisor Prof. K.G. Phago and joint supervisor Ms V.P .P . Disoloane, received October 2011, 
available here: http://uir.unisa.ac.za/bitstream/handle/10500/5537/thesis_munzhedzi_p.pdf
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
Kroukamp (2011, p. 25) is of the view that for government 
departments to improve the relevance of their skills 
development plans, it is critically important to strengthen, 
through a coordinated approach with all role players, the 
manner in which skills assessments and provision are done. 
Unfortunately, the skills audit as well as the trainings 
provided to public servants, often through National School 
of Government (NSG), are often not aligned (Mello, 2015; 
Munzhedzi, 2011). Performance management also has a 
positive contribution towards training management, 
including that of assisting public service managers to identify 
and pinpoint performance gaps and weaknesses.
The purpose of this article is to explore the relationship 
between performance management and training in the South 
African public service. The article commences by providing a 
coherent conceptualisation of the notions of performance 
management and training with the view of establishing a 
commonality in their understanding, at least in the context of 
this article. The article further argues that the relationship 
between the two is inevitable in that training often ensues 
after the lack of skills and capacity has been identified 
through the performance management process. It is for this 
reason that Munzhedzi (2011) propounds that, performance 
of both individual employees and by extension the whole 
organisation is enhanced through training, which should be 
focused on the identified challenging areas. For adequate 
understanding, training and performance management are 
conceptualised before the exploration is advanced.
Conceptualising performance 
management and training in the 
public service
According to Armstrong (1995, p. 429), performance 
management is a means of getting better results from an 
institution, teams and individuals by understanding and 
managing performance within an agreed framework of 
planned goals, standards and competence requirements. 
Cardy and Dobbins (1994, p. 2), on the other hand, define 
performance management as a formal and systematic process 
by means of which the job-relevant strength and weakness of 
employees are identified, measured, recorded and developed. 
Although performance management may sound as if it has 
the same meaning as a performance management system 
(PMS), they are different. A PMS is an authoritative 
framework for managing employee performance that 
includes a policy framework as well as a framework relating 
to all aspects and elements in the performance cycle,  
including performance planning and agreement, performance 
monitoring, review and control, performance appraisal and 
moderating and managing the outcome of appraisals (Mello, 
2015; Munzhedzi & Phago, 2014; Simeka Management 
Consulting, 2004). Munzhedzi (2011, p. 14) also posits that 
PMS gives guidelines on how everything to do with 
performance management is to be done, from goal setting 
and deciding how to measure accomplishments to providing 
regular assessments.
A PMS is also a process that begins b y translating overall 
institutional objectives into clear individual objectives that 
will be set as targets for individual employees on a quarterly 
or annual basis (Amos, Ristow, Ristow & Pearse, 2008, p. 286). 
The performance target of individual employees also sets  
the agenda for supervisors and individual employees 
regarding the monitoring and reviewing of performance. It is 
in those set performance targets and requirements that the 
satisfactory or non-satisfactory performance of employees 
will be determined. After such determinations, good 
performance may be rewarded and poor performance may 
be improved through appropriate improvement measures. 
Good performance refers to a performance where an 
employee achieves the set performance targets and bad 
performance refers to a performance where an employee 
consistently fails to achieve the set performance targets 
(Aguinis, 2009; Mello, 2015; Viedge, 2011). In essence, 
performance management is the means applied to harness 
available resources to improve performance, productivity 
and service delivery in the context of the public service. It 
therefore means that performance management focuses not 
only on the management of the workforce but also on the 
effective, efficient and economic use of requisite resources 
including but not limited to financial and material resources. 
Most important is that the said resources may be properly 
managed by a trained and competent workforce.
Institutions all over the world are often applying wide-
ranging strategies to stay ahead of global competition insofar 
as training and development is concerned. In order to stay 
ahead of the said competition, Kroukamp (2011, p. 24) posits 
that institutions should continuously invest in the skills and 
knowledge capital of the workforce through inter alia training. 
However, it can be argued that training is not a miracle cure 
by which all management and administrative challenges 
can be unravelled. It is one of the pivotal human resource 
development practices that may be used by an institution to 
capacitate and improve the productivity of their workforce 
(Erasmus, Loedolff, Mda & Nel,  2008, p. 45). Training 
basically refers to a learning opportunity that is provided 
in order to improve individual as well as organisational 
performance (Vukovic, Zavrsnik, Rodic & Miglic,  2008, 
p. 655), and it assists government to develop some kind 
of necessary capacities of public servants and promote 
institutional change. The said capacitation contributes 
towards equipping these public servants with the necessary 
knowledge, skills and competencies to achieve their 
set performance targets effectively and efficiently. Like 
performance management being a paramount factor in 
training and development, training plays a crucial role in the 
performance management process. Of paramount importance, 
as far as Kroukamp (2011) is concerned, is that training is one 
mechanism which, if properly utilised, could bring about a 
visible change in the performance of the public service. The 
ensuing discussion focuses on the different training models 
applicable in enhancing the skills gap that would have been 
identified through the performance management process 
further supporting Kroukamp’s (2011) argument that 
performance and training are inextricably interconnected to
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
each other. Mello (2015) correctly notes that for good 
management performance to take place, a proper functioning 
PMS is necessary. That is, a proper PMS is a prerequisite for 
proper performance management.
Various training models to enhance 
performance in the public service
There are different models that are used to impart knowledge 
and skills in the public service officials, namely, orientation 
training, e-learning, sensitivity training, team building, case 
study, coaching and job rotation (Du Toit et al., 2002). 
Department of Higher Education and Training (2016) 
indicates that there is a mismatch between the kind of skills 
and competencies that are in demand versus what the 
education sector is currently supplying. Department of 
Higher Education and Training (2016) further notes that 
skills that lack in the main are those in the scare skills 
professions, including but not limited to health sciences, 
accounting and engineering. These lacking skills are the ones 
that are needed the most, but they are in short supply. To a 
certain extent, this may affect the overall organisational 
performance because there is generally lack of skills in the 
South African public service including at the local sphere of 
government. The different models of training that the 
government may consider in addressing the lack of skills and 
capacity are discussed below.
Orientation training
While new employees may have requisite academic 
qualifications, they often lack necessary familiarity with 
specific circumstances and skills of the new job (National 
School of Government, 2015; Underwood, 2002). It is 
paramount that each and every new public service employee 
is orientated so that he or she may be familiarised with the 
new work environment including all the technicalities 
required. It is therefore a prerequisite for all new employees 
to be oriented (Public Service Commission, 2014). The 
performance of an employee who has not been oriented is 
likely to be affected in that the employee does not have a 
clear picture of the organisational objectives and his or her 
part in a bigger puzzle. It is critical that an employee 
understands or be oriented of the bigger picture in the 
organisation so that he or she may be able to link his or her 
performance targets with the organisational annual plan, 
strategic plan, vision and mission and the National 
Development Plan (NDP) in the case of government in its 
entirety (Minnaar, 2010). It is therefore crucial to ensure that 
new employees are oriented so as to augment their 
performance and the management of it thereof.
Sensitivity training
Sensitivity training refers to training that focuses on 
improving interpersonal relations (Du Toit et al., 2002, p. 181; 
Mello, 2013; Underwood, 2002). In this case, it is assumed 
that emotional problems contribute negatively in the job 
performance of employees. Van der Weisthuizen and Wessels 
(2013, p. 334) purport that the main aim of sensitivity training 
is to sensitise or make employees aware of their own 
behaviour and how such behaviour affects fellow co-workers. 
This effect may either be positive or negative. It is for this 
reason that most public service institutions have got a 
specialised unit called ‘Employees’ Wellness Programme’, 
which basically focuses on the wellness of employees. It does 
counselling for employees who either have marital, drug or 
alcohol problems particularly because all these ‘not work-
related’ problems directly or indirectly do affect the 
performance of the employees in the public service. It is 
therefore safe to say that work-related skills alone do not 
matter as far as performance management is concerned.
Team building
Team building is often about new or even old employees of 
the department or the municipality getting to know each 
other in a not-so-formal environment. According to Van der 
Weisthuizen and Wessels (2013, p. 334), team building 
addresses information about how the groups work together, 
what problems exist and what norms are followed and 
sought. Activities associated with team building are goal 
setting, development of interpersonal relations and 
clarification of roles and responsibilities (Du Toit et al., 2002; 
Knipe, 2002). After the interactions, the facilitator assists the 
group to understand the feedback and also develop the 
action plans so as to improve the processes and increase trust 
and openness. The more employees interact, the more they 
get to know each other and the more they know and trust 
each other, the more they are likely to perform well as a 
group and the more they perform well as a group, the more 
the organisation is likely to be productive, which ultimately 
results in improved service delivery.
Simulation
Simulation refers to a method whereby a particular work is 
done in the presence of the employees or trainees, thereafter, 
those employees will have to replicate it to show that they 
have learned. The main objective of simulation is to show 
that employees may be able to replicate that which they have 
learned (De Cenzo & Robbins, 1994, p. 269; Knipe, 2002; Van 
der Westhuizen & Wessels, 2013, p. 335). Some of these works 
is done or shown to a group but individual employees have 
to demonstrate an element of understanding.
Case study
To demonstrate an understanding, employees or trainees 
may be provided with a written description of a particular 
actual or hypothetical case. In such cases, employees or 
trainees are required to analyse the case, identify and discuss 
the identified problem and finally suggest possible solutions. 
De Cenzo and Robbins (1994, p. 269) posit that the case study 
method seeks to show trainees that there is no easy solution 
to organisational problems, that there may be various but 
equally valid solutions and that case studies assist trainees 
with problem-solving skills.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
Coaching
Coaching basically refers to a case where experienced 
managers guide, mentor and supervise the work of those 
who are less experienced (Fisher, Schoenfelt & Shaw, 1993, 
p. 39). The advantage of coaching is that trainees receive 
performance feedback as and when they engage in their daily 
tasks and activities. With coaching, the mentor or the coach is 
more hands-on regarding guidance and supervision unlike 
the other methods of training (De Cenzo & Robbins, 1994). It 
is also one of the best forms of identifying underperformance 
and good performance. It is through this identification of 
the state of performance that mentors or managers are able 
to develop improvement or corrective plans (Erasmus, 
Swanepoel, Schenk, Van der Westhuizen & Wessels, 2005, 
p. 337). It is through coaching that underperformance is 
identified and addressed as and when it is identified, 
meaning that the coach does not have to wait until the end of 
the quarter or the financial year. However, other scholars 
including Fisher, Schoenfelt and Shaw (1993, p. 39), are of the 
opinion that the disadvantage is that the trainee may adopt 
the manager or mentor’s way of doing things, which may at 
times not necessarily be the best there is. This article argues 
that coaching is one of the best method of training and 
performance management ingredient compared to other 
training models discussed.
Job rotation
Job rotation refers to a method of moving employees from 
one job assignment to another within the same organisation 
and possibly in the same salary or job level (Van der 
Westhuizen & Wessels, 2013, p. 336). This is done to give 
employees a broader perspective of the mission, vision and 
objectives of the organisation. In a way, job rotation 
encourages generalists instead of job specialists in that 
organisational employees obtain overall perspective of the 
organisation. In short, you can not only be able to manage 
organisational human resource but also you must be able to 
develop strategic plan, draft budget and project expenditure, 
train the unskilled, analyse expenditure patterns and so on. It 
also becomes easier to cover for an employee who is on leave 
or replace an employee who has just resigned because other 
employees are generalists as well and they can fill in the gap 
in no time. It therefore means that there is a greater benefit in 
job benefit in that individual employees are exposed to 
broader organisational objectives and operations (Decenzo & 
Robbins, 1994, p. 272) than specialising or having one focus 
area. It is also a common purpose that more employees may 
appreciate being exposed to other greater opportunities than 
to do routine and boring work. However, a disadvantage 
may be that other employees have become more like 
specialists in their specific field of work. This may mean that 
they may not want to be rotated for the fact that they are 
already a specialist and learning a new field may prove to be 
difficult.
Nevertheless, job rotation is a positive contribution not 
only to public service training but al so to performance 
management. An individual employee may be moved from 
one unit to another for having under-performed or lack of 
skills on their previous division or unit. The movement is 
often done with an anticipation that the identified employee 
will perform better in the new unit because they have a 
particular skill, qualification or desire that may assist him or 
her perform better in the new unit.
E-learning
E-learning refers to a learning approach whereby learning 
resources, including booklets and software materials, are 
provided electronically to the targeted group of public service 
employees (More, 2002; Van der Westhuizen & Wessels, 2013, 
p. 336). These learning materials could also be a video, audio, 
slideshow or web-based training services provided through 
online portal. The advantage of this form of training is that to 
an established organisation, this may be cost-effective in that 
the institution does not have to hire an external service 
provider or a physical being to conduct training. The 
Information Technology (IT) devices may be able to provide 
such training with a click of a button. It is important to note 
that the introduction of technology must be accompanied by 
technological illiteracy of employees as well as availability of 
relevant equipment (Mathevula & Uwizeyimana, 2014). 
E-learning may be a valuable tool of conveying needed 
information to public officials. While the same IT devices 
may be valuable for training purposes, they may be used to 
capture performance management information as well. Such 
information may include submission of performance 
instruments, underperformers, good performers and those 
who are in need of training. It further justifies the fact that the 
relationship between performance management and training 
is inevitable.
However, E-learning may prove to be a challenge in a country 
like South Africa where computer illiteracy is widespread 
(Mathevula & Uwizeyimana, 2014). It means that government 
in its entirety may have to strengthen its base and capacity 
regarding its effort to train its officials.
The foregoing paragraphs highlighted various types of 
training model that may be used to impart knowledge and 
capacity in the public service officials particularly for skills 
gap identified through the performance management 
process. However, each of these different models has got its 
own pros and cons. Nevertheless, each one of these models 
may contribute positively to the development of capacity in 
the South African public service, particularly if others may be 
applied simultaneous, such as coaching and job rotation. 
Munzhedzi (2011, p. 34) posits that it is imperative for the 
municipality (or the public service in this case) as provided 
for by section 45 of the Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act 32 of 
2000), to conduct a performance audit in order to find out 
their strengths and weaknesses. In essence, these models are 
not only enablers of training insofar as capacitation is 
concerned but they complete the performance management 
process in that underperformers are assisted through the 
very same models discussed. The ensuing paragraphs discuss
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
different role players and the specific role they play in the 
performance management process.
Role players in the performance 
management system
There are several role players in the process of managing 
performance in the public service. These role players include 
the Public Service Commission, the Department of Public 
Service and Administration (DPSA), NSG, trade unions and 
employees. These role players are discussed in detail below.
Public Service Commission
The Public Service Commission (PSC) was established in 
terms of section 196 of the 1996 Constitution as a chapter 10 
institution that promotes values and principles set out in 
section 195, throughout the public service (Republic of 
South Africa, 1996). Some functions of the Commission are 
to propose measures to ensure effective and efficient 
performance within the public service. The Commission also 
has a watchdog role to play in that it investigates, monitors 
and evaluates human resource practices of the public services 
(Erasmus et al., 2005, p. 9; Mello, 2013; PSC, 2014). The 
performance agreements of Provincial Heads of Department 
and National Directors General are coordinated by the Office 
of the PSC. The implementation of human resource policies 
are monitored and evaluated at the PSC. Upon completion of 
its processes of investigations, inspections, monitoring and 
evaluations, the Commission publishes its findings as public 
reports. Some of the reports published include a report on 
the payment of performance incentives (bonuses or pay 
progression) to Heads of Departments without annual 
performance evaluations conducted in 2008 and a report on 
the analysis of Performance Agreements as an effective 
performance management tool conducted in 2009. A PSC has 
further responsibility to advise national and provincial organs 
of state regarding personnel practices relating to recruitment, 
appointment, transfer, discharge and career management 
(Mello, 2015; PSC, 2014). It is the responsibility of the PSC to 
ensure that policies such as the PMS are properly implemented 
in the public service and advise where necessary.
Department of Public Service and 
Administration
According to the White Paper on Human Resource Management 
in the Public Service  of 1997, the DPSA focuses in terms of 
human resources solely on the public service. The key 
responsibilities for the DPSA include developing human 
resource policies, getting support for such policies from 
organised labour at national level, ensuring practicality of 
application for the policies and ensuring that human resource 
policies are aligned with other transformation initiatives 
(Department of Public Service and Administration, 1997; 
Erasmus et al., 2005, p. 35). The DPSA also has to give support 
service to national departments and provincial administration 
regarding the implementation of human resource policies 
and development of capacity to implement the developed 
policies and programmes. Even the first PMS policy 
framework was initiated by the DPSA in 1999 to serve as a 
guide to national and provincial departments in developing 
their own departmental policies. All public service institutions 
have to align their policies with DPSA’s framework. 
Individual performance targets have to be aligned to the 
departmental goals and objectives in order to enhance the 
overall performance of the department (Banfield & Kay, 2008, 
p. 310). However, the policy of a specific department must be 
in line with the DPSA’s policy framework on a PMS and each 
department’s policy must be relevant to its own needs and 
circumstances.
National of School of Government
NSG seeks to contribute towards establishing a capable, 
professional and responsive public service that is committed 
to and has institutionalised the values and policies of a 
Developmental State (National School of Government, 2015, 
p. 10). The NSG was officially launched in 2013, which was a 
replacement to the Public Administration Leadership and 
Management Academy (PALAMA) and this was established 
in 2008 as a replacement for the South African Management 
Development Institute with the mandate of facilitating 
training provision to public servants (Kroukamp, 2011, p. 26). 
NSG is constituted as a Schedule 1 department by the Public 
Service Act, 1994 (Proclamation 103 of 1994) as amended by 
the Public Service Act, 1999 (Act 5 of 1999). NSG is headed by 
a Director-General who reports to the Minister of Public 
Service and Administration. NSG, as the public sector 
training academy, has a central role to play in building the 
capacity of the public service to perform effectively and 
efficiently (PALAMA, 2010, p. 3). PALAMA trains and 
develops public service employees in order to enable them to 
improve their performances, which will then contribute to 
the improvement of public service delivery.
However, there are major challenges facing NSG in the 
fulfilment of its mandate of contributing to the development 
of a high-performing public service by capacitating public 
servants (PALAMA 2010, p. 4). One of the challenges includes 
the uncoordinated way in which public service training is 
conducted. PALAMA aims to ensure that public servants 
have all the necessary skills including technical, leadership 
and financial. According to the Public Service Amendment Act, 
2007 (Act 30 of 2007), there shall be a training institution 
listed as a national department, which shall provide training 
or cause such training to be provided (Republic of South 
Africa, 2007). Lack of understanding of a PMS in the public 
service should be addressed by NSG through relevant 
training programmes.
Trade unions
The Labour Relation Act, 1995 (Act 66 of 1995) defines a union 
as an association of employees whose primary purpose is to 
regulate the relations between employees and employers 
including associations that represent employers. A union that 
wishes to continuously be in touch with issues affecting its 
members in any institution will ensure that it has a shop
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
steward at every level possible (Republic of South Africa, 
1995; Bendix, 2001, p. 167). Unions have to ensure that the 
management of an institution recognises their shop stewards 
because they (shop stewards) play a pivotal role in the 
workplace in all matters that affect their membership. It must 
also be highlighted that public sector employment is highly 
unionised with majority of its employees affiliated to one 
union or the other (Kroukamp, 2011, p. 22). Congress of South 
African Trade Unions constitutes majority of the public 
service employees. From the development of a PMS policy 
to the facilitation of the process, trade unions play a role 
in representing the interests of their members. The unfair 
treatment of employees with regard to payment of 
performance bonuses or subjective assessment of employees’ 
performance often leads to trade unions being in endless 
confrontations with management. The shop steward has to 
ensure that the relationship between the union and its 
members is maintained and promoted (Bendix, 2001, p. 168). 
When employees have not received performance bonuses at 
the end of the financial year, they often lodge complaints 
with a trade union against their employer. Trade unions also 
intervene when their members allege that they have been 
treated unfairly as far as the PMS is concerned.
Capacity versus training and 
performance management
There is an inevitable relationship between the human 
capacity of public service employees together with their 
training and performance management. Capacity refers to 
the availability of and access to concrete or tangible resources 
(human, financial, material or technological) and having the 
knowledge to implement policies and the delivery of public 
services (Koma, 2010, p. 114). Capacity may also refer to the 
intangible resources such as commitment to, and leadership 
for, the implementation of policies and delivery of public 
services (Brynard & De Coning, 1999, p. 2006). It may also be 
associated with potential to translate policy objectives into 
practical and tangible outcomes, which are often the needs of 
the community as captured during the development of 
manifestos by political parties. It is generally well accepted 
that some policies of government are very good and well 
thought of. However, the question of capacities of public 
functionaries always come into play. No matter how good 
the public policies are, lack of capacity often results in limited 
or no implementation of those policies at all. In a way, 
capacity makes a huge difference between a good and a bad 
public policy.
Lack of capacity to translate the said policies is often identified 
through performance management processes, namely, 
quarterly and annual assessments often by supervisors. 
Through the said assessments which are done on a regular 
basis, supervisors are able to pinpoint and identify lack of 
skills and capacity, underperformance and good performance 
by officials. However, it must also be noted that 
underperformance is not always as a result of lack of skills 
and capacity. It may also be because of pure laziness. It is also 
the view of Ivancevich, Konopaske and Matt eson (2011, 
p. 209) that employees should not be required to perform 
responsibilities that exceed their current skill or knowledge 
level if they have not received training. More efficient 
structures, procedures and criteria of training have to be 
established with the Public Service Sector Education and 
Training Authority taking the lead role in this respect 
(Munzhedzi, 2011, p. 30). However, the process does not end 
at the regular assessments of performance but at closing the 
gap between the lack of skills and capacity and achieving the 
set performance objectives. Training plays a vital role in the 
implementation of a PMS in any public service institution. A 
PMS that is not linked to training is not likely to succeed in 
the inculcation of maximum performance. Lack of training in 
an institution can result in underutilised abilities (Byars & 
Rue, 2006, p. 222).
To be precise, an inevitable relationship between skills and 
capacity, training and performance management exists. It 
often starts with identification of lack of skills and capacity 
through performance management and proceeds with 
training of those with limited skills and capacity. It must be 
noted that one may only identify weaknesses and strength if 
you assess that particular performance. It is then that training 
may be effected to enhance skills and capacity of those found 
to be lacking. However, Munzhedzi (2011, p. 78) correctly 
postulates that in government most of the training that is 
done is not aligned to the skills gap or challenge. Nevertheless, 
the Public Service Commission (2010, p. 8) is emphatic on the 
fact that the functioning of the machinery of government 
needs to be strengthened through the development of 
appropriate skills to ensure that institutional capacity is built 
and services can be delivered optimally.
Conclusion
In essence, the South African public service is essentially 
responsible for bringing government policy into practice. 
Basically, the public service is there to implement government 
policies and realise the policy objectives into practical 
operations. However, implementation of government 
policies may not be such a smooth process if the implementing 
body, namely, the public service does not have capacity to 
implement. It is the duty of government to ensure that 
underperformance and lack of skill and capacity are 
pinpointed and identified so that they may be addressed 
through appropriate measures. Kroukamp (2011) correctly 
posits that the numerous training programmes developed to 
address the skills gap in the field of public administration 
and management, be it the formal curricula, work-integrated 
learning to improve the challenges regarding bridging the 
gap between theory and practice or Memoranda of 
Understanding between different role players to transfer 
skills for improved service delivery, should adequately reflect 
and address ongoing challenges seeking to improve 
productivity or service delivery in the case of the public 
service. To this end, orientation, sensitivity training, 
e-learning, job rotation, coaching, case study, team building 
and simulation are some of the measures that may be used to
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 7 Original Research
http://www.sajhrm.co.za Open Access
address skills and capacity gap in the public service so as to 
ultimately improve performance of employees. However, 
performance management as a system that is used to identify 
performance gaps must also be beefed-up so that it may be 
able to do so effectively. The implication of this analogy is 
that, if skills gaps are not correctly identified through PMS, 
the training programmes developed may incorrectly solve 
the wrong problem and the service provision is going to 
suffer. Wessels (2006, p. 1505) also concurs that if the wrong 
problem has been diagnosed or if the wrong skill shortage 
has been identified, then wrong or inappropriate solutions 
may be proposed. As a result, employees will be trained on 
skills they do not need, meaning the wrong problem will be 
addressed. Munzhedzi (2011, p. 78) postulated that training 
could play a paramount role in the improvement of 
performance and productivity in government. However, 
there must be a proper skills audit and training based on 
proper and regular assessments. In order to avoid unnecessary 
expenditure on training, the impact (of these trainings) 
should be seen through the performance of an employee. 
Nevertheless, the significance and the unavoidable link 
between the two variables, namely, performance management 
and training cannot be overemphasised because they 
complement each other, and that one cannot be successfully 
be undertaken without the other.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced him 
in writing this article.
References
Aguinis, H. (2009). Performance management . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall.
Amos, T.L., Ristow, A., Ristow, L., & Pearse, N.J. (2008). Human resource management. 
(3rd edn.). Cape Town: Juta & Co Ltd.
Armstrong, M. (1995). A handbook of personnel management practice . London: 
Kegan Page.
Banfield, P ., & Kay, R. (2008). Introduction to human resources management . New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Bendix, S. (2001). Industrial relations in South Africa. Lansdowne: Juta.
Brynard, P ., & De Coning, C. (1999). Policy implementation. In F. Cloete, H. Wissink, & 
C. De Coning (eds.), Improving public policy , (pp. 196–203). Pretoria: Van Schaik 
Publishers.
Byars, L.L., & Rue, L.W. (2006). Human resource management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cardy, R., & Dobbins, G. (1994). Performance appraisal: Alternative perspectives . 
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western College Publishing.
De Cenzo, D.A., & Robbins, S.P . (1994). Human resource management: Concepts and 
practice. Toronto: Wiley.
Department of Higher Education and Training. (2016). Skills supply and demand in 
South Africa. Pretoria: DHET.
Department of Public Service and Administration. (1997). White paper on human 
resource management in the public service. Pretoria: Government Printer.
Du Toit, D., Knipe, A., Van Niekerk, D., Van der Waldt, G., & Dolve, M. (2002). Service 
excellence in governance. Sandown: Heinemann.
Erasmus, B., Swanepoel, B., Schenk, H., Van der Westhuizen, E.J., & Wessels, J.S. 
(2005). South African human resource management for the public sector . Cape 
Town: Juta.
Erasmus, B.J., Loedolff, P .V.Z., Mda, T., & Nel, P .S. (2008). Managing training and 
development in South Africa (4th ed.). Cape Town: Oxford Southern Africa.
Fisher, C.D., Schoenfelt, L.F., & Shaw, J.B. (1993). Human resource management . 
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Ivancevich, J.M., Konopaske, R., & Matteson, M.T. (2011). Organisational behavior and 
management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Knipe, A. (2002). Project human resources management. In A. Knipe, G. Van der 
Waldt, D. Van Niekerk, D. Burger, & K. Nell (eds.), Project management for success. 
Sandown: Heinemann.
Koma, S.B. (2010). The state of local government in South Africa: Issues, trends and 
options. Journal of Public Administration, 45(1.1), 111–120.
Kroukamp, H. (2011). Efficient and responsive public services: Are departments of 
Public Administration and Management at universities playing their rightful role? 
Administratio Publica, 19(1), 20–32.
Mathevula, M.D., & Uwizeyimana, D.E. (2014). The challenges facing the integration 
of ICT in teaching and learning activities in South African rural secondary schools. 
Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 5 (20), 1087–1097. https://doi.
org/10.5901/mjss.2014.v5n20p1087
Mello, D.M. (2013). Managing human capital in the public sector. Pretoria: Van Schaik.
Mello, D.M. (2015). Performance management and development system in the South 
African public service: A critical review. Journal of Public Administration, 50 (3.1), 
688–699.
Minnaar, F. (2010). Strategic and performance management in the public sector . 
Pretoria: Van Schaik.
More, S. (2002, February 21–23). E-learning: A new tool of education in YCMOU. Paper 
presented at the 15th Annual Conference of the Asian Association Open 
Universities (AAOU), New Delhi, India.
Munzhedzi, P .H. (2011). Performance management system and improved 
productivity: A case of the department of local government and housing in the 
Limpopo Province . Unpublished Masters dissertation. Pretoria: University of 
South Africa.
Munzhedzi, P .H., & Phago, K. (2014). Performance management system quandary in 
the public service: A case of the Limpopo province, South Africa. Journal of Public 
Administration, 49(4), 1083–1099.
National School of Government. (2015). Strategic plan 2015/16–2019/20 . Pretoria: 
NSG.
Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy (PALAMA). (2010). 
Public administration leadership and management academy’s strategic plan for 
2010–2013. Pretoria: PALAMA.
Public Service Commission (PSC). (2010). State of the public service report . Pretoria: 
Government Printers.
Public Service Commission (PSC). (2014). Public service commission annual report 
2013/2014. Pretoria: Government Printers.
Republic of South Africa. (1995). Labour Relation Act, 1995 (Act 66 of 1995). Pretoria: 
Government Printer.
Republic of South Africa. (1996). Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996. 
Pretoria: Government Printer.
Republic of South Africa. (2007). Public Service Amendment Act, 2007 (Act 30 of 
2007). Pretoria: Government Printer.
Simeka Management Consulting. (2004). Performance management system 
information manual. Polokwane: Limpopo Provincial Government.
Underwood, W.L. (2002). Cultural awareness sensitivity training . Unpublished 
Masters dissertation. Charleston, WV: Marshall University.
Van der Westhuizen, E., & Wessels, J.S. (2013). South African human resource 
management for the public sector (2nd ed.). Cape Town: Juta.
Viedge, C. (2011). Performance management. In A. Werner (ed.), Organisational 
behaviour: A contemporary South African perspective  (3rd ed.), (pp. 135–158). 
Pretoria: van Schaik.
Vukovic, G., Zavrsnik, B., Rodic, B., & Miglic, G. (2008). The training of civil servants in 
the Slovene state administration: Issues in introducing training evaluation. 
International Review of Administrative Sciences, 74 (4), 653–676. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0020852308098473
Wessels, J.S. (2006). The challenge of knowledge production by researchers in public 
administration, a South African perspective. South African Journal of Higher 
Education, 19(Special edition), 1499–1515.