<<<PAGE=1>>>
Academic Editor: Xinqiao Liu
Received: 25 November 2024
Revised: 9 January 2025
Accepted: 12 January 2025
Published: 16 January 2025
Citation: N¯ımante, D., Kokare, M.,
Baranova, S., & Surikova, S. (2025).
Transferring Results of Professional
Development into Practice: A Scoping
Review. Education Sciences, 15(1), 95.
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci
15010095
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
Transferring Results of Professional Development into Practice:
A Scoping Review
Dita N¯ımante 1
 , Maija Kokare 2
 , Sanita Baranova 1, *
 and Svetlana Surikova 2
1 Faculty of Education Sciences and Psychology, University of Latvia, LV-1083 R¯ıga, Latvia; dita.nimante@lu.lv
2 Scientific Institute of Pedagogy, Faculty of Education Sciences and Psychology, University of Latvia,
LV-1083 R¯ıga, Latvia; maija.kokare@lu.lv (M.K.); svetlana.surikova@lu.lv (S.S.)
* Correspondence: sanita.baranova@lu.lv
Abstract: The paper aims to map available evidence regarding the transfer of learning
from professional development (PD) into practice. The scoping review is based on an
analysis of the key characteristics of effective PD, drawing from 60 meta-analyses and
various types of reviews (e.g., systematic, integrative, etc.) regarding PD both in general
and in various professional fields published from 2009 to 2024. Three research questions
are put forward: What characterises effective PD? Which theoretical concepts in the scien-
tific literature represent the transfer of adult PD into practice? And what processes and
indicators show effective ways of transferring PD and learning outcomes into practice?
The methodology of the review is organised into three steps—preliminary study, the main
study, and conceptualisation—by selecting publications and deriving concepts and conclu-
sions relevant to the research questions, as well as identifying knowledge gaps for further
exploration. The research literature uses various concepts to characterise the transfer of PD
into practice as it is determined by different contexts, research traditions, and practices. Al-
though effective PD has been defined and several theoretical models have been developed,
research on PD effectiveness indicators and processes related to the transfer of PD into
practice is still ongoing. However, not all evaluations take these models as bases to evaluate
the existing PD practices, so the different indicators proposed by different researchers make
it difficult to compare the results. The main problem is insufficient evidence in terms of
measurable and comparable effectiveness criteria in all fields. The scoping review reveals
a variety of controversial or incompletely researched aspects of transferring PD results
into practice.
Keywords: professional development; professional learning; continuing professional
development; transferring to practice; gap in knowledge
1. Introduction
Professional development (PD) is crucial for both employees and employers. It en-
hances skills, competitiveness, and a commitment to lifelong learning. Studies have shown
that employees who engage in upskilling or training are more likely to retain their jobs
(Shiri et al., 2023).
Despite significant investments in employee training, a persistent challenge is the
low transfer of PD into actual workplace practices. While extensive research has explored
effective PD design, particularly for teachers and healthcare professionals (e.g., Sims
et al., 2023; Basma & Savage, 2023; Darling-Hammond et al., 2017; Guskey, 2003; Dunst
et al., 2015), a universally accepted framework for effective adult PD across all fields
remains elusive.
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci15010095
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 2 of 22
Furthermore, although the rapid evolution of PD implementation strategies, driven
by advancements in online learning as a result of the pandemic and blended learning, has
created new challenges in PD, most research remains focused on transmissive PD models
(Kennedy & Stevenson, 2023). This limits our understanding of how to effectively evaluate
the impact of contemporary PD approaches.
Therefore, understanding PD and transferring the results of PD into practice by iden-
tifying both current research directions and limitations in new contemporary situations
would help both researchers and practitioners to develop further the field of PD. So far,
most of the research is about teachers and health workers and less about other professions;
thus, we focus on all fields in our scoping review. This paper investigates both the con-
ceptualisation of PD and identifies the measurable results (processes and indicators) in
terms of PD outcomes and effects (e.g., Dunst et al., 2015). Thus, our study aims to map
the available evidence regarding the transfer of learning from PD into practice. Based on a
literature review, we aim to identify gaps in knowledge for further research by exploring
three research questions: What characterises effective PD? Which theoretical concepts in
the scientific literature represent the transfer of adult PD into practice? And what processes
and indicators show effective ways of transferring PD and learning outcomes into practice?
2. Method
The current study focuses on published research regarding the transfer of PD results
into practice. The scoping review draws on qualitative research of systematic reviews,
meta-analyses, critical reviews, etc. (for the period 2009–2024). We chose a scoping review
(Arksey & O’Malley, 2005; Munn et al., 2018) with the purpose of reviewing the existing
theoretical literature to identify knowledge gaps and scope a body of literature, as well as
to map the concepts of effective PD. We proceeded with our research in three steps:
1. Preliminary study: a team of eight researchers decided on inclusion/exclusion criteria,
searching strategies and sources, and publications selected for analysis and identified
relevant articles to answer the research questions (Levac et al., 2010).
2. The main study: the authors analysed articles in detail to reveal the diversity
and problematics of the perspectives reflected in the studies regarding the three
research questions.
3. Conceptualisation: the authors identified knowledge gaps and summarised knowl-
edge for further analyses.
When searching for articles, the keywords were derived from the following research
questions: professional development OR professional learning OR further education OR
continuing education OR continuing professional development OR in-service training
OR professional growth OR professional empowerment OR professional upskilling AND
effective OR effectiveness OR effect OR impact OR influence AND transfer OR transfer of
training OR training transfer OR transfer of learning OR learning transfer OR transfer into
practice OR transfer of results AND systematic review OR systematic literature review OR
systematic synthesis OR meta-analysis.
In order to not expand the scope of research, we did not focus our searching strategies
on the concepts of organisational learning and workplace learning, although contextually
these are important aspects for the transfer of PD results into practice. Finally, inclusion
and exclusion criteria were applied to the scoping review (see Table 1) to focus on the whole
picture. This is an essential step both for determining the directions of future research and
for limiting the number of studies relevant to the research questions.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 3 of 22
Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the scoping review.
Aspect Inclusion Criteria Exclusion Criteria
Source
Web of Science, Scopus, ERIC, EBSCO, Sage Journals,
SpringerLink Contemporary Journals, Wiley Online
Library, Taylor & Francis Library, ScienceDirect,
MDPI, Emerald eJournals Premier
other resources
Language English or German other languages
Publication year 2004–2024 before 2004
Publication type journal articles, research reports books, chapters, conference
proceedings
Research type
meta-analyses and various types of reviews (e.g.,
systematic review, integrative review, rapid synthesis
review, scoping review, mapping review, etc.)
other
Target group (field) employed adults, professionals unemployed adults
Full-text paper available yes no
Protocol PRISMA or other relevant protocol is used PRISMA or other relevant
protocol is not used
Answered RQ1–3 yes no
In total, 151 articles were selected by the team of eight researchers for further analysis
after searching publication titles, keywords, and abstracts in 11 databases (EBSCO, Emerald
eJournals Premier, ERIC, MDPI, ScienceDirect, Sage Journals, Web of Science, Scopus,
SpringerLink Contemporary Journals, Taylor & Francis Library, Wiley Online Library).
In the second research phase, 60 articles that fully responded to the inclusion criteria
(Supplementary Materials) were identified by searching the full text. It was found that
62% of the selected articles were targeted to teacher PD, 25% to the growth of healthcare
professionals, and 13% to developing PD in general or in other professions.
Of the articles selected for detailed analysis, 52 articles include answers to RQ1 (“What
characterises effective PD?”), 39 to RQ2 (“Which theoretical concepts in the scientific litera-
ture represent the transfer of adult PD into practice?”), and 41 to RQ3 (“What processes and
indicators show effective ways of transferring PD and learning outcomes into practice?”).
For a detailed summary, including the author(s), publication year, source (database),
research type, target group (field), number of studies included in the research, period
of publication, research design and location, and contribution(s) to the current study in
addressing the three research questions, please refer to Supplementary Materials.
3. Results
3.1. RQ1: What Characterises Effective PD?
The concept of PD and its effectiveness has been widely discussed over the last
two decades, providing many widely recognised reviews, systematic analyses, and meta-
analyses regarding the PD of teachers (e.g., Basma & Savage, 2018, 2023; Kyndt et al.,
2016; Sims et al., 2021, 2023; etc.), as well as some for healthcare professionals (e.g., Allen
et al., 2019; Main & Anderson, 2023; Firmstone et al., 2013; Hill et al., 2009, etc.) and other
professionals (Shahzad et al., 2023a, 2023b; Wong et al., 2018; Pargmann et al., 2023; Fogaça
et al., 2024). Nevertheless, the concept’s complexity and methodological ambiguity lead to
a lack of clarity and cannot be generalised and applied to various and changing contexts.
It must be acknowledged that the “ambition to identify general features of effective
professional development is also problematic” (Asterhan & Lefstein, 2024, p. 11), even
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 4 of 22
in educational settings. As “we absolutely know how to change what teachers know
and do” (Desimone, 2023, p. 2), the main problem is related to the hardly measurable
and comparable impact of teacher PD on student learning and the transfer of learning
into more general settings. Similar conclusions have been made in the field of healthcare,
reporting great heterogeneity with no common features regarding duration, frequency,
or method of intervention (Hill et al., 2009) as well as the impact of PD: “In order to
capture the broad range of impacts of CPD, including those that are unanticipated, a more
broadly encompassing definition of impacts that goes beyond knowledge, attitude, and
behaviour change and incorporates the full range of potential impacts of CPD programmes,
is required” (Allen et al., 2019, p. 1097).
Although most authors define PD as formally organised activities for improved perfor-
mance, though without hard evidence, many reviews focus on the concepts of the learning
community, workplace learning, coaching, and mentoring as a part of PD (Hughes et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2022; Salmerón Aroca et al., 2023), particularly that of teachers (Kyndt
et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2022; Filderman et al., 2022) and healthcare professionals (Campbell
et al., 2019). These reviews emphasise informal learning as an important but hardly mea-
surable and contradictory aspect of professional learning and development (for instance,
Basma and Savage (2023) did not find significant results related to coaching in their review).
Notably, no large-scale studies for workplace learning effectiveness have been identified
(Ventista & Brown, 2023).
This is why three critical considerations related to the use of the concept of PD are
chosen as the reference points for analysis:
1. Measurability and the problem of evidence;
2. The incomparable effects of formal, informal, and workplace learning;
3. The transformative potential of professional learning.
Effective PD is characterised in 52 publications as follows:
• Desimone’s conceptual framework (Desimone, 2009; so-called ‘consensus view’) for
‘high-quality’ teachers’ PD, which is characterised by ‘core features’: content focus,
active learning, coherence (relevance), duration, and collective participation (Didion
et al., 2020; Donath et al., 2023; Filderman et al., 2022; Parkhouse et al., 2019; Willems
& Van den Bossche, 2019);
• Desimone’s revised framework (Desimone, 2023), emphasising individual PD pro-
cesses and the role of leadership, and the expanded framework, which adds other
relevant concepts—the process of teacher change (Guskey, 2002) and wider organisa-
tional contexts (Philipsen et al., 2019);
• Design elements of teachers’ PD programmes (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017)—
content focus, use of models and modelling, active learning, collaboration, coaching
and expert support, feedback, reflection, and sustained duration (Boz, 2023; Lo, 2021;
Surahman & Wang, 2023);
• Teachers’ motivation, attitude, commitment, and self-efficacy (Johari et al., 2022);
• Content, process and structure, collective engagement, goal alignment, and ongoing
and sustainable support (Huang et al., 2022);
• Kirkpatrick’s (1959) general and teacher-specific models, which evaluate PD pro-
grammes on four different levels: reaction, participant’s learning, changes in learner’s
behaviour, and the programme’s impact on objectives (Ahadi et al., 2024; Ayeleke
et al., 2019; Campbell et al., 2019; Firmstone et al., 2013; Hill et al., 2009; Pagnucci et al.,
2023; Petersen et al., 2024; Phillips et al., 2019), and Guskey’s (2000) model, an adapted
version for educational settings;
• Moore’s expanded outcomes framework (Moore et al., 2009)—participation, satisfac-
tion, learning (declarative and procedural knowledge), competence, performance,
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 5 of 22
patient health, and community health—for continuing medical education (Williams
et al., 2023);
• The IMTP model—insight, motivation, techniques, and practice (Sims et al., 2021, 2023).
Effective PD for teachers is summarised in 35 selected publications for different
contexts (for STEM teachers—Boz, 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Lo, 2021; for reading
achievement—Didion et al., 2020; Basma & Savage, 2023; for inclusive education—Donath
et al., 2023; Ahmed et al., 2022; for novice teachers—Hirsch et al., 2021; for early childhood
and care—Jensen & Rasmussen, 2019; Obee et al., 2023; Peleman et al., 2018; for mathe-
matics teachers—Johari et al., 2022; for science teachers—Kowalski et al., 2020; for science
teachers’ online learning—Li et al., 2023). Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that the solid
theoretical foundations for ‘PD features’ are not supported by direct evidence (for instance,
Kowalski et al., 2020; Sims et al., 2021, 2023). Moreover, it is argued (Asterhan & Lefstein,
2024) that researchers, by relying on an assumed consensus, do not test and search for solid
evidence of PD’s effectiveness but instead are looking for correspondence between PD
processes and consensus view statements.
Overall, different aspects of PD effectiveness are studied depending on what the
result is considered to be—for teacher PD, this may be improved students’ or teachers’
performance. Some studies (e.g., Basma & Savage, 2023; Sims et al., 2021, 2023; Didion et al.,
2020; Kahmann et al., 2022; Kowalski et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022) employ the link between
teachers and students’ performance (described by Kennedy, 2016; Darling-Hammond et al.,
2017; Desimone, 2009; etc.), assuming (but not always empirically justifying) that if the
performance of teachers resulting from increased knowledge, understanding, and mastery
improves, students’ learning and results will also improve (noted by Dunst et al., 2015).
Similar conclusions emerge from research in the health sector; for instance, “while there is
good evidence that continuous PD is effective in increasing practitioner knowledge, there
is less evidence that it changes clinical practice” (Main & Anderson, 2023, p. 2).
Most PD in the reviews is related to PD programmes, searching for the best ways to
characterise their effectiveness. There are two main perspectives regarding the effectiveness
of PD programmes (Li et al., 2023):
1. Evaluate the impact of PD programmes based on participants’ performance, measur-
ing the learning outcomes represented as improved practice.
2. Evaluate the effectiveness of PD programmes, collecting participants’ personal reviews
(subjective evaluation).
In this respect, Asterhan and Lefstein (2024) refer to recent research and argue that
teachers’ self-reported gains in PD do not correlate with subsequent direct assessments
of teacher knowledge. Nevertheless, Donath et al.’s (2023) meta-analysis revealed no
difference between self-rated knowledge and knowledge assessed using tests. Higher
effects of PD demonstrated for programmes connected to a specific subject domain may be
related to the notion that measurements of student outcomes are mostly subject-oriented
(Kahmann et al., 2022); therefore, more general effects could not be measured at all.
Some authors conclude that secondary school teachers are offered more formal PD,
but primary school teachers are more often engaged in learning communities, receiving
less formal PD (Ventista & Brown, 2023). Although the majority of the research is focused
on formal PD, it has also been noted that formal and informal PD are unjustifiably di-
chotomised; these forms of learning are marginal states, but the reality is in between—i.e.,
continuous and undifferentiated (Kyndt et al., 2016). It is diverse support for practicing
what has been learnt (perhaps also informally, but certainly contextually and dependent on
the organisation’s learning culture) that constitutes sustainable PD practice.
Criticising the insufficiently developed methodology of previous studies (Sims &
Fletcher-Wood, 2021), a group of researchers (Sims et al., 2021, 2023) has developed a
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 6 of 22
new theory for guiding teachers’ effective PD—the IGTP (Sims et al., 2021) or IMTP (Sims
et al., 2023) model. In this theory, effective PD is defined as “the ability to improve
teaching, as reflected in pupil test scores” (Sims et al., 2023, p. 3). While being limited
in a variety of PD outcomes, this narrow perspective on PD offers testable indicators for
measuring effectiveness in order to explain the impact of PD designs on teaching and
learning. A set of causally active 14 mechanisms developed by the analogical abduction
of the broader literature is used to operationalise the four constitutive parts (‘things’) of
effective PD—insight, motivation, techniques, and practice—derived by analysing failings
in teachers’ PD described in previous studies.
Systematic reviews empirically justify the model’s usefulness and examine two hy-
potheses regarding the impact of PD programmes, concluding that the “number of mecha-
nisms incorporated in a PD programme is associated with greater impact of the PD on test
scores” and “balanced PD programs do have higher average effect sizes than imbalanced
PD programs” (Sims et al., 2023, pp. 23, 26). The IMTP model provides a granular, flexible
approach for PD designers “in order to develop teacher insights, motivate change, develop
techniques, and embed these in practice” (Sims et al., 2023, p. 28).
Acknowledging that evidence about the impact of continuing PD (CPD) on patient
outcomes and clinical practice remains unclear (Petersen et al., 2024) or is not statistically
significant, research characterises the effective CPD of health professionals as interactive,
using a variety of methods, providing multiple exposures over a longer period of time,
and focusing on content that is important for practitioners (Main & Anderson, 2023). It
has also been noted that just a variety of programmes, unless they are sustainable, may
produce fragmented improvement (Hill et al., 2009). Recently, research has focused on the
modalities of CPD, concluding that “no one unique mode of delivering CPD programmes
(face-to-face, online, and blended) will be sufficient to ensure optimal results in delivering
CPD programmes” (Pagnucci et al., 2023, p. 6).
A few systematic reviews have also been devoted to other professions:
• Sport psychologists (Fogaça et al., 2024), using the perspective of counselling and
supervision as a means for PD and identifying specific developmental characteristics
related to a professional career;
• Librarians (Shahzad et al., 2023a, 2023b), focusing more on sustainable competence
development needs and challenges than on effectiveness;
• Accountants (Pargmann et al., 2023), considering changing job profiles related to
digital transformation and exploring new technologies rather than providing routine
PD; and
• Engineers (Wong et al., 2018), exploring mentoring as a career development approach
instead of PD.
Regarding the systematic analyses reviewed, it can be summarised that PD is regarded
as effective if the following criteria are met:
• Learning results are applied in the workplace (Campbell et al., 2019);
• Learning results are transferred into practice (Filderman et al., 2022) or embedded in
practice (Sims et al., 2023);
• It changes teachers’ attitudes, beliefs, knowledge, and understanding (Ahmed et al.,
2022; Didion et al., 2020);
• It is transformative and fosters professionalism (Boylan et al., 2023);
• It is practice-based, and developed skills are transferred from authentic professional
learning situations to the classroom (Hirsch et al., 2021);
• It has a positive impact (Ahadi et al., 2024; Willemsen et al., 2023) or effect in terms of
improved practice (for instance, student learning outcomes are improved);
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 7 of 22
• It demonstrates outcomes according to Moore’s framework: participation, satisfaction,
declarative and procedural knowledge, competence, performance, patient health, and
community health (Williams et al., 2023);
• It is provided in a balanced way by using different mechanisms (Sims et al., 2023);
• It is sustained and linked to students’ learning goals, is based on best practices and
delivered by coaches/experts, includes collaborative participation among teachers,
derives from student needs, and is implemented with school support, including solid
leadership and reflective teaching practices (Basma & Savage, 2023).
This highlights the complexity of assessing and comparing effective PD transfer into
practice. Besides, it is important to note that limited evidence does not mean that PD has
not been effective (Firmstone et al., 2013).
Since different concepts are used in the research literature to characterise the transfer of
PD into practice, as it is determined by different contexts, research traditions, and practices,
it is essential to create a conceptually unified view of the terms used to characterise and
describe effective PD while acknowledging and accepting the risk of losing the nuances of
particular concepts. Some researchers (for instance, Jensen & Rasmussen, 2019) recommend
developing a flexible design framework, ensuring different contexts but still enabling
comparable analyses of the impact of PD while acknowledging that “the most effective
type of PD” could not be generally defined.
3.2. RQ2: Which Theoretical Concepts in the Scientific Literature Represent the Transfer of Adult
Professional Development into Practice?
The gap between acquiring new knowledge and skills in PD and applying them in the
workplace is also a persistent challenge from the point of view of theoretical justification.
Understanding the theoretical concepts behind the transfer of learning is crucial to bridging
this gap and maximising the effectiveness of adult education programmes. However,
in the context of our research, we should look not just at programmes but also more
broadly at PD as a whole, including workplace learning and self-organised learning. The
transfer of adult PD into practice involves various theoretical concepts, from adult learning
theory to organisational behaviour and instructional design. These concepts provide
valuable insights into how people learn, how effective teaching can be designed, and how
educational outcomes can be improved, helping explain how adults acquire, retain, and
apply new knowledge and skills in their professional environments. Theoretical concepts
guide research, inform teaching practice, and shape educational policy in a variety of
learning environments.
Of the selected articles in which we were able to identify an answer to the second
research question, the majority (24) were conducted in the field of PD for teachers and those
working in the education sector, followed by the PD of healthcare and medical professionals
(12). Twelve articles refer to the model developed by Kirkpatrick (Ahadi et al., 2024; Allen
et al., 2019; Ayeleke et al., 2019; Ayivi-Vinz et al., 2022; Campbell et al., 2019; Firmstone
et al., 2013; Hill et al., 2009; Li et al., 2023; Nexø et al., 2024; Pagnucci et al., 2023; Petersen
et al., 2024; Phillips et al., 2019), while eight refer to Guskey’s model (Ahadi et al., 2024;
Basma & Savage, 2023; Didion et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Kahmann et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023; Philipsen et al., 2019; Sims et al., 2021). The Kirkpatrick model is popular in the
theoretical framework for evaluating the effectiveness of PD outside the education sector,
such as in the context of the PD of healthcare and medical professionals. This is due to
the fact that the model is structured and enables the assessment of PD effectiveness at the
organisational level based on specific criteria (Petersen et al., 2024). Several researchers
(Blume et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2020; Wißhak, 2022) refer to one of the earliest conceptual
frameworks for learning transfer—Baldwin and Ford’s model of training transfer. In this
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 8 of 22
model (Baldwin & Ford, 1988), transfer is explained as learning acquired in the workplace,
using improved and newly learnt skills in different situations and maintaining them over
a longer period of time. Transfer can be assessed as the use of learnt knowledge or skills
and as the effectiveness of the learner’s application of knowledge or skills. Factors in the
work environment during this time, such as support from management and colleagues and
limitations or opportunities to use the skills learnt at work, are important.
According to Blume et al. (2010), training transfer can be viewed as two types of
processes: generalisation (to what extent the knowledge and skills acquired in the learning
environment are applied in different environments and situations outside of learning)
and maintenance (how changes resulting from learning experiences persist over time).
Therefore, learning transfer is more than just what was learnt during the training; primarily,
it is the proof that the acquired competences are used in the job for which they were
intended. In the context of PD transfer, employees should meaningfully think, feel, and/or
act differently than before (Blume et al., 2010; Wißhak, 2022).
Frameworks such as Guskey’s five levels of PD evaluation (Guskey, 2000; Guskey,
2003) and Desimone’s conceptual framework (Desimone, 2009) help us understand how
the knowledge and skills gained through PD are applied in practice (Donath et al., 2023;
Kowalski et al., 2020; Willems & Van den Bossche, 2019). Guskey’s approach, for instance,
evaluates the effectiveness of PD on different levels, including participants’ reactions,
learning, and the application of new knowledge or skills (Li et al., 2023). This transfer
process also requires alignment between the PD activities and the actual work context of the
participants, highlighting the importance of situating learning within relevant professional
challenges and environments.
The Kennedy framework (Kennedy, 2005, 2014) is an important theoretical underpin-
ning of several studies (referred to by Ahadi et al., 2024; Basma & Savage, 2023; Boylan
et al., 2023; Didion et al., 2020; Fernández-Batanero et al., 2022; Hirsch et al., 2021; Kah-
mann et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Petersen et al., 2024; Main & Anderson, 2023; Ventista &
Brown, 2023; Williams et al., 2023) for analysing CPD models. Kennedy (2005) developed
a framework in which the main characteristics of nine CPD models are identified and
categorised: the training model, the award-bearing model, the deficit model, the cascade
model, the standards-based model, the coaching/mentoring model, the community of
practice model, the action research model, and the transformative model. All models
are organised into three broad categories—transmission, transitional, and transformative.
The models’ structure shows that the professional autonomy abilities of teachers (as adult
learners) should increase when moving from transmission to transformative categories.
When explaining the interconnections of PD, theories of action are utilised to ensure
that professional learning serves as a long-term outcome, including in relation to change
theories. Effective PD leads to positive changes both in individual performance and in
organisational development. Theories of action help analyse why, how, and for whom PD
is effective (Kowalski et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2020). In this context, significant theoretical
concepts for ensuring effective PD include specific and clear requirements, factors related
to adult learner self-motivation, the relevance of learning to practice, and a supportive
leadership and workplace culture. Thus, it incorporates the theoretical principles of both
behaviourism and pragmatism (Main & Anderson, 2023; Mairs et al., 2013).
Psychological theories are also implemented in the justification of PD, emphasising
that it should help mitigate stress and reduce the risks of burnout (Hirsch et al., 2021). PD
should be implemented within a practice-based PD framework, taking into account that
effective PD incorporates active learning, focuses on specific content and skill development,
provides multiple models of practice, delivers several sessions over a period of time, and
offers adults the opportunity to learn and practice new skills (Hirsch et al., 2021).
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 9 of 22
Theoretical concepts of active learning are revealed through analysis, highlighting
the importance of supervision, the apprenticeship model, peer-to-peer support, coaching,
expert support, and workshops in PD. These various approaches help practitioners un-
derstand how to refine and apply the knowledge, skills, beliefs, or behaviours they have
acquired. Thus, PD enhances self-efficacy (Johari et al., 2022; Rogers et al., 2020; Willems &
Van den Bossche, 2019; Lo, 2021; Hirsch et al., 2021), enabling personalised PD learning
paths (Main & Anderson, 2023). PD training should be interactive, employing a variety of
methods (such as case-based learning, demonstrations, feedback, lectures, problem-based
learning, role play, and simulations) and delivered in a sequence that involves multiple
exposures over an extended period. The training should focus on outcomes deemed
important by practitioners (Main & Anderson, 2023).
In the analysis of adult PD, essential theoretical principles also emerge from interdisci-
plinary and transdisciplinary collaborative learning, which helps to analyse and transform
their practice (Lo, 2021; Kowalski et al., 2020).
In the transfer of PD outcomes in the context of learning and motivation theories,
attention should be paid both to the learning participant and to the adult educators be-
cause they prepare the participants for the transfer of the learning experience. Needs
assessment, appropriate learning content and methods, cognitive abilities, awareness, mo-
tivation, self-efficacy, support, and feedback in the workplace are important in transfer
(Wißhak, 2022).
Professional learning should be implemented by providing adults with formal learn-
ing through programmes, as well as both formal and informal learning in the workplace,
including self-directed and collaborative learning (Zhou et al., 2022). Synthesising the-
oretical perspectives with empirical evidence highlights the importance of the coaching
approach, derived from anthropological theories, in PD (Main & Anderson, 2023; Yang
et al., 2022). The situated learning theory has also been discussed as a basis for PD (Yang
et al., 2022).
Some studies are based on social constructivism theory (one of the most effective ap-
proaches to effective learning), the concepts and principles of adult education (andragogy),
the application of flipped learning, information processing, and technological pedagogical
content knowledge (TPACK) frameworks (Lo, 2021; Rogers et al., 2020; Surahman & Wang,
2023; Williams et al., 2023). Studies also examine PD or professional learning in the context
of online learning strategies, particularly concerning information processing and flow
theory in relation to technology-based learning (Zhou et al., 2022). The selected theoretical
concepts depend on the branch in which the research was conducted, as well as the fields
of science represented by the researchers. The study of the PD of (sports) psychology practi-
tioners is grounded in psychological theories, explaining how PD occurs within the context
of personality development, including emotional, cognitive, and behavioural aspects. It is
argued that effective PD should encompass processes such as learning by doing, reflection,
supervision, and connections and networking with peers. Specifically, learning by doing is
identified as the central concept for effective PD (Fogaça et al., 2024).
Some authors indicate the importance of self-determination theory (Li et al., 2023;
Wißhak, 2022) in effective PD and its transfer. According to the self-determination theory,
intrinsic motivation, which is particularly important for typical transfer, is promoted by the
learners’ autonomy, their experience of competence, and social integration. Additionally,
Su et al. (2023) analysed the didactic–mathematical knowledge and competencies (DMKC)
model for initial teacher training in mathematics for sustainability in a systematic review,
describing the importance of the focus and sustainability of initial teacher education and
PD for teachers (in this case, mathematics teachers).
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 10 of 22
The selected articles include a number of theoretical concepts developed in the context
of organisations and/or programs used rather than justifying learning as an individual
and social phenomenon. Numerous derived theories are used as the theoretical basis of the
analysed articles, and an invitation was even made to develop a new theory of the transfer
of PD. Additionally, a discussion regarding whether the existing theoretical foundation is
sufficiently supported by strong evidence is encouraged. However, it is impossible to create
a universal theory because PD is a multidimensional phenomenon that needs to be analysed
interdisciplinarily and contextually. As transfer research is multidisciplinary (Hughes et al.,
2020; Kowalski et al., 2020), transfer research will always be multidisciplinary, as will the
theoretical concepts used to support it.
3.3. RQ3: What Processes and Indicators Show Effective Ways of Transferring PD and Learning
Outcomes into Practice?
Although discussions about processes and indicators showing effective ways of trans-
ferring PD and learning outcomes into practice have been around for some time in both
psychology and education, an empirical synthesis is still lacking (Blume et al., 2010).
Relevant publications in teacher PD contain a number of proposals for key indicators.
The ultimate goal of PD and PD programmes is to help in-service teachers to develop
positive attitudes, knowledge, skills, and beliefs in order to improve students’ learning
outcomes and behaviour and improve other children’s school experiences (Donath et al.,
2023; Filderman et al., 2022). Zhou et al. (2022), analysing 37 studies, summarised the
learning outcomes of vocational education pedagogues (mostly found to be positive) as
follows: (1) pedagogy and industry knowledge and skills, (2) emotions (e.g., whether
educators are satisfied with their learning experience), (3) value relevance (how educa-
tors perceive the importance of what they have learned in their pedagogical practice),
(4) motivation and attitude (do educators have a characteristic enthusiasm and desire to
apply what they have learned in practice), (5) new awareness (does something change
conceptually in the pedagogue’s perception and thinking), (6) impact on teaching practice
(what changes occur in the teaching practice of pedagogues), (7) student/pupil results
(what is the benefit of teachers’ professional learning for learners), and (8) institutional
results (what is the benefit of professional learning the teacher’s colleagues, educational
institution, and industry).
Filderman et al. (2022) concluded that teachers’ training in data literacy has significant
positive effects on both teacher knowledge/skills and teacher beliefs. At the same time,
they admitted that future research that evaluates how training impacts long-term effects
on practice is necessary. Participants must be given sufficient time to adopt new ideas
into their practice and transform it. Therefore, the degree and quality of implementation
practice should be evaluated. Depending on the purpose of PD, the scientific literature
recommends using questionnaires, structured interviews, lesson plans (for teachers), oral
or written individual reflections, participant journals, dictionaries and portfolios, direct
observations by professional observers or digital recorders, videos, and other methods to
evaluate the effectiveness of PD (Huang et al., 2022). Self-assessment is not considered
sufficient to evaluate the results of PD; scientists often recommend strict quality monitoring
in the process of the implementation and evaluation of PD planning, using formative and
summative evaluations (Boz, 2023).
PD outcome measurement can be identified as cognitive, behavioural, affective, and
correlational. According to Huang et al. (2022), the most common subcategories for the
cognitive dimension are higher-order thinking, student achievement, teacher learning
outcomes, and teacher collaboration. On the other hand, the affective dimension involves
self-efficacy/belief/identity and teachers’ opinions on various issues related to PD, fol-
lowed by attitude/motivation. When characterising the behaviour dimension, teachers
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 11 of 22
were most often asked, for example, how often they used so-called online learning. In
addition, Huang et al. (2022) recommend specifying skills as pedagogical ideas/practices.
Teachers’ skills/practices/ideas were mainly assessed by observing teachers in action
and conducting interviews. Correlation studies analysed the relationship between the
knowledge acquired and teachers’ practice.
In order for the results of PD to be implemented in practice, including in the long
term, the organisational aspect is crucial. Hughes et al. (2020) conducted a meta-analysis
on the importance of three indicators of work environment support in order to transform
the PD outcomes—peer, supervisor, and organisational support—in relation to the training
results’ (knowledge, skills, and attitudes) transfer, persistence, and long-term use. The
meta-analysis concluded the importance of the work environment in the transfer of learning
outcomes for all indicators. Motivation to transfer for trainees was shown to act as an
important mediator, explaining the ability of work environment support variables to
predict training transfer. Organisational, supervisory, and peer support are explained by
motivation to transfer as a mediator, and all these factors predict the persistence of learning
outcomes. All three levels of work environment indicators are recognised as statistically
significant, confirming their unique importance in training transfer. Peer support in the
work environment has the greatest relative importance in predicting the transfer of training
outcomes. The conclusions emphasise the importance of designing training as a systemic,
multi-level process that takes place on an ongoing basis and that all levels of support in
the work environment (i.e., organisation, supervisors, and colleagues) are essential for
sustaining learning outcomes.
The effective transfer to practice in teacher education is evidenced by the positive
impact of PD on child/student learning outcomes (Sims et al., 2023; Ventista & Brown,
2023; Didion et al., 2020; Asterhan & Lefstein, 2024; Jensen & Rasmussen, 2019; Johari et al.,
2022), most commonly evaluated by standardised student test scores. For example, Didion
et al. (2020) investigated the impact of teachers’ PD on the reading results of preschool
children and students up to the 8th grade. However, the systematic review developed
by Ventista and Brown (2023) concluded that no research was identified that examined
the impact of teacher PD on other valuable 21st-century educational outcomes and skills
needed by future citizens, such as students’ critical thinking, creativity, motivation, or
collaboration skills.
Based on the results of a systematic review, Ahadi et al. (2024) concluded that the 41
reviewed papers do not utilise evaluation frameworks designed to assess the PD workshop
programmes. Most papers included in the scoping review did not deploy comprehensive
PD evaluation models to assess teacher PD workshops or report on the use of established
instruments for the purposes of data collection. Thus, the majority of these studies did not
attempt to evaluate different dimensions of teacher change. Thus, Ahadi et al. recommend
that the evaluation of the effectiveness of PD programs should be carried out, taking into
account the following considerations: (a) programmes’ evaluation should be based on the
theories of evaluation and teacher change, (b) a comprehensive range of PD dimensions
to be evaluated should be developed, (c) various data should be collected before the
implementation of the PD programme, during the implementation of the programme,
and after the completion of the programme, and (d) validated tools should be used in the
evaluation, not hastily created, questionable, and theoretically agnostic questionnaires.
Only then can researchers develop a more complete understanding of the effectiveness of
PD and individuals’ readiness and ability to transfer the acquired experience into practice.
Basma and Savage (2023) concluded that none of the analysed studies presented
indicators of the implementation of teachers’ PD based on theory. It was recognised
that a full-fledged PD model has not been established; thus, potential factors have been
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 12 of 22
investigated, but not a complete set of theoretical influencing factors. The research data
showed an apparent disconnect between what the theory of effective teacher PD expounds
and the content and approaches of well-designed empirical studies of teacher PD. Thus,
further research is recommended to identify changes in teachers’ knowledge and attitudes
in PD. The review by Boylan et al. (2023) also indicates that transformative professional
learning is under-theorised, with accounts emphasising only one or two features, usually
agency, collaboration, or educational purpose. The authors suggest that transformative
professional learning should be grounded in clarity about its purpose, knowledge, and the
relationship to the knowledge developed.
Another aspect that has not been researched properly is the context of PD. Context
plays an important role in PD practitioners’/researchers’ successes and challenges in the
field. However, only a few studies included detailed information regarding teacher, school,
and district backgrounds (Boz, 2023). Relevant publications in psychology focused on
the transfer of training from a psychological perspective. There is a long history of such
research. Blume et al. (2010) found that learning outcomes may decay over time. Their
meta-analysis of 89 empirical studies explored the impact of predictive factors (e.g., trainee
characteristics, work environment, training interventions) on the transfer of training to
different tasks and contexts. They used the model of training transfer presented by Baldwin
and Ford (1988) as their theoretical basis. Thus, Blume et al. (2010) concluded that the
single largest relationship to transfer involved cognitive ability. However, transfer is not
solely dependent on trainees’ cognitive ability, as other moderately strong relationships
were observed for other trainee characteristics, such as conscientiousness and voluntary
participation. Neuroticism, pretraining self-efficacy, motivation to learn, and a learning
goal orientation also had moderate relationships with transfer. Specifically, most predictor
variables examined (e.g., motivation, work environment) had stronger relationships to
transfer when the focus of training was on open (e.g., leadership development) as opposed
to closed (e.g., computer software) skills.
Fewer studies were found for the representatives of other professions. In these studies,
similar to the case of teachers’ PD, it was also concluded that the transfer of PD into practice
can be evaluated at different levels—both at the level of the individual and at the level of
the organisation. Therefore, the connection of the transfer with individual needs, such as
personality and professional activity, can be evaluated (in the context of the workplace,
according to the needs of the organisation) (Shahzad et al., 2023b). For example, Ayivi-Vinz
et al. (2022) evaluated the changes in the behaviour of healthcare specialists as a result of
CPD activities, using the CPD-REACTION questionnaire. In another study (Williams et al.,
2023) on the transfer of the results of the PD of healthcare specialists into practice, it was
recognised that there were improvements in professional performance in the workplace
(workplace-based performance) and in their professional practice (performance in one’s
own practice), using Moore’s outcomes framework (Moore et al., 2009).
Kirkpatrick’s classic model (Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick, 2016) is also used relatively
often to evaluate PD transfer (Ayeleke et al., 2019; Pagnucci et al., 2023). As concluded
by Ayeleke et al. (2019), most of the studies included in the review focused primarily on
the effects of PD at the individual level, e.g., assessing participants’ knowledge and skills,
as well as professional performance related to level 2 (learning) and level 3 (behavioural)
assessments from Kirkpatrick’s model. Little, if any, data were collected for level 4 (out-
comes) relating to organisational performance (which could include healthcare quality and
patient outcomes in the healthcare context). Therefore, the authors could not objectively
draw conclusions about the impact of PD on organisational performance.
It can be concluded that researchers have put forward several indicators of effective
PD transfer. There are identifiable performance indicators, such as student learning out-
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 13 of 22
comes in standardised tests, student behaviour, course duration, cognitive abilities, etc.
Several process indicators (quality) have been identified: learning outcomes (knowledge,
skills, attitude, beliefs, competencies, emotions, perceptions, new awareness, motivation,
engagement, satisfaction, self-efficacy), trainer satisfaction, employer satisfaction, impact
on teaching practices, transfer of knowledge, persistence and long-term use, pedagogical
ideas/practices, work environment, teacher collaboration, peer, supervisor, and organ-
isational support, generalisation, maintenance, etc. These indicators may refer to the
individual, organisational, programme/intervention, or global level. In psychology and
education, at an individual level, it refers to both professional and personal aspects, such
as knowledge, skills, attitudes, beliefs, cognitive ability, motivation, etc.
In many cases, the effectiveness of teachers’ PD and its transfer is linked to the achieve-
ments of students, as they can be objectively evaluated using standardised tests; usually, the
students’ academic achievements are evaluated. However, insufficient studies have been
identified that assess how the transfer of PD influences other aspects of student performance
(development of 21st-century skills, social-emotional development, behaviour). Various
environmental factors—peer, supervisor, and organisational support—are essential in en-
suring training transfer, persistence, and long-term use of PD results at the organisational
level. PD context also plays an important role in the transfer. Although the effectiveness of
PD programmes is evaluated in two ways—by evaluating objectively measurable indicators
(students’ achievements) and by subjective evaluations—the personal benefits to teachers
and the programmes’ effectiveness are not always evaluated correctly, especially in the
long term.
4. Discussion
Over the past 15–20 years, researchers have attempted to define what effective PD is.
Several theoretical models of PD practice have been developed, and several effectiveness
indicators and identified processes related to the transfer of PD into practice have been
discussed. Recent research reflects a consensus that PD is helping teachers to improve their
knowledge, skills, and practice, thus hopefully increasing student achievement. Despite
that, there is no clear set of indicators that researchers regularly measure in empirical
studies of PD (Desimone, 2009). The complexity of the issue that focuses on the need for
clarity at the specific level of PD and what the impacts are for practice has been evaluated.
Although recent research has tried to resolve the complex question of the effectiveness of
PD and then put those theoretical models into practice, implementing programmes based
on these premises, there is still an urgent need to make some kind of common theory-based
practice in all fields. Analysing the recent developments, certain gaps in the knowledge
and questions that should be addressed in the future have been identified (see Table 2).
It is assumed that effective PD will improve teachers’ performance and probably
increase student outcomes and transfer processes (such as bridging the knowledge–doing
gap), probably occurring in workplaces in non-linear ways, are needed for that. Never-
theless, the value of PD is individual and contextual and depends not only on the PD
content, types of programs and mechanisms, support, etc., but mainly on the professional’s
own ability to analyse what is valuable for a particular situation (what can improve per-
formance or make a process more efficient by optimising it) and what is not. Improving
performance for teachers means becoming a reflective practitioner, working harder by
transferring PD gains to practice, and using evidence to constantly revise ongoing practice
by experimenting—giving up less effective techniques and strategies to introduce new
and more promising ones. In this process, it is not possible to distinguish the pathway of
single PD programme outcomes to characterise their effectiveness. Therefore, PD results
should be measured in the workplace (at the individual or organisational level), not in
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 14 of 22
single interventions as the result of particular PD programmes. Besides, personalised and
self-directed PD that is based on teachers’ metacognitive competence and embedded in a
school’s organisational culture emphasises the paradigm shift from ‘deficit paradigm’ to
‘teacher as active participant’ who constructs their own PD trajectories, conceptualising
teacher professional learning and PD in terms of internal teacher growth or change rather
than in terms of activities.
The concept of effectiveness itself is based on measurable impact; thus, it is embedded
within performative structures and could be applied to reproductive activities and systems
with clear performance indicators. It does not provide a means for evaluating the transfor-
mative aspects of PD and learning. Studying the long-term effects on practice is necessary:
participants should be given enough time to adopt new ideas into their practice and trans-
form it. In his proposed “Five Levels of Professional Development Evaluation”, Guskey
(2002) argues that level 1 (“Participant reaction”) and level 2 (“Participant learning”), which
combine satisfaction about learning and new knowledge and skills, can be immediately
evaluated after PD, but information about level 4 (“Participant use of new knowledge and
skills”) cannot be gathered straight after a PD session. According to Knapp (2003), the
purpose of PD assessment is to examine changes in thinking, knowledge, skills, and their
application, and there is a very strong recommendation to use a variety of assessment tools
and involve as many different assessment agents as possible (e.g., teachers, administration,
parents, etc.).
Discussions about the transformative potential of professional learning are emerging
in the field (Boylan et al., 2023) by “challenging [the] dominant approach to professional
learning, which focuses on attempts to identify the most ‘effective’ means of ensuring
that teachers can improve pupils’ scores on standardised tests” (Kennedy & Stevenson,
2023, pp. 581–582). However, despite quite a lot of research over a long period of time, the
theoretical concepts of learning transfer are still fragmented and characterised by different
findings (Wenzel & Cordery, 2014). Kennedy (2014), reflecting on his CPD model developed
in 2005, points out that it is necessary to take into account how the use of concepts changes
when talking about PD. Sometimes, concepts are considered self-evident in the theoretical
aspect, but from the context, different phenomena can be understood with the same
concept. As time goes on, theoretical assumptions and the categories they include should be
critically evaluated.
Table 2. Gaps in present knowledge.
What Has Been Researched? Authors Gap in Knowledge and Future
Questions
Characteristics of effective teachers’
PD programmes and different aspects
of PD design regarding its impact on
teacher and/or student outcomes, four
core features: intensity, relevance,
active learning, and collective
participation; specific subject focus,
modelling, practising, ongoing
reflection, and sustainable support.
(Boz, 2023)
(Donath et al., 2023)
(Didion et al., 2020)
(Filderman et al., 2022)
(Huang et al., 2022)
(Kowalski et al., 2020)
(Willems & Van den Bossche, 2019)
Methodological weaknesses, little
empirical support, and controversial
results are reported, suggesting that
there is a need to use more
experimental studies to test proposed
features of effective PD and to
distinguish what makes PD more or
less effective in different contexts and
how PD programmes introduce
pedagogical strategies.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 15 of 22
Table 2. Cont.
What Has Been Researched? Authors Gap in Knowledge and Future Questions
The effectiveness of teacher PD transfer is
linked to student outcomes, often to (easily
measurable) results in tests.
(Ahmed et al., 2022)
(Basma & Savage, 2023)
(Boz, 2023)
(Didion et al., 2020)
(Jensen & Rasmussen, 2019)
(Parkhouse et al., 2019)
(Rogers et al., 2020)
(Ryan et al., 2022)
(Sims et al., 2021, 2023)
(Ventista & Brown, 2023)
(Yang et al., 2022)
(Wißhak, 2022)
Research assessing how teacher PD results
are transferred to affect diverse aspects of
student performance—development of
21st-century skills, social-emotional
development, behaviour, and
well-being—is insufficiently identified.
Processes and indicators showing effective
ways of transferring professional learning
outcomes into practice; factors that can
predict the transfer have been identified.
(Blume et al., 2010)
Lack of empirical synthesis for processes
and indicators. What are the personal,
professional, and environmental
(organisational) factors?
Various evaluation models have been
developed and used to assess the impact of
PD in terms of different outcomes,
generally indicating the positive effects
of PD.
(Ahadi et al., 2024)
(Ayeleke et al., 2019)
(Didion et al., 2020)
(Firmstone et al., 2013)
(Hill et al., 2009)
(Huang et al., 2022)
(Kahmann et al., 2022)
(Kowalski et al., 2020)
(Pargmann et al., 2023)
(Rogers et al., 2020)
(Sims et al., 2021, 2023)
(Zhou et al., 2022)
(Willemsen et al., 2023)
(Willems & Van den Bossche, 2019)
There are still questions about whether
changes in professional training can be
associated with improvements in
student/client outcomes.
The quality of measurements is
questionable, with high degrees of
heterogeneity between studies and a lack
of standardised, theoretically grounded,
evidence-based research that involves a
broad range of outcomes (both process and
performance indicators) to reveal the link
between professional outcomes in PD and
student/client outcomes/benefits.
Quantitative and qualitative
methodologies should be mixed.
The IMTP model for teacher PD evaluation:
develop insights, motivate change, develop
techniques, and embed these in practice.
Fourteen mechanisms in a PD programme
are associated with PD’s greater impact on
student test results, and balanced PD
programmes have higher average effect
sizes than imbalanced PD programmes.
(Sims et al., 2023)
Future research needs to apply the model
in broader contexts and different
professional fields.
Usually, short-term results are measured
and reported, even for PD aspects that
require sustained use to be represented
in outcomes.
(Donath et al., 2023)
(Filderman et al., 2022)
(Yang et al., 2022)
The lack of maintenance measures for PD
effectiveness is identified in the long term.
Future research that evaluates the
long-term effects of PD on practice and
performance is necessary.
One of the achievable results of PD is a
change in teacher attitudes and beliefs.
(Ahmed et al., 2022)
(Basma & Savage, 2023)
(Dignath et al., 2022)
(Filderman et al., 2022)
(Johari et al., 2022)
Incomparable measurements addressing
teacher attitudes and belief systems limit
exploring their relation to change in
practice and student achievement. There is
a need to evaluate more different
dimensions of teacher change.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 16 of 22
Table 2. Cont.
What Has Been Researched? Authors Gap in Knowledge and Future Questions
Controversial results about the impact of
increasingly used coaching and mentoring
as a part of PD are reported, and formal
and informal aspects of mentoring are
also discussed.
(Basma & Savage, 2023)
(Didion et al., 2020)
(Filderman et al., 2022)
(Main & Anderson, 2023)
(Rogers et al., 2020)
(Wang et al., 2022)
(Wißhak, 2022)
(Wong et al., 2018)
(Yang et al., 2022)
(Salmerón Aroca et al., 2023)
Coaching and feedback are often defined
ambiguously and characterised as very
different constructs, lacking consensus on
the theoretical foundation related to
coaching as an effective tool, not specifying
coaching design, and not providing
transparent data analysis.
Future research is needed as there are
many new contextual opportunities to use
both mentoring and coaching at the
organisational level to support PD transfer
into practice.
A potential shift from formally organised
PD courses to teacher workplace learning
is recognised.
Informal learning is considered an
important but hardly measurable part
of PD.
(Kyndt et al., 2016)
(Ventista & Brown, 2023)
(Zhou et al., 2022)
Research on the impact of teachers’
self-organised learning and targeted
workplace learning approaches on the
teaching, student outcomes, and
organisational factors of a school is limited
and should be investigated. PD transfer is
incorporated into these practices.
There are rather controversial research
results about what is more
effective—mandatory/obligatory versus
self-directed/voluntary participation in
PD.
(Donath et al., 2023)
(Main & Anderson, 2023)
(Wißhak, 2022)
Objective, comparable measures to
evaluate the role of voluntary versus
mandatory participation of professionals in
PD and the effectiveness of PD are lacking.
Various environmental factors (the
context—e.g., school, district, etc.) are
essential in ensuring transfer at the
organisational level. PD context plays an
important role in the transfer of PD results.
(Boz, 2023)
(Peleman et al., 2018)
There is a lack of research about the PD
context, which plays an important role in
PD practitioners/researchers’ successes
and challenges in the field. However, it has
been undervalued so far.
Community of practice is recognised as an
important aspect of practice-based PD
(especially in early career stages). Virtual
communities of practice are an effective
way to share knowledge
among professionals.
(Campbell et al., 2019)
(Concina, 2023)
(Hirsch et al., 2021)
(Kyndt et al., 2016)
(Mairs et al., 2013)
(Surahman & Wang, 2023)
(Ventista & Brown, 2023)
There is a need for experimental research
based on underlying PD characteristics
and related to the broader (virtual)
communities of practice.
Teacher PD duration has been analysed,
with controversial conclusions. There is no
consensus on the length of PD to improve
teaching practice, and it could be
concluded that there are other aspects than
the duration of PD affecting the transfer of
PD into practice and student results.
(Basma & Savage, 2023)
(Boz, 2023)
(Didion et al., 2020)
(Dignath et al., 2022)
(Donath et al., 2023)
(Jensen & Rasmussen, 2019)
(Kowalski et al., 2020)
Research should be carried out in the
context of PD content and outcomes and
whether the current indicator can be used
as a PD effectiveness indicator.
No unique mode (face-to-face, online,
blended) of delivery of PD activities is
recognised to be most effective; however,
the practical nature of training
programmes is related to
educational effectiveness.
Research based on experimental designs
regarding various modes and formats
provides differing results.
(Fernández-Batanero et al., 2022)
(Pagnucci et al., 2023)
(Williams et al., 2023)
More experimental design research
targeting higher levels of educational
outcomes (including community-level
outcomes) is needed for a consensus
regarding various PD modes and formats.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 17 of 22
Table 2. Cont.
What Has Been Researched? Authors Gap in Knowledge and Future Questions
The effectiveness of PD may be moderated
by teachers’ experience/career stage. (Didion et al., 2020)
Evidence-based studies of how teaching
experience is related to the transfer of PD
outcomes into practice are needed.
PD is recognised as a way to transfer
(translate) and disseminate findings of
current research in medicine into practice,
not just as the training and changing
knowledge/skills/attitude of practitioners.
(Mairs et al., 2013)
(Nexø et al., 2024)
The role of universities and researchers in
providing PD focused on the
translation/dissemination of actual
research findings (evidence) into teaching
practice is understudied.
Understanding of theories and concepts. (Basma & Savage, 2023)
(Li et al., 2023)
The use of theoretical concepts should be
critically evaluated in line with current
theories, considering dynamic changes in
systems, organisations, processes,
individuals, and their contexts.
PD as a learning process. (Wißhak, 2022)
There is a need to see learning in PD as an
individual and social phenomenon, as an
autonomous process involving individual
growth, not only as organisational
development.
Approach to the use of theories (Surahman & Wang, 2023)
(Williams et al., 2023)
A comprehensive meta-study of the
theories used in the research on PD and its
transfer into practice should be conducted.
Transformative professional learning has
been conceptualised but is not related to
the effectiveness of PD.
(Boylan et al., 2023)
Transformative professional learning is
insufficiently conceptualised theoretically.
It should be conceptualised across a range
of aspects important for understanding
both professionalism and
professional learning.
Regarding teacher PD and learning, our scoping review, on the one hand, identifies
gaps in the knowledge, emphasising the need for rigorous research designs, standardised
indicators, and performance measurements, and on the other, it strongly resonates with the
findings that characterise teacher learning “as a non-linear, complex process that makes
planning and evaluating professional learning somewhat challenging” (King et al., 2023,
p. 974). It proposes a pragmatic approach to conceptualising teacher professional learning
according to the three major constructs—context, experience, and outcomes (King et al.,
2023)—as well as the emerging effort in the field for uncovering the transformative potential
of professional learning (Kennedy & Stevenson, 2023).
Finally, according to conclusions from the research in health care (Mairs et al., 2013;
Nexø et al., 2024), instead of concentrating on investigating PD as interventions, training,
and routines, researchers probably should rather focus on PD as a way to transfer and
disseminate findings from current research in all fields, enabling them to follow how new
knowledge takes place by changing practices in different contexts.
5. Conclusions
The scoping review is designed to identify and summarise current approaches, trends,
and conclusions regarding the evaluation of the effectiveness of transferring PD results into
practice in order to develop an evidence-based, conceptually and operationally coherent,
multi-level (at national, organisational, and individual levels) PD system in Latvia.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 18 of 22
Regarding RQ1, most of the studies reviewed analyse the PD of teachers and health-
care professionals, exploring formal, informal, and workplace learning in different settings
and contexts and revealing complexities and challenges in defining universal features of
effective PD due to its context-specific nature and ambiguous concepts regarding outcomes.
Although different models and frameworks have been developed and applied to charac-
terise the effectiveness of PD programmes and practices, a consensus on effective PD has
not yet been reached, and measuring its impact remains problematic. These models and
frameworks either lack strong empirical evidence or simplify reality by losing contextual
information, which reduces the possibility of using the conclusions in practice. A new
theory (IMTP model: Sims et al., 2023) aims at measuring the impact of teacher PD repre-
sented in student results and offers a more granular approach to PD by focusing on insight,
motivation, techniques, and practice. On the one hand, it identifies testable indicators for
measuring the impact of PD programmes, and on the other, it is focused on PD interven-
tions, not on PD as an ongoing practice within contextually rich settings. PD effectiveness
has also been explored in other professions, like sports psychology, librarianship, and
engineering, though these studies tend to focus on specific career development challenges
rather than broader PD outcomes. In general, while PD’s effectiveness varies by context
and profession, ensuring that learning results are applied in practice remains a key marker
of success, even as the methods for evaluating this impact continue to evolve. We conclude
that the term ‘effectiveness’ can be aligned with successful transformational change at the
levels of individual and organisational development.
By evaluating the selected publications to address RQ2, we can conclude that more the-
oretical models are utilised at the organisational and programme levels, while insufficient
attention is given to PD as an individual and social learning process. The theoretical basis
for further research should be more versatile, incorporating theories that address not only
the outcomes of learning but also its processes and contexts. The dynamic global, political,
social, and individual influences on adult learning mean that the pursuit of adequate
theoretical concepts that help us to understand and shape it is permanent.
Answering RQ3, it was concluded that identified indicators are statistics that allow
value judgements to be made about key aspects of the functioning of PD and its effective-
ness. There is no common agreement on what the key indicators to be used for measuring
PD effectiveness are, which is why the transfer of PD outcomes in terms of aim, content, and
contexts—in different fields and professions—can vary substantially. Many suggestions
about possible indicators come from researchers working in psychology and education,
who use both performance (for example, student outcomes) and process indicators (for
example, teacher learning outcomes). Additionally, there are indicators at the individual,
organisational, programme, and global levels. A range of indicators to measure lower-level
and short-term PD results has been introduced; indicators for measuring long-term results
showing PD transfer into practice are less common. Finally, resorting to too many indicators
exacerbates the problem since the use of different methodologies and approaches makes
most research findings incomparable.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/educsci15010095/s1. Annex: References Analysed Reviews.
Author Contributions: Conceptualisation, M.K., D.N. and S.B.; methodology, D.N. and S.S.; valida-
tion, D.N., M.K., S.B. and S.S.; investigation and formal analysis, D.N., M.K. and S.B.; writing-original
draft preparation, D.N., M.K. and S.B.; writing-review and editing, D.N., M.K., S.B. and S.S.; project
administration, S.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 19 of 22
Funding: This research is funded by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Latvia,
project “Elaboration of evidence-based solutions for effective professional competence development
of adults and assessment of the transfer of its results into practice in Latvia”, project No. VPP-IZM-
Izgl¯ıt¯ıba-2023/4-0001.
Institutional Review Board Statement: As this work has undertaken a scoping review of the
literature, there is no need for ethical approval.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
Ahadi, A., Bower, M., Lai, J., Singh, A., & Garrett, M. (2024). Evaluation of teacher professional learning workshops on the use of
technology—A systematic review. Professional Development in Education, 50(1), 221–237. [CrossRef]
Ahmed, S. K., Jeffries, D., Chakraborty, A., Lietz, P ., Kaushik, A., Rahayu, B., Armstrong, D., & Sundarsagar, K. (2022). PROTOCOL:
Teacher professional development for disability inclusion in low-and middle-income Asia-Pacific countries: An evidence and gap
map. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 17(4), e1287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Allen, L. M., Palermo, C., Armstrong, E., & Hay, M. (2019). Categorising the broad impacts of continuing professional development: A
scoping review. Medical Education, 53(11), 1087–1099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Arksey, H., & O’Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. International Journal of Social Research
Methodology, 8(1), 19–32. [CrossRef]
Asterhan, S. C., & Lefstein, A. (2024). The search for evidence-based features of effective teacher professional development: A critical
analysis of the literature. Professional Development in Education, 50(1), 11–23. [CrossRef]
Ayeleke, R. O., North, N. H., Dunham, A., & Wallis, K. A. (2019). Impact of training and professional development on health
management and leadership competence: A mixed methods systematic review. Journal of Health Organization and Management,
33(4), 354–379. [CrossRef]
Ayivi-Vinz, G., Bakwa Kanyinga, F., Bergeron, L., Décary, S., Adisso,É. L., Zomahoun, H. T. V ., Daniel, S. J., Tremblay, M., Plourde,
K. V ., Guay-Bélanger, S., & Légaré, F. (2022). Use of the CPD-REACTION questionnaire to evaluate continuing professional
development activities for health professionals: Systematic review. JMIR Medical Education, 8(2), e36948. [CrossRef]
Baldwin, T. T., & Ford, J. K. (1988). Transfer of training: A review and directions for future research. Personnel Psychology, 41(1), 63–105.
[CrossRef]
Basma, B., & Savage, R. (2018). Teacher professional development and student literacy growth: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Educational Psychology Review, 30, 457–481. [CrossRef]
Basma, B., & Savage, R. (2023). Teacher professional development and student reading in middle and high school: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Journal of Teacher Education, 74(3), 214–228. [CrossRef]
Blume, B. D., Ford, J. K., Baldwin, T. T., & Huang, J. L. (2010). Transfer of training: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Management, 36(4),
1065–1105. [CrossRef]
Boylan, M., Adams, G., Perry, E., & Booth, J. (2023). Reimagining transformative professional learning for critical teacher professional-
ism: A conceptual review. Professional Development in Education, 49(4), 651–669. [CrossRef]
Boz, T. (2023). Teacher professional development for STEM integration in elementary/primary schools: A systematic review.Inter-
national Electronic Journal of Elementary Education, 15(5), 371–382. Available online: https://www.iejee.com/index.php/IEJEE/
article/view/1958 (accessed on 3 June 2024). [CrossRef]
Campbell, N., Wozniak, H., Philip, R. L., & Damarell, R. A. (2019). Peer-supported faculty development and workplace teaching: An
integrative review. Medical Education, 53(10), 978–988. [CrossRef]
Concina, E. (2023). Effective music teachers and effective music teaching today: A systematic review. Education Sciences, 13, 107.
[CrossRef]
Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M. E., & Gardner, M. (2017). Effective teacher professional development. Learning Policy Institute.
Desimone, L. M. (2009). Improving impact studies of teachers’ professional development: Toward better conceptualizations and
measures. Educational Researcher, 38(3), 181–199. [CrossRef]
Desimone, L. M. (2023). Rethinking teacher PD: A focus on how to improve student learning. Professional Development in Education,
49(1), 1–3. [CrossRef]
Didion, L., Toste, J. R., & Filderman, M. J. (2020). Teacher professional development and student reading achievement: A meta-analytic
review of the effects. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 13(1), 29–66. [CrossRef]
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 20 of 22
Dignath, C., Rimm-Kaufman, S., van Ewijk, R., & Kunter, M. (2022). Teachers’ beliefs about inclusive education and insights on what
contributes to those beliefs: A meta-analytical study. Educational Psychology Review, 34, 2609–2660. [CrossRef]
Donath, J. L., Lüke, T., Graf, E., Tran, U. S., & Götz, T. (2023). Does professional development effectively support the implementation of
inclusive education? A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 35, 30. [CrossRef]
Dunst, C. J., Bruder, M. B., & Hamby, D. W. (2015). Metasynthesis of in-service professional development research: Features associated
with positive educator and student outcomes. Educational Research and Reviews, 10(12), 1731–1744. [CrossRef]
Fernández-Batanero, J. M., Montenegro-Rueda, M., Fernández-Cerero, J., & García-Martínez, I. (2022). Digital competences for teacher
professional development. Systematic review. European Journal of Teacher Education, 45(4), 513–531. [CrossRef]
Filderman, M. J., Toste, J. R., Didion, L., & Peng, P . (2022). Data literacy training for K–12 teachers: A meta-analysis of the effects on
teacher outcomes. Remedial and Special Education, 43(5), 328–343. [CrossRef]
Firmstone, V . R., Elley, K. M., Skrybant, M. T., Fry-Smith, A., Bayliss, S., & Torgerson, C. J. (2013). Systematic review of the effectiveness
of continuing dental professional development on learning, behavior, or patient outcomes. Journal of Dental Education, 77(3),
300–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fogaça, J. L., Quartiroli, A., & Wagstaff, C. R. D. (2024). Professional development of sport psychology practitioners: From systematic
review to a model of development. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 70, 102550. [CrossRef]
Guskey, T. R. (2000).Evaluating professional development. Corwin Press.
Guskey, T. R. (2002). Professional development and teacher change. Teachers and Teaching, 8(3), 381–391. [CrossRef]
Guskey, T. R. (2003). Analyzing lists of the characteristics of effective professional development to promote visionary leadership.
NASSP Bulletin, 87(637), 4–20. [CrossRef]
Hill, A. G., Yu, T.-C., Barrow, M., & Hattie, J. (2009). A systematic review of resident-as-teacher programmes.Medical Education, 43(12),
1129–1140. [CrossRef]
Hirsch, S. E., Randall, K., Bradshaw, C., & Lloyd, J. W. (2021). Professional learning and development in classroom management for
novice teachers: A systematic review. Education and Treatment of Children, 44, 291–307. [CrossRef]
Huang, B., Jong, M. S.-Y., Tu, Y.-F., Hwang, G.-J., Chai, C. S., & Jiang, M. Y.-C. (2022). Trends and exemplary practices of STEM
teacher professional development programs in K-12 contexts: A systematic review of empirical studies. Computers & Education,
189, 104577. [CrossRef]
Hughes, A. M., Zajac, S., Woods, A. L., & Salas, E. (2020). The role of work environment in training sustainment: A meta-analysis.
Human Factors, 62(1), 166–183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jensen, P ., & Rasmussen, A. W. (2019). Professional development and its impact on children in early childhood education and care: A
meta-analysis based on European studies. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 63(6), 935–950. [CrossRef]
Johari, M. I., Rosli, R., Maat, S. M., Mahmud, M. S., Capraro, M. M., & Capraro, R. M. (2022). Integrated professional development for
mathematics teachers: A systematic review. Pegem Journal of Education and Instruction, 12(4), 226–234. [CrossRef]
Kahmann, R., Droop, M., & Lazonder, A. W. (2022). Meta-analysis of professional development programs in differentiated instruction.
International Journal of Educational Research, 116, 102072. [CrossRef]
Kennedy, A. (2005). Models of continuing professional development: A framework for analysis. Journal of In-Service Education, 31(2),
235–250. [CrossRef]
Kennedy, A. (2014). Understanding continuing professional development: The need for theory to impact on policy and practice.
Professional Development in Education, 40(5), 688–697. [CrossRef]
Kennedy, A., & Stevenson, H. (2023). Beyond reproduction: The transformative potential of professional learning. Professional
Development in Education, 49(4), 581–585. [CrossRef]
Kennedy, M. M. (2016). How does professional development improve teaching? Review of Educational Research, 86, 945–980. [CrossRef]
King, F., Poekert, P ., & Pierre, T. (2023). A pragmatic meta-model to navigate complexity in teachers’ professional learning.Professional
Development in Education, 49(6), 958–977. [CrossRef]
Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1959). Techniques for evaluating training programs: Pt.1. Reactions. Journal of the American Society for Training and
Development, 13(11), 3–9.
Kirkpatrick, J. D., & Kirkpatrick, W. K. (2016). Kirkpatrick’s four levels of training evaluation. ATD Press.
Knapp, M. S. (2003). Professional development as a policy pathway. Review of Research in Education, 27(1), 109–157. [CrossRef]
Kowalski, S. M., Taylor, J. A., Askinas, K. M., Wang, Q., Zhang, Q., Maddix, W. P ., & Tipton, E. (2020). Examining factors contributing to
variation in effect size estimates of teacher outcomes from studies of science teacher professional development. Journal of Research
on Educational Effectiveness, 13(3), 430–458. [CrossRef]
Kyndt, E., Gijbels, D., Grosemans, I., & Donche, V . (2016). Teachers’ everyday professional development: Mapping informal learning
activities, antecedents, and learning outcomes. Review of Educational Research, 86(4), 1111–1150. [CrossRef]
Levac, D., Colquhoun, H., & O’Brien, K. K. (2010). Scoping studies: Advancing the methodology. Implementation Science, 5, 69.
[CrossRef]
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 21 of 22
Li, Z., Hassan, N. C., & Jalil, H. A. (2023). The effectiveness of face-to-face versus online delivery of continuing professional development
for science teachers: A systematic review. Education Sciences, 13(12), 1251. [CrossRef]
Lo, C. K. (2021). Design principles for effective teacher professional development in integrated stem education: A systematic review.
Educational Technology & Society, 24(4), 136–152.
Main, P . A. E., & Anderson, S. (2023). Evidence for continuing professional development standards for regulated health practitioners in
Australia: A systematic review. Human Resources for Health, 21, 23. [CrossRef]
Mairs, K., McNeil, H., McLeod, J., Prorok, J., & Stolee, P . (2013). Online strategies to facilitate health-related knowledge transfer: A
systematic search and review. Health Information & Libraries Journal, 30(4), 261–277. [CrossRef]
Moore, D. E., Jr., Green, J. S., & Gallis, H. A. (2009). Achieving desired results and improved outcomes: Integrating planning and
assessment throughout learning activities. Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Profession, 29(1), 1–15. [CrossRef]
Munn, Z., Peters, M. D. J., Stern, C., Tufanaru, C., McArthur, A., & Aromataris, E. (2018). Systematic review or scoping review?
Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Medical Research Methodology,
18, 143. [CrossRef]
Nexø, M. A., Kingod, N. R., Eshøj, S. H., Kjærulff, E. M., Nørgaard, O., & Andersen, T. H. (2024). The impact of train-the-trainer
programs on the continued professional development of nurses: A systematic review. BMC Medical Education, 24, 30. [CrossRef]
Obee, A. F., Hart, K. C., & Fabiano, G. A. (2023). Professional development targeting classroom management and behavioral support
skills in early childhood settings: A systematic review. School Mental Health, 15, 339–369. [CrossRef]
Pagnucci, N., Aleo, G., Orlik, W., Mahon, P ., Kearns, T., Kelly, C., Lordan, T., & Fitzgerald, C. (2023). Teaching and learning modalities
for continuing professional development in the long-term care: A rapid synthesis review. Nurse Education in Practice, 70, 103638.
[CrossRef]
Pargmann, J., Riebenbauer, E., Flick-Holtsch, D., & Berding, F. (2023). Digitalisation in accounting: A systematic literature review of
activities and implications for competences. Empirical Research in Vocational Education and Training, 15, 1. [CrossRef]
Parkhouse, H., Lu, C. Y., & Massaro, V . R. (2019). Multicultural education professional development: A review of the literature.Review
of Educational Research, 89(3), 416–458. [CrossRef]
Peleman, B., Lazzari, A., Budginait˙e, I., Siarova, H., Hauari, H., Peeters, J., & Cameron, C. (2018). Continuous professional development
and ECEC quality: Findings from a European systematic literature review. European Journal of Education, 53(1), 9–22. [CrossRef]
Petersen, J. A., Bray, L., & Østergaard, D. (2024). Continuing professional development (CPD) for anesthetists: A systematic review.
Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, 68(1), 2–15. [CrossRef]
Philipsen, B., Tondeur, J., Pareja Roblin, N., Vanslambrouck, S., & Zhu, C. (2019). Improving teacher professional development
for online and blended learning: A systematic meta-aggregative review. Educational Technology Research and Development, 67,
1145–1174. [CrossRef]
Phillips, J. L., Heneka, N., Bhattarai, P ., Fraser, C., & Shaw, T. (2019). Effectiveness of the spaced education pedagogy for clinicians’
continuing professional development: A systematic review. Medical Education, 53(9), 886–902. [CrossRef]
Rogers, S., Brown, C., & Poblete, X. (2020). A systematic review of the evidence base for professional learning in early years education
(The PLEYE Review). Review of Education, 8(1), 156–188. [CrossRef]
Ryan, M., Alliott, O., Ikeda, E., Luan, J., Hofmann, R., & van Sluijs, E. (2022). Features of effective staff training programmes within
school-based interventions targeting student activity behaviour: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 19, 125. [CrossRef]
Salmerón Aroca, J. A., Moreno Abellán, P ., & Martínez de Miguel López, S. (2023). Teachers’ professional development and intelligent
ways of coping with it: A systematic review in elementary and middle school education. Journal of Intelligence, 11(1), 1. [CrossRef]
Shahzad, K., Khan, S. A., Javed, Y., & Iqbal, A. (2023a). E-learning for continuing professional development of university librarians: A
systematic review. Sustainability, 15(1), 849. [CrossRef]
Shahzad, K., Khan, S. A., Latif, M., & Iqbal, A. (2023b). Relationship between personal traits and sustainable competence development
among librarians in relation to value-added library services in a networked world: A systematic literature review from 2002 to
2022. Sustainability, 15(3), 2359. [CrossRef]
Shiri, R., El-Metwally, A., Sallinen, M., Pöyry, M., Härmä, M., & Toppinen-Tanner, S. (2023). The role of continuing professional training
or development in maintaining current employment: A systematic review. Healthcare, 11, 2900. [CrossRef]
Sims, S., & Fletcher-Wood, H. (2021). Identifying the characteristics of effective teacher professional development: A critical review.
School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 32(1), 47–63. [CrossRef]
Sims, S., Fletcher-Wood, H., O’Mara-Eves, A., Cottingham, S., Stansfield, C., Van Herwegen, J., & Anders, J. (2021). What are the
characteristics of effective teacher professional development? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Education Endowment Foundation.
Available online: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED615914.pdf (accessed on 18 June 2024).
Sims, S., Fletcher-Wood, H., O’Mara-Eves, A., Cottingham, S., Stansfield, C., Goodrich, J., Van Herwegen, J., & Anders, J. (2023).
Effective teacher professional development: New theory and a meta-analytic test. Review of Educational Research, 0(0). [CrossRef]
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Educ. Sci. 2025, 15, 95 22 of 22
Su, C. S., Díaz-Levicoy, D., Vásquez, C., & Hsu, C. C. (2023). Sustainable development education for training and service teachers
teaching mathematics: A systematic review. Sustainability, 15, 8435. [CrossRef]
Surahman, E., & Wang, T.-H. (2023). In-service STEM teachers professional development programmes: A systematic literature review
2018–2022. Teaching and Teacher Education, 135, 104326. [CrossRef]
Ventista, O. M., & Brown, C. (2023). Teachers’ professional learning and its impact on students’ learning outcomes: Findings from a
systematic review. Social Sciences & Humanities Open, 8(1), 100565. [CrossRef]
Wang, Q., Lai, Y.-L., Xu, X., & McDowall, A. (2022). The effectiveness of workplace coaching: A meta-analysis of contemporary
psychologically informed coaching approaches. Journal of Work-Applied Management, 14(1), 77–101. [CrossRef]
Wenzel, R., & Cordery, J. (2014).Training transfer research: A manager’s guide and bibliography. Australian Institute of Management.
Willems, I., & Van den Bossche, P . (2019). Lesson study effectiveness for teachers’ professional learning: A best evidence synthesis.
International Journal for Lesson and Learning Studies, 8(4), 257–271. [CrossRef]
Willemsen, J., de Condé, H., Kaluzeviciute-Moreton, G., Guogaite, G., Polipo, N. F., & Zech, E. (2023). A qualitative meta-analysis
examining the impact of personal therapy on clinical work and personal and professional development. Counselling and
Psychotherapy Research, 24(3), 853–869. [CrossRef]
Williams, E., Fernandes, R. D., Choi, K., Fasola, L., & Zevin, B. (2023). Learning outcomes and educational effectiveness of e-learning as
a continuing professional development intervention for practicing surgeons and proceduralists: A systematic review. Journal of
Surgical Education, 80(8), 1139–1149. [CrossRef]
Wißhak, S. (2022). Transfer in der berufsbezogenen Weiterbildung: Systematisches Literaturreview und Synthese mit Blick auf die
Handlungsmöglichkeiten der Lehrenden [Transfer in professional training: Systematic literature review and synthesis with
regard to the options for action of teachers]. Zeitschrift für Weiterbildungsforschung, 45, 69–88. [CrossRef]
Wong, S. S. K., Cross, J. A., & Mueller, P . S. (2018). Impact of mentoring on practicing engineers: A meta-synthesis.Journal of Workplace
Learning, 30(6), 415–441. [CrossRef]
Yang, W., Huang, R., Su, Y., Zhu, J., Hsieh, W. Y., & Li, H. (2022). Coaching early childhood teachers: A systematic review of its effects
on teacher instruction and child development. Review of Education, 10(1), e3343. [CrossRef]
Zhou, N., Tigelaar, D. E. H., & Admiraal, W. (2022). Vocational teachers’ professional learning: A systematic literature review of the
past decade. Teaching and Teacher Education, 119, 103856. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.