<<<PAGE=1>>>
Ottoson, J. M. (2009). Knowledge-for-action theories in evaluation: Knowledge utilization,
diffusion, implementation, transfer, and translation. In J. M. Ottoson & P. Hawe (Eds.),
Knowledge utilization, diffusion, implementation, transfer, and translation: Implications for
evaluation. New Directions for Evaluation, 124, 7–20.
Knowledge-for-Action Theories in 
Evaluation: Knowledge Utilization, 
Diffusion, Implementation, Transfer, 
and Translation
Judith M. Ottoson
Abstract
Five knowledge-for-action theories are summarized and compared in this chap-
ter for their evaluation implications: knowledge utilization, diffusion, imple-
mentation, transfer , and translation. Usually dispersed across multiple fields and
disciplines, these theories are gathered here for a common focus on knowledge
and change. Knowledge in some form (ideas, innovation, skills, or policy) moves
in some direction (laterally , hierarchically , spreads, or exchanges) among vari-
ous stakeholders (knowledge producers, end users, or intermediaries) and con-
texts (national, community , or organizational) to achieve some outcomes
(intended benefits, unanticipated outcomes, or hijacked effects). Although rooted
in different disciplines, sensitive to different key indicators, and following dif-
ferent process paths, these theories individually and collectively provide multi-
ple lenses on the evaluation of complex interventions. A table compares key
theory points of disciplinary roots, type of knowledge, movement of knowledge,
contextual influences, and the added lens of each theory . These lenses are used to
analyze the set of theories for evaluation implications. © Wiley Periodicals,
Inc., and the American Evaluation Association.
7
1
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION, no. 124, Winter 2009 © Wiley Periodicals, Inc., and the American Evaluation 
Association. Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com) • DOI: 10.1002/ev.310
<<<PAGE=2>>>
8 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
T
his chapter begins with a practice-based evaluation dilemma: how to
assess the outcomes of a nationwide public health intervention.
Although the intended outcome of this intervention was substance
abuse reduction, the dilemma will be familiar to many evaluators. The inter-
vention consisted of 31 types of training programs, conducted at 249 sepa-
rate sites, by multiple providers, with approximately 9,500 participants, over
a 5-year period. There was no one outcome or stakeholder to answer ques-
tions about intended effects of this complex intervention. What was to
count as success? Who would decide?
Hunting down objectives for individual programs did little to answer
broader questions about intervention effects. Somewhere in the process,
however, it became clear that a number of overlying theories about change
(some explicit, others implicit) not only shaped where outcomes were
sought, but whether stakeholders valued those outcomes. For example, fund-
ers wanted to know whether intended beneficiaries used knowledge gained
from program participation. Knowledge utilization theory offered guidance
on understanding the parameters of use, but other theories were needed to
understand issues of fidelity , power, language, and knowledge movement.
Did learning move as intended from the training site to the community con-
text, or did it morph into alternative, adapted skills (transfer theory)? Did
intended beneficiaries have the authority or opportunity to use a new skill
(implementation theory)? Were ideas translated into actionable messages
for intended beneficiaries (translation theory)? If intended beneficiaries
shared but did not use their program experience, does that spread of knowl-
edge count as nonuse or success (diffusion theory)?
To answer these questions, this chapter offers a summary review of
individual theories and applies that knowledge to comparisons among and
between theories and their implications for program evaluation.
Knowledge-for-Action Theories
Five knowledge-for-action theories or processes are the focus of this chap-
ter: knowledge utilization, diffusion, implementation, transfer, and transla-
tion. Each of these theories offers evaluators an added lens to view program
and policy process and outcomes (Ottoson, 1997). But, first, a few more
questions: Are these theories? Why these five? Why the knowledge-for-
action moniker? How can they benefit evaluation?
Theory is used here with a small “t” as “a set of beliefs that underlie
action” (Weiss, 1998a, p. 55). The five selected theories all focus on knowl-
edge and change. Knowledge in some form (ideas, innovation, skills, or pol-
icy) moves in some direction (laterally , hierarchically , spreads, or exchanges)
among various stakeholders (knowledge producers, end users, or interme-
diaries) and contexts (national, community , or organizational) to achieve
some outcomes (intended benefits, unanticipated outcomes, or hijacked
effects). These theories are collectively referred to here by their intent and
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=3>>>
9KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
movement of knowledge as knowledge-for-action. Others have used this label
and multiple other terms to describe the movement of knowledge into
action (Argyis, 1993; Graham et al., 2006). Limited by space, these five the-
ories were picked because they have history , literature, practical applica-
tions, disciplinary support, and, in some cases, legal or professional
requirements. They stand in contrast to other kinds of processes, such as
“application,” which is a commonly used term but a poorly studied process
(Ottoson, 1995).
It is time these various understandings of change met as subheadings
in the same chapter. While many of these processes acknowledge roots in
knowledge utilization, it is not clear that knowledge utilization reciprocates
awareness of its extended family . The intent in this effort is not to promote
or improve the evaluation of any individual knowledge-for-action theory ,
such as doing better transfer evaluation; rather, the intent is to understand
these theories, individually and collectively , in ways that would benefit any
evaluation. For example, what can be learned from transfer theory that
would benefit any evaluation? These theories have commonalities and dif-
ferences that can widen the peripheral vision and perspective of those
involved in the evaluation of complex systems and processes. Taken indi-
vidually or together, they explain “what the outcomes are outcomes of”
(Weiss, 1998a, p. 10).
Knowledge-for-Action Theories: A Summary Review
The following summaries of individual knowledge-for-action theories iden-
tify the roots, key variables, processes, and evaluation implications that are
compared in Table 1.1. These summaries set the stage for the intertheoret-
ical exchanges that follow . The summaries draw on, but are not limited to,
the in-depth discussion of knowledge utilization, diffusion, implementation,
transfer, or translation theories in Chapters 2 through 6, respectively , in this
issue.
Knowledge Utilization. Knowledge utilization embeds itself in both
evaluation theory (Shadish, Cook, & Leviton, 1991) and program evaluation
standards (Joint Committee on Standards of Educational Evaluation, 1994).
Its roots lay at the intersection of science and philosophy and subsequent
waves of knowledge utilization research (Backer, 1991). Early on, Weiss
(1979) described multiple models of use, Patton (1997) focused on process
as use, and Henry and Mark (2003) suggested a shift to focus to influence.
Research knowledge is the what that moves in knowledge utilization theory
(see Table 1.1). Models of knowledge use have been grouped by field (pub-
lic policy or business), type of end user (researcher, consumer), or context
(organization, society; Edwards, 1991). Key contextual influences on knowl-
edge utilization include the roles of end users, timing, resources, social con-
ditions, leadership, politics, and communication (Beyer & Trice, 1982;
Kingdon, 2003; Landry , Amara, & Lamari, 2001; Yin & Gwaltney , 1981). 
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Table 1.1. Comparing Knowledge-for-Action Theories
Key Influences on Evaluation
Theory Roots What Moves? How? Process Added Lens Implications
Knowledge Intersection of Research Instrumentally Time Many meanings of Value linked to
utilization science and knowledge Conceptually Resources use, nonuse, meaning of use
philosophy Symbolically Support and misuse by intent,
As process Leadership stakeholder, and
Politics context
Diffusion Rural sociology Innovation Innovation is Innovation Spread Outcomes link to
and communication communicated characteristics adoption curve
through channels Social system Innovation may
over time among Time be adapted
members of a Communication
social system channels
Implementation Political science  Policy Top down Policy Sociopolitical factors System influences
and public Program Bottom up Context Feasibility Value transparancy
administration Contingency Stakeholders Contribution
Democratic Politics, power Process matters
Networked Values
Administration
Transfer Science and Learning Mechanisms such What moves Direction of Initial and final 
technology Technology as training, Mechanism movement what are
Policy implementing, Context Comparability of comparable
diffusing, or contexts
marketing
Translation Linguistics and Research Communication Stakeholders Language Sustain
communication products or Ongoing Politics, power stakeholders
syntheses interaction and Commitment Informed
exchange Capacity decisions
Communication Outcome link
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=5>>>
11KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
To engage the knowledge utilization lens effectively , evaluators need to under-
stand the parameters of use in context and to be savvy about how knowledge
engages in practice. “Did they use it?” is too simplistic a question.
Diffusion. In contrast to knowledge utilization, diffusion evolved
toward a more unified theory and definition (Tornatzky & Fleischer, 1990)
across multiple disciplines (Green & Johnson, 1996). Rooted in communi-
cations theory , diffusion is understood to be “the process by which an inno-
vation is communicated through certain channels over time among the
members of a social system” (Rogers, 2003, p. 7). In the unifying work of
Rogers (2003), the what that moves in diffusion is an innovation (see Table
1.1); its shape can be as diverse as a product, practice, program, policy , or
idea. An S-shaped (cumulative) curve represents the uptake, acceleration,
and decline of innovation adoption in a population. Innovation character-
istics that influence adoption include its perceived relative advantage, com-
patibility , complexity , trialability , and observability . Other broad influences
on diffusion are the social system, time, and communication channels. Eval-
uation implications emerging from diffusion theory include the concept of
spread, differences in adopters over time, and innovation adaptation.
Implementation. “Implementation is an iterative process, in which
ideas expressed as policy , are transformed into behavior, expressed as social
action” (Ottoson & Green, 1987, p. 362). Rooted in political science and
public administration, implementation reflects a stage in the policy process
sandwiched between policy development and policy impact. The what that
moves in implementation is a policy or program (see Table 1.1). Imple-
mentation models and theories have variously described this process as 
bottom up, top down, contingency , democratic, or networked (Goggin,
Bowman, Lester, & O’Toole, 1990; O’Toole, 2000). In their classic tale of
implementation, Pressman & Wildavsky (1984) describe how policy
changes as it engages multiple contexts, organizations, and stakeholders
reflecting varied agendas, value differences, administrative practices, and
politics. Continuing and contemporary challenges to macrolevel policy
implementation include economic downturns, political shifts, and net-
worked governance. Implementation adds a sociopolitical lens to evalua-
tion, with special attention to power differentials among stakeholders and
its implication for negotiating value in a transparent and democratic
process.
Transfer. The diverse transfer literature spans multiple disciplines,
fields, professions, and contexts. Transfer is both a ubiquitous and ambigu-
ous concept. Evaluators using this lens need to consider three components
central to any transfer process: the what, the context, and the mechanisms
of transfer (see Table 1.1). The what that transfers might be a product,
process, idea, skill, know-how , best practice, regulation, research, or policy
(Bozeman, 1988; Haskell, 2001; Mossberger & Harold, 2003). The context
of origin shapes what transfers and the context of application whether and
how what is transferred engages in a new setting. For example, in learning
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=6>>>
12 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
transfer, key contextual variables include learner characteristics, the work
site, and pedagogy (Baldwin & Ford, 1988); in technology transfer, key vari-
ables are location, economics, and mission (Bozeman, 2000). Transfer move-
ment is most often described as unidirectional, but the direction also might 
be lateral or hierarchical. The movement or mechanism of transfer 
may involve other change processes; for example, learning may transfer by
the mechanism of training, or policy may transfer by the mechanism of
implementation.
Translation. With roots in applied linguistics and communication,
knowledge translation is a transdisciplinary , multilevel knowledge-for-action
theory . In the recent explosion of knowledge translation literature (T ugwell,
Robinson, Grimshaw , & Santesso, 2006), translation has been conceptual-
ized as the practice, science, and art of bridging the “know-do gap” between
knowledge accumulation and use (World Health Organization, 2006). The
what that moves in knowledge translation is research products or synthesis
(see Table 1.1). Knowledge translation assumes a path that has been vari-
ously described as multidirectional, circular, or iterative; however, its stages
or situations are described by some as unidirectional, for example, knowl-
edge translation from basic to applied research (Hiss, 2004). The research-
initiated messages of this communications-driven process are translated
with stakeholders through a complex set of interactions, including synthe-
sizing research, developing actionable messages, improving practitioner or
public awareness, and adapting and reporting findings to multiple audiences
and contexts. Fidelity is not a key determinant of translation success.
Added Lenses and Implications for Evaluation
From individual theory summaries, this chapter now turns to cross-theory
comparisons using the added lenses introduced in Table 1.1. By virtue of
their emphasis, uniqueness, research, or roots, these lenses add in-depth
understandings of selected components of the change process. The follow-
ing discussion explores common and disparate ground among theories and
the evaluation implications for the set of theories.
Translation Theory Adds the Lens of Language. In practice, these
various terms, such as transfer or use, are tossed around continuously , infor-
mally , and often lightly . Translation theory reminds us that language matters.
For example, one stakeholder’s “transfer” might be another stakeholder’s
“implementation.” These terms mean something, and evaluations benefit
when that meaning is understood and shared in context.
All of these knowledge-for-action theories evolved over time. Such evo-
lution includes adding, expanding, or sharpening theoretical constructs.
Examples include the movement from instrumental to conceptual under-
standings of use (Weiss, 1998b), the addition of an implementation phase
to the innovation adoption process of diffusion, and the increasing role 
of context in transfer theory . For some theories, such as implementation,
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=7>>>
13KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
evolution has meant waxing, waning, and morphing over time in levels of
interest, disciplinary commitment, and focus. While some theories evolved,
new ones, such as translation, were born. To know a theory at one point in
time and use that experience and language to embrace or to stereotype it
henceforth is fallacy . Even if the language of theory remains the same, the
concepts and constructs may not.
Could any one of these theories be the overarching theory to all oth-
ers? While knowledge utilization may attempt to float off with the umbrella
metaphor (Backer, 1991), it is not without challenges. The roots, the con-
cepts, the language, and the culture around these theories show them to be
related but not synonymous. Multiple theoretical umbrellas covering dif-
ferent aspects of a change process may be a more apt metaphor than one
umbrella covering all.
Not only is an umbrella a problematic metaphor among theories, it is
a problematic metaphor within theories. Diffusion, with its synthesizing
work by Rogers (2003), probably comes closer to having a unified theory
and common conceptual model than any of the other theories. The other
four knowledge-for-action theories comprise multiple, even competing, the-
ories that may be comprehensive, context driven, variable illuminating, or
field specific. While some lament the lack of unifying theory , others reject 
or lament the idea of a single theory as antithetical to context-specific change
(Estabrooks, Thompson, Lovely , & Hofmeyer, 2006).
Despite differences, commonalities exist among theories. For example,
an instrumental understanding of knowledge utilization, early transfer the-
ory , and top-down implementation all use fidelity as a criterion of success,
that is, knowledge, technology , or policy is unchanged by context. In con-
trast, a symbolic understanding of knowledge utilization and a bottom-up
view of implementation theory share a political understanding of change
that includes knowledge and policy adaptation as part of a definition of suc-
cess. Furthermore, bottom-up implementation and translation theory share
a common interest in early stakeholder involvement in the change process
and local relevance.
The commonalities, the differences, and the crossovers make the transla-
tion, interpretation, and retranslation of these theories a process in itself. The
evolution of these theories can result in greater commonalities among the the-
ories than within them. Language matters, and so does meaning in context.
Transfer and Diffusion Theories Add the Lens of Movement. The
five selected theories all consider how knowledge moves among various
stakeholders and contexts to achieve outcomes. Transfer theory adds mul-
tiple views on linear point A to point B movement, and diffusion adds the
concept of spread. Together these theories sharpen the lenses on what
moves, where it moves, the pattern of movement, the context of movement,
and key influences on movement.
What Moves. Table 1.1 summarizes the what that moves in each of these
theories that shapes the change process and outcomes. Understanding the
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=8>>>
14 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
what is consistent with evaluation theory about the need to understand the
evaluand before marshaling value indicators and knowledge construction
procedures. The evaluand shapes process and outcomes.
How It Moves. Movement of the what might be one-way , bidirectional,
multidirectional, or some combination of these. Lateral and hierarchical
concepts of movement may be as much about power as they are about struc-
ture. Early knowledge utilization, implementation, and transfer theories
emphasized one-way , top-down movement. Researchers, politicians, or
entrepreneurs created knowledge, policy , or technology that moved to
intended beneficiaries. Later theories of bottom-up or evolutionary imple-
mentation and participatory research tended to keep the one-way focus, but
turned the process on its head by moving the what from the community or
consumers to researchers and politicians. Translation theory purports a bidi-
rectional approach with knowledge created at multiple points. Diffusion and
networked approaches to implementation go beyond the “from-to” move-
ment to the concept of spread or the metaphor of a web. Keeping an eye on
such dizzying movement requires that evaluators use more than one pair of
lenses. For example, evaluating a bottom-up innovation that became a top-
down policy before diffusing to other sites required a broader lens than any
one theory could offer (Hubbard & Ottoson, 1997).
Context of Movement. In a contemporary understanding of all these the-
ories, context matters. It shapes process and outcomes. General contextual
variables that cut across these theories include timing, location, opportu-
nity , resources, social support, leadership, organizational structures, poli-
tics, and communication. Transfer theory assumes that the comparability
between starting and ending contexts aids transfer. Implementation and
translation theories anticipate contextual differences and influences in shap-
ing what moves. Diffusion theory considers how contextual factors, including
social norms, affect decision making about innovation adoption. No matter
how new the innovation, rigorous the knowledge production, or savvy the
policy , context has the potential to shape it, sink it, or salvage it. Evaluators
need to work with stakeholders to identify and account for contextual 
influences.
Key Stakeholders. Determination of the priority end users and inter-
mediaries is shaped by theory . The priority end user for knowledge utiliza-
tion is the decision maker; for diffusion, the priority end user is the adopter,
which changes over time; for implementation, the priority end user is the
intended beneficiary; for transfer, the priority end user is the consumer,
organization, or country; and for translation, the priority end user might be
one of the six P’s: public, patient, press, practitioner, policymaker, or private
sector (T ugwell et al., 2006). The felt need, motivation, and receptivity of
end users shape whether and how knowledge, policy , or an innovation is
adopted or received. To reach the end user, individual theories identify some
type of intermediary or mechanism between the producers and users of
knowledge. For example, diffusion has change agents and opinion leaders
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=9>>>
15KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
(Rogers, 2003), translation suggests knowledge brokers (Lomas, 2000), and
transfer describes various mechanisms. Whether and how the intermediary
role is performed has the potential to shape process and outcomes.
In summary , the transfer and diffusion lenses add multiple perspectives
on the complexity of change. It is not just what moves, how it moves, the
context through which it moves, or the key stakeholders that influences 
the process and outcomes of programs, policies, and innovations. It is all of
these combined.
Knowledge Utilization Adds the Lens of Use. All of these knowl-
edge-for-action theories connect with use at some point. Although the what
of knowledge utilization theory is research knowledge, this theory sharp-
ens the lens on two key variables to consider in evaluation: timing and
fidelity .
Time. The length of time it takes for the what—knowledge, innovation,
or policy—to move from production to action has varying importance for
these theories and evaluation. Timeliness or least delay (Hiss, 2004) gener-
ally is considered a good thing. Implementation theory might like quick
results, but its practical side prepares for the effects of time and context on
policy and program intent. As knowledge utilization theory evolved (Weiss,
1998b), the time dimension in its theories grew from a short gap into long
and winding roads. Finding the link between research in one decade and
informed policy change in another (Ottoson et al., 2009) changed the work
of evaluation from attribution to contribution. In diffusion theory , adopters
vary over time, with early adopters more likely to be social leaders, edu-
cated, and connected to an expansive network compared to late adopters,
who tend to be more skeptical and have lower socioeconomic status, fewer
resources, and smaller networks. In translation theory , the use or transla-
tion of ideas is conceived as an ongoing time line rather than an end-of-
process event. The time dimension in these theories shapes evaluation
methods, as well as key variables.
Fidelity and V aluing.How much can the what—knowledge, innovation,
technology , or policy—change and still be considered successfully trans-
ferred, used, diffused, translated, or implemented? What counts as success
from the perspective of these knowledge-for-action theories? This is a core
evaluation question about valuing.
A contemporary understanding of all these theories allows for some
level of change in the what as it moves across time, context, stakeholders,
intents, and resources. These theories are awash with the realities of change.
Knowledge utilization theory asks an array of value-related questions about
how much of what is used over time, by whom, and how well. From an
implementation perspective, the increasing involvement of networks
ensures increasing numbers of stakeholders and competing agendas that
challenge notions of fidelity and complicate valuing. Translation focuses less
on changing knowledge than on changing the message, or the mode of mes-
sage delivery , so that the research is accessible and understood by intended
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=10>>>
16 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
beneficiaries. Diffusion does not hold to the invariance of the innovation;
rather, it anticipates adaptability to fit the context as an aid to adoption and
maintenance over time. Even transfer theory , associated most closely with
a fidelity stance, recognizes that change in the what may occur.
The extent to which fidelity is important in these various change
processes depends on several factors. First, it depends on what is being
moved. Fidelity concerns become increasingly anticipated as abstract ideas
move toward more concrete representations of knowledge—for example,
reformulated messages, packaged programs, or boxed innovations. Second,
the importance of fidelity depends on stakeholder stance. The inventor,
politician, or researcher who produced the innovation, policy , or knowledge
may have a higher stake or expectation of fidelity than intended users, ben-
eficiaries, or consumers, who have to figure out how to act in context. This
leaves a critical role for evaluators to negotiate among stakeholders about
expectations of fidelity and their role in determining success. Finally , when
the time dimension is added to characteristics of what is moved and over
which context, the what itself becomes increasingly challenging to find, let
alone measure its fidelity .
Implementation Theory Adds the Social-Political Lens. With an
exploration of social-political factors within each of these knowledge-for-
action theories, the implementation lens sharpens a view of power,
resources, and relationships within theories. No matter how strong the what,
how well timed its arrival, how supportive the context, or how receptive the
stakeholders, social-political factors can shape both the processes and out-
comes of change. Who has the resources or political capital to benefit from
research knowledge, the latest innovation, or changed policy? Who has the
power to receive that what and break it, shape it, or share it? The imple-
mentation lens has particular relevance to valuing theory in evaluation.
What is valued? Who decides?
While the initial impetus here was to use the implementation lens to
look within knowledge-for-action theories, that lens instead is used to look
at the whole set of theories themselves. What are visible through the imple-
mentation lens are not just theories; these are also movements, cultures, and
institutions. The first observation is that these theories spring from differ-
ent disciplines, issues, and contexts. Although they may share some com-
mon roots, these theories start with different assumptions, intent, and
disciplinary perspective. Few professionals have an ecumenical education
that spans all of these theories, credentialed competence in them, or the
ability to break the tower of theoretical and methodological Babel down to
a common language.
Added to this observation is a kind of referencing or dismissal among
theories of each other. True enough, there is some intertheory referencing,
particularly to use. It is the lack of references among theories, however, that
exposes the gaps among them. For example, it is unclear how the knowledge
brokers of the new millennium translation (Lomas, 2000) have benefited
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=11>>>
17KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
from the experiences of the linking agents who played an early role in dis-
semination and translation (Havelock, 1967). Unawareness is one thing, but
disparaging remarks among the theories take the separation a step further.
For example, diffusion theory explains that the adoption of an innovation is
not necessarily “a passive role of just implementing a standard template of
the new idea” (Rogers, 2003, p. 17). “Mere transfer” has been used to criti-
cize the inadequacy of transfer theory to explain the complexities of moving
learning into practice. It is hard to imagine that anyone who understood con-
temporary implementation or transfer theory would refer to such processes
as “passive,” “just,” or “mere.” What is going on here?
One explanation from an implementation perspective is that these the-
ories have been institutionalized in various ways. For example, the National
Institutes of Health has established the Office of Transfer Technology; the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has established the Division of
Diabetes Translation; the health administration field has launched the Jour-
nal of Implementation Science; Rogers’s book Diffusion of Innovations (2003)
is in its fifth edition; and the University of Alberta has established the
Knowledge Utilization Studies Program. The institutionalization of these
theories shows a commitment or generation of resources, legitimization,
agenda setting, voice, and authority . The lens for viewing change gets set,
at least for a time.
T urned on itself, the implementation lens shows the potential shelf life
of these theories. The implementation boom of the 1970s dropped off by the
mid-1990s when implementation was pronounced dead. By the early mil-
lennium, implementation was reborn in the health administration field. Will
the current explosion of literature in translation theory follow a similar path?
Recommendations for Evaluators: Adjust the Lenses
For evaluators negotiating within and across the culture and context of the
theories reviewed here, staying grounded in evaluation theory provides per-
spective. The additional theoretical lenses reviewed here complement eval-
uation theory by providing depth and perspective on the change process.
Evaluations benefit when theories are exposed and understood, variables
influencing change are clarified, use is revealed for all its complexities, and
the context within and around change is made transparent.
Change theories inform evaluation theories of social programming, valu-
ing, knowledge use, knowledge construction, and evaluation practice (Shadish
et al., 1991). For example, “good” social program theory explains the evalu-
and, including the intended change process by which it proposes to contribute
to social betterment. While some evaluators and stakeholders place empha-
sis on the outcomes of social program theory , “lenses” was deliberately cho-
sen as a metaphor for the intent of this chapter. The change process needs to
be seen, its workings visible, and the influence of process on outcomes trans-
parent. Outcomes are not conceived in an immaculate process.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=12>>>
18 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
The values inherent in these über theories of knowledge-for-action offer
what counts as success (or not) and why . They direct attention to different
process indicators and outcomes. For example, success from a transfer per-
spective might be an intact skill moving from a training context to a work
site. From a knowledge utilization perspective, this example represents
instrumental use rather than conceptual use. Neither of these theories looks
at knowledge spread, an indicator of success from a diffusion perspective.
Together these theories help answer the difficult questions of evaluation:
What will be valued? Who decides?
Evaluation practice and the use of evaluation findings are enhanced by an
understanding of these not just as theories but also as supporting disciplines,
professional cultures, and institutionalized perspectives. This acculturation of
change shapes an understanding of key variables, stakeholders, values, and
outcomes. For example, an evaluator working in a context shaped by diffusion
and translation theories benefits from an understanding that use of evaluation
findings is shaped by more than communication messages, language, and opin-
ion leaders. Adding an implementation perspective sharpens an understand-
ing of the role of context, power, and resources. Evaluators often cross multiple
boundaries in their work. They are not bound to praise translation, push dif-
fusion, or punish transfer as the only understanding of change. Our loyalties
are not to any single process, but rather to understanding whether and how
process unfolds and what its implications are for valuing.
Taken together, an understanding of change as theory and culture influ-
ences evaluators’ understanding of process, flags key indicators, and
explains use in context in ways that influence knowledge construction 
and evaluation practice.
References
Argyis, C. (1993). Knowledge for action: A guide to overcoming barriers to organizational
change. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Backer, T. E. (1991). Knowledge utilization: The third wave. Knowledge: Creation, Dif-
fusion, Utilization, 12(3), 225–240.
Baldwin, T. T., & Ford, J. K. (1988). Transfer of training: A review and directions for
further research. Personnel Psychology, 41(1), 63–105.
Beyer, J. M., & Trice, H. M. (1982). The utilization process: A conceptual framework
and synthesis of empirical findings. Administrative Science Quarterly, 27, 591–622.
Bozeman, B. (1988). Evaluating technology transfer and diffusion. Evaluation and 
Program Planning, 11(1), 63–104.
Bozeman, B. (2000). Technology transfer and public policy: A review of research and
theory. Research Policy, 29(4–5), 627–655.
Edwards, L. A. (1991). Using knowledge and technology to improve the quality of life of
people who have disabilities. Philadelphia: Knowledge Utilization Program, Pennsyl-
vania College of Optometry.
Estabrooks, C., Thompson, D., Lovely, J., & Hofmeyer, A. (2006). A guide to knowledge
translation theory. Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Professions, 26,25–36.
Goggin, M. L., Bowman, A. O., Lester, J. P., & O’Toole, L. J. (1990).Implementation the-
ory and practice: Toward a third generation. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=13>>>
19KNOWLEDGE-FOR-ACTION THEORIES IN EVALUATION
Graham, I., Logan, J., Harrison, M., Straus, S., Tetroe, J., Caswell, W., et al. (2006). Lost
in knowledge translation: Time for a map? Journal of Continuing Education in the
Health Professions, 26, 13–24.
Green, L. W., & Johnson, J. L. (1996). Dissemination and utilization of health promo-
tion and disease prevention knowledge: Theory, research and experience. Canadian
Journal of Public Health, 87(Suppl. 2), 11–17.
Haskell, R. E. (2001). Transfer of learning: Cognition, instruction, and reasoning.Orlando,
FL: Academic Press.
Havelock, R. G. (1967). Dissemination and translation roles in education and other fields:
A comparative analysis. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social
Research. Retrieved October 3, 2009, from ERIC (ED015535).
Henry, G. T., & Mark, M. M. (2003). Beyond use: Understanding evaluation’s influence
on attitudes and actions. American Journal of Evaluation, 24(3), 203–314.
Hiss, R. (2004, January 12–13). Fundamental issues in translational research.Introductory
session at the conference From Clinical Trials to Community: The Science of Trans-
lating Diabetes and Obesity Research, Bethesda, MD. Retrieved October 3, 2009, from
http://www.niddk.nih.gov/fund/other/diabetes-translation/conf-publication.pdf
Hubbard, L., & Ottoson, J. M. (1997). When a bottom-up innovation meets itself as a
top down policy: The AVID untracking program. Science Communication, 19 (1),
41–55.
Joint Committee on Standards of Educational Evaluation. (1994). The program evalua-
tion standards (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kingdon, J. W. (2003). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Landry, R., Amara, N., & Lamari, M. (2001). Climbing the ladder of research utilization.
Science Communication, 122(4), 396–422.
Lomas, J. (2000). Using “linkage and exchange” to move research into policy at a Cana-
dian foundation. Health Affairs, 19(3), 236–240.
Mossberger, K., & Harold, W. (2003). Policy transfer as a form of prospective policy
evaluation: Challenges and recommendations. Public Administration Review, 63 (4),
428–440.
O’Toole, L. J. (2000). Research on policy implementation: Assessment and prospects.
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 10(2), 263–288.
Ottoson, J. M. (1995). Reclaiming the concept of application: From social to techno-
logical process and back again. Adult Education Quarterly, 46, 1–30.
Ottoson, J. M. (1997). Beyond transfer of training: Using multiple lenses to assess com-
munity education programs. In A. D. Rose, & M. A. Leahy (Eds.), Assessing Adult
Learning in Diverse Settings: Current Issues and Approaches (pp. 87–96). New Direc-
tions for Adult and Continuing Education, no. 75. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ottoson, J. M., & Green, L. W. (1987). Reconciling concept and context: Theory of
implementation. Advances in Health Education and Promotion, 2, 353–382.
Ottoson, J. M., Green, L. W., Beery, W. L., Senter, S. K., Cahill, C. L., Pearson, D. C., et al.
(2009). Policy-contribution assessment and field-building analysis of the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation’s Active Living Research Program. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 36(2, Supplement 1), S34–S43.
Patton, M. Q. (1997).Utilization-focused evaluation(3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pressman, J. L., & Wildavsky, A. (1984). Implementation (3rd ed.). Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Leviton, L. C. (1991). Foundations of program evaluation:
Theories of practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tornatzky, L. G., & Fleischer, M. (1990). The process of technological innovation. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
<<<PAGE=14>>>
20 KNOWLEDGE UTILIZATION, DIFFUSION, IMPLEMENTATION, TRANSFER
Tugwell, P., Robinson, V., Grimshaw, J., & Santesso, N. (2006). Systematic reviews and
knowledge translation. Bulletin of the World Health Organisation, 84, 643–651.
Weiss, C. H. (1979). The many meanings of research utilization. Public Administration
Review, 39(5), 426–431.
Weiss, C. H. (1998a). Evaluation (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Weiss, C. H. (1998b). Have we learned from anything new about the use of evaluation?
American Journal of Evaluation, 19(1), 21–33.
World Health Organization. (2006). Bridging the “know-do” gap: Meeting on knowledge
translation in global health. Geneva: World Health Organisation.
Yin, R. K., & Gwaltney, M. K. (1981). Knowledge utilization as a networking process.
Knowledge: Creation, Diffusion, and Utilization, 2(4), 555–580.
JUDITH M. OTTOSON is an independent evaluation consultant and an adjunct lec-
turer at San Francisco State University . She initiated this project when she was
an associate professor at the Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia
State University , Atlanta.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR EVALUATION • DOI: 10.1002/ev
 1534875x, 2009, 124, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ev.310 by <Shibboleth>-member@80182490.imf.org, Wiley Online Library on [17/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License