<<<PAGE=1>>>
Vol.:(0123456789)
Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-018-9334-4
1 3
DISCUSSION AND COMMENTARY
Policy‑making and truthiness: Can existing policy models 
cope with politicized evidence and willful ignorance 
in a “post‑fact” world?
Anthony Perl1 · Michael Howlett2 · M. Ramesh3
Published online: 18 September 2018 
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018
Abstract
From “alternative facts” to “fake news,” in recent years the influence of misinformation 
on political life has become amplified in unprecedented ways through electronic commu -
nications and social media. While misinformation and spin are age-old tactics in policy 
making, and poor information and poorly informed opinion a constant challenge for policy 
analysts, both the volume of erroneous evidence and the difficulties encountered in dif -
ferentiating subjectively constructed opinion from objectively verified policy inputs have 
increased significantly. The resulting amalgamation of unsubstantiated and verifiable data 
and well and poorly informed opinion raises many questions for a policy science which 
emerged in an earlier, less problematic era. This article examines these developments and 
their provenance and asks whether, and how, existing policy making models and practices 
developed and advocated during an earlier era of a sharper duality between fact and fiction 
have grappled with the new world of “truthiness,” and whether these models require seri -
ous revision in light of the impact of social media and other forces affecting contemporary 
policy discourses and processes.
Keywords False news · Alternative facts · Truthiness · Policy theory · Advocacy coalition 
framework · Multiple streams framework · Policy analysis · Policy science
Introduction: fake news, alternate facts and the assumptions 
of the policy sciences
It has been an unquestioned axiom over the history of the policy sciences that the purpose 
of policy studies and analyses is to improve policy-making by developing policy options 
based on the articulation of realistic solutions to carefully defined problems (Lasswell 
 * Michael Howlett 
 howlett@sfu.ca
1 Urban Studies and Department of Political Science, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada
2 Department of Political Science, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC, Canada
3 Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
<<<PAGE=2>>>
582 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
1970, 1971). While a perfect match is not always possible and governments can and do 
often under- or over-react to problems and issues which may be better or less well-defined 
(Maor 2012, 2014, 2015), the predominant idea motivating the policy sciences is that some 
efforts at calibrating government efforts and problem severity should be the aim of pol-
icy analysis and that a better policy is one which embodies this balance. This view has a 
long history in the policy sciences, going back to the pragmatics of Harold Lasswell in his 
early work on the subject (Lasswell and Lerner 1951) and has been reiterated most recently 
in the manifestation of much the same worldview in the many writings of the evidence-
based and evidence-informed policy movements (Bhatta 2002; Packwood 2002; Sanderson 
2002).
In recent years, however, a concern has arisen that this link between the meta-rationale 
for policy analysis and the actual workings of the policy process may have been disrupted, 
if not severed, by the well-publicized growth of disinformation campaigns, “alternate” 
alternative facts and the willful desire of many politicians and members of the public to 
avoid recognizing and engaging with real and emerging problems such as climate change 
(Kakutani 2018; McIntyre 2018; Kavanaugh and Rich 2018; Stoker 2018; Southwell et al 
2018). Policy analysis and policy-making, it could be argued, have been impaired by this 
descent from the realm of truth and knowledge into, and beyond, what the satirist Ste-
phen Colbert derisively termed the growth of “truthiness,” that is opinion-driven selective 
provision of information or, worse, reliance upon intentionally false data and the alternate 
realities of conspiracy theory-driven worldviews and judgments (Dossey 2014; Proctor and 
Schiebinger 2008; Warnier 2013).
While conflict, misinformation and spin have been perennial tactics in policy making, 
the increase in recent years of both the volume of erroneous evidence and the increasing 
challenge of differentiating subjectively constructed phenomena from objectively verified 
policy inputs have increasingly raised such fears (Macafee 2013; Hong and Nadler 2016). 
The explosive growth and pervasive rise of social media and internet journalism as key 
sources of information in many countries, in particular, have been singled out has as force 
multipliers for these phenomena, often augmenting them in a malicious compilation of 
deliberate misinformation, lies and misdirection (Theocharis and van Deth 2018; Green-
wood et  al. 2016). In a dangerous brew the endogenous propagation of alternative facts 
can overlap with, and often amplify, the effect of exogenous campaigns to manufacture 
misinformation, paradoxically increasing the confidence of the uninformed in the accuracy 
of their views (Benegal 2018; Johnson and Kaye 2016; Kruger and Dunning 1999; Motta 
et al. 2018).
As Vosoughi et al. (2018: 1146) have noted, “Foundational theories of decision-mak -
ing, cooperation, communication, and markets all view some conceptualization of truth or 
accuracy as central to the functioning of nearly every human endeavor.” Hence successful 
efforts to erode the distinction between reality and imagined truth, it is alleged, threaten the 
continued viability of the evidence-based policy making paradigm of the policy sciences, 
potentially undermining the principles of policy studies laboriously built up over the past 
75 years (McIntyre 2018; Kakutani 2018; Mintrom 2007; Carlsson 2017).
This article examines these such developments and asks whether, and how, existing pol-
icy frameworks have been able to grapple with the new world of false news and alternate 
facts. It discusses the epistemological bases of the policy sciences and the role of social 
media and other internet-based sources in affecting the kinds and types of knowledge uti-
lized in political discourses and policy processes. It examines the conceptual implications 
and growing influence on policy-making of inaccurate, and often camouflaged, “evidence” 
on three commonly cited and deployed frameworks of policy-making—the policy cycle
<<<PAGE=3>>>
583Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
model, the advocacy coalition framework (ACF) and the multiple streams framework 
(MSF).
Ultimately, it is argued that while popular and media portrayals of policy-making and 
policy analysis as purely technical exercises in scientific rationality may be difficult to rec-
oncile with the new reality of false or evidence-free impaired policy making, the “stand-
ard” policy analytical frameworks found in the policy sciences prove to be quite robust in 
the face of these new circumstances. The models used in the discipline are very capable of 
identifying the key features of policy processes in the era of truthiness and the nature of the 
challenges policy-makers face in creating solutions to address policy problems in a world 
filled with post-factual inputs and influences and even suggest some strategies that can be 
used to mitigate their impact.
The epistemologies of the policy sciences: reason, (willful) ignorance 
and malice in public policy‑making
Concern about a future in which policy is pursued with disregard for facts has been voiced 
by many prominent public figures. In an address to the 2018 graduating class at Rice Uni-
versity, for example, former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg stated:
Today, those in politics routinely dismiss any inconvenient information, no matter 
how factual, as fake – and they routinely say things that are demonstrably false. … 
many of those at the highest levels of power see the plain truth as a threat. They fear 
it. They deny it. And they attack it …. The trend toward elected officials propagating 
alternate realities – or winking at those who do – is one of the most serious dangers 
facing democracies. Free societies depend on citizens who recognize that deceit in 
government isn’t something to shrug your shoulders at. (Bloomberg 2018)
Of course, the general problem of false, biased or misleading information entering into 
political discussions and policy deliberations is not new and the policy sciences have 
always recognized both the limits or bounds of knowledge in policy-making (Simon 1967, 
1978; Jones 2002) and the socially constructed nature of policy problems, solutions and 
targets (Schneider and Ingram 1993, 2005; Foucault 1979; Lemke 2000). Both of these 
components of policy-making and their impact on policy work and analysis have been a 
steady subject of debate and interest in the field for decades (Fischer 1987; Fischer and 
Forrester 1993). While new developments thus may challenge relatively naive or popu-
lar beliefs in the objectivity of evidence and technocratic views of the objective nature of 
policy analysis and policy-making uninformed by these internal debates, it is unclear if, 
and how, these developments affect the models and frameworks with which well-informed 
members of the policy sciences community actually work.
With respect to the role of knowledge or the epistemologies of policy-making and policy 
analysis, policy scientists have always viewed themselves as following a mode of “speak -
ing truth to power” (Wildavsky 1979); that is, assembling and presenting verifiable facts 
and evidence about what works and what does not to policy-makers. Indeed, for decades, 
using this rationalist and instrumental theory of knowledge (Tribe 1972; Goodin 1980; 
Hawkesworth 1992), generations of policy scholars have advanced, applied, and refined 
models that interpret the policy making process based on the principle assumption that all
<<<PAGE=4>>>
584 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
policy participants are usually both willing and able to distinguish fact from fiction, even if 
conflicts over meaning and strategy may be endemic to the politics of policy-making.
Epistemologically speaking, the underlying theory of knowledge behind the mainstream 
policy sciences, existing as a pre-supposition for analysis and deliberation, has always been 
a “realist” one; that is, a stance toward the world in which it is assumed that “evidence” 
objectively exists and can be marshalled by careful study and analysis to address specific 
kinds of policy problems but always with the recognition both of the limits of cognition, 
or the “boundedness” of rationality, and of the perpetual desire of self-interested parties to 
hijack, distort or otherwise re-orient public processes toward their ends and goals (Jones 
2002; Habermas 1974).
In the words of uncertainty theorists, the former concern, relating to the difficulties of 
predicting accurately all possible courses of action and their implications, has led policy 
scientists to deal with a second epistemological concern—ignorance—which is thought 
to be a major source of policy failure even when polices are well intentioned (Bovens and 
t’Hart 1996; Howlett 2012). Of course the policy sciences are well prepared to deal with 
such a lack of knowledge as long as it represents a deficiency in existing knowledge that 
can be ameliorated by careful knowledge transmission and persistent education activities. 
In fact some scholars have characterized the work of policy analysis as a whole in precisely 
these terms, that is, as involving principally the effort to generate and disseminate as much 
policy relevant knowledge as possible, ensuring decisions are taken which are fully cog-
nizant of all “known–knowns” (Hawkesworth 1992; Chow and Sarin 2002; Logan 2009), 
reducing the number of “unknown–knowns” while dealing with the risk and uncertainty 
caused by the presence of both “known” and “unknown” unknowns (Morgan and Henrion 
1990; Manski 2013).
This epistemological stance serves not only as a call for more analysis but also as a 
caveat against hubris or the prudent acknowledgment of the probable existence of igno-
rance and gaps in policy knowledge (Gross 2010; Curzon and Kontoleon 2016). That is, 
the recognition of the boundedness of knowledge is seen not as an excuse not to undertake 
abandon good faith efforts at empirical description and analysis of the social world and the 
impact of specific kinds of government interventions within it, but rather as a warning to 
all parties of the imperfect nature of knowledge, the difficulties involved in predicting the 
future, and the need to hedge reason against uncertainty and act in a prudential or precau-
tionary fashion (Dunn 1991; Van der Sluijs 2005).
Although studied much less frequently, the policy sciences also recognize the possibil-
ity of a third, more Machiavellian, stance toward, and practice of, the generation and use of 
policy knowledge, in which a much more malicious intent informs policy deliberations and 
actions and the concern for “speaking truth” remains a distant second to “winning” pol-
icy battles (Goodin 1980; Riker 1986; Schultz 2017). It is well recognized, of course, that 
policy actors sometimes do spin and misinform policy making by introducing inaccurate 
information into policy debates and deliberations, either intentionally or out of ignorance, 
sometimes in a major, concerted way as occurred in the 1960s and 1970s around tobacco 
control and more recently around global warming (Oreskes and Conway 2011).
Whether such actions are seen to be taken for the personal enrichment of proponents 
or for evil purposes such as the elimination, oppression or exploitation of rival groups or 
ethnicities, malice in this sense is a rival epistemological stance to the policy analytical 
orthodoxy in which instrumental reason is still present in policy-making but is exercised 
in the individual or group interest rather than for the public good. As highlighted by many 
studies of corruption and clientelism in government decision-making, for example (Scott 
1969; Treisman 2007), this stance toward knowledge is an alternative to prudential reason
<<<PAGE=5>>>
585Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
which utilizes certain types of evidence and facts while ignoring others in promoting and 
disseminating self-interested policy alternatives. In such efforts, lies and mis-statements 
and appeals to emotional and cultural stereotypes and attribution of false motives to rivals 
and targets are quite common (Goodin 1980; Maor 2015) and the existence of this way of 
thinking about, and “doing,” policy is no surprise to the policy science community which, 
again, sees its role as actively discouraging or, at least, harnessing such efforts to the pro-
duction of public value (Moore 1994; Schultze 1977).
Like ignorance, the malicious use of knowledge to manipulate policy processes is 
also anathema to traditional policy science, not only on moral grounds, since it typically 
replaces the public interest with the private as the chief criterion for policy adoption, but 
also on epistemological ones as it undermines the ability of analysts to accurately describe 
and convey an objective appraisal of costs and benefits to policy-makers in that common 
interest. But in the policy analysis community, it is again considered to be precisely the 
role of policy scientists and analysts to reveal these malicious lapses and re-orient policy-
making back toward a more evidentiary, rational, base. That is, while it is acknowledged 
that disinterested truth may not always prevail in policy deliberations, and it is well rec-
ognized that in the final analysis the political merits of strategies often outweigh technical 
considerations, it is expected that outright falsehoods and misleading statements—such as 
“birtherism” or the propagation of the false claim that US President Barack Obama was 
born in Kenya and not Hawaii in order to undermine his legitimacy and that of the Demo-
cratic Party to which he belonged (Richey 2017)—will be called out by policy analysts 
and ultimately eliminated from deliberations by prudent decision-makers concerned about 
policy efficiency and effectiveness (Dunn 1988; Webber 1992).
In other words, whether a decision taken upon reviewing analytical outputs turns out 
to maximize public welfare or not, facts are expected to stand apart from falsehoods dur -
ing the formulation of policy options and deliberation on implementation strategies and 
choices. And policy scientists have long advocated enhanced accountability, transparency 
and surveillance, for example, in order to minimize the occurrence of malicious practices 
and restrict discussion to more disinterested sources of knowledge and opinion (Galanter 
1980). Elite displeasure with overt manipulation of populations and governments in self-
interested directions has also served to check many of its excesses. These efforts, for exam-
ple, have been greatly aided by the press and other traditional media who found that expos-
ing malicious misinformation offers a ripe source for news, scandal, readers and viewers.
Eliminating ignorance and discouraging maliciousness have thus not surprisingly been 
two pillars of the policy sciences which have accompanied its realist orientation toward 
the provision and deployment of knowledge in the policy process. While some uncertainty 
and ignorance is thought to be unavoidable—such as imperfect knowledge of future con-
ditions and impacts which constitutes an unavoidable upward bound on analysis (Simon 
1978; Howlett and Nair 2017)—in general, many policy scientists until recently were con-
tent that their efforts toward the advocacy of prudence, transparency and education with 
the expectation that the quality of evidence and debate forward in policy-making would 
improve as a result and lead, in turn, to improved policy-making and policy outcomes. The 
emergence of claims of false news and alternative facts cited above, however, has brought 
to the forefront a fourth epistemological position or stance toward knowledge which policy 
scientists and analysis had largely discounted in the past, that is, the significance of willful 
ignorance in which facts and evidence which contradict or undermine strongly held opin-
ions and beliefs are denied, obstinately contested or simply ignored.
Willful ignorance, the study of which Proctor and Schiebinger (2008) have termed 
the subject of the new field of “agnotology,” has always existed in the form of wishful
<<<PAGE=6>>>
586 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
thinking, problem denial and the refusal to recognize facts on the ground which violate 
strongly held religious or ideological beliefs—from the anti-Copernican views of the eight-
eenth and nineteenth century Catholic Church to the beliefs of regime apologists in the 
merits and progress made by the Chinese Great Leap Forward. But it is also the hallmark 
epistemological characteristic of the era of truthiness, one in which false facts, claims of 
fake news and, in general, a lack of knowledge and expertise is upheld for self-interested 
personal, economic or partisan purposes (Croissant 2014). This is the sphere of the con-
spiracy theories and problem denialism that have been a feature of recent political dis-
courses and electoral politics in many countries. Contemporary examples range from the 
promotion of entire worlds of alternate facts and realities—found in concerns about “deep 
states” and various racist and other kinds of conspiracies (“Pizzagate,” “I am Q,” “Black 
Helicopters” and the like) (Oliver and Wood 2014; Pasek et al. 2015), to the denial of a gun 
problem in the USA, the unsubstantiated fiscal and economic dividends predicted by UK 
Brexiteers, or the befuddled obtuseness of climate change deniers contradicting the weight 
of the scientific evidence marshalled against them (Björnberg et al. 2017; Del Vicario et al. 
2017; Oliver and Wood 2014).
These four epistemological stances and their problematic aspects are set out in Table  1 
along with the practices and techniques typically espoused by the policy science commu-
nity for dealing with their challenges.
This fourth stance toward policy knowledge and evidence is particularly significant in 
that it undermines the rationality assumption of policy studies and promotes the acceptance 
and adoption of strategies and programs based on misleading evidence or unsubstantiated 
uninformed opinion, and is also easily subjected to malicious manipulation (Newman et al. 
2012). While it has been present in earlier eras in regimes which, for example, centered 
policy-making on the prejudiced beliefs of members of the public about ethnic groups or 
the stereotypical treatment of minorities and others, in general the worst aspects of this 
epistemology, such as hate-speech and slander, were suppressed or circumscribed by either 
law or convention or both (Herz and Molnar 2012). As discussed below, however, it is 
precisely this kind of speech which has recently moved out of the far fringes of political 
Table 1  Epistemological stances of policy actors with associated policy problems and solutions
Extent of knowledge of policy problems and solutions
High Low
Nature of 
knowledge 
utilization
For the public good Instrumental rationality/reason
 Policy problem: boundedness, uncer-
tainty
Solutions: more and better analysis, 
prudence
Ignorance
 Policy problem: high 
propensity for avoid-
able policy failure, 
blame
 Solutions; Enhanced 
Education, Better 
Knowledge Dissemi-
nation & Transmission
For particular gain Maliciousness
 Policy problem: high private value, 
low or negative public value
Solution: transparency and account-
ability; legal proscription
Willful ignorance
 Policy problem: high 
propensity for avoid-
able policy failure
 Solution: suppression, 
legal proscription
<<<PAGE=7>>>
587Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
debate and tabloid-level publicity and literally been given a space and amplified voice 
by the opening up social media and non-traditional news outlets from Reddit to Breitbart 
(Bogers and Wernersen 2014). The decline of traditional media gatekeepers, allowing such 
views to evade legal and conventional limits on speech have created a new challenge for 
orthodox policy scientists for which they were largely unprepared (Jones and Lidsky 2016; 
Wallace 2018).
Dealing with enhanced levels of (willful) ignorance and maliciousness: 
how social/internet media in the post‑factual era steer policy making 
onto a treacherous path
When it comes to explaining the ebb and flow of factual and evidentiary influences on 
policy over the past half century and more, there is ample evidence that facts have been 
a politicized input for quite some time. The complexity, permeability and interaction of 
public problems are such that in many jurisdictions policy making has been perpetually 
contested and fights between different characterization of facts or their mis-representation 
have been commonplace. However, while much of this activity historically has involved the 
malicious partisan (re)interpretation of facts, as policy programs have also become more 
complex the level of ignorance concerning how such programs operate and what is their 
actual intent has also increased. Technologies from the internet to cryptocurrency enable 
key policy actors to bypass government organizations, regulations and programs in imagin-
ing and creating policy alternatives, highlighting the ignorance of not just the public but 
also many policy-makers with these new technologies.
This has introduced a sizeable gap between expert and public discourses, with experts 
discredited and publics empowered by the growth of complexity and ignorance. Jasanoff  
and Simmet, for example, now differentiate between empirical knowledge which is gener -
ated by following the scientific method and “public facts” which are the product of a com-
petition between knowledge and values in the public arena. They assert that “… debates 
about public facts have always also been debates about social meanings, rooted in realities 
that are subjectively experienced as all-encompassing and complete, even when they are 
partial and contingent.” (Jasanoff and Simmet 2017: 752). Cairney (2016: 42) similarly 
captures the fluctuating relationship between beliefs, evidence and policy when he writes 
that: “In the real world, evidence is contested, the policy process contains a large number 
of influential actors, scientific evidence is one of many sources of information, and policy-
makers base their decisions on a mixture of emotions, knowledge and shortcuts to gather 
relevant evidence.”
Under these circumstances, the potential for evidence to be undermined by misinfor -
mation grows. In a situation of maliciously driven or tinged policy making characterized 
by willful ignorance, as Daviter (2017: 17) reminds us, gathering and assessing evidence 
becomes another component of the struggle over policy options, leaving policy analysis 
increasingly indistinguishable from politics and open to malicious manipulation. In such 
an extreme post-positivist policymaking space, “policy conflicts rooted in multiple and 
incompatible problem perceptions cannot be settled by recourse to evidentiary analysis….”
In such a context, as Berling and Bueger (2017: 333) point out, “… while there might 
be a singular truth in the non-political sphere, in the realm of politics truth remains in the 
plural, and tends to be connected to opinion.” Hence, for example, researchers examining
<<<PAGE=8>>>
588 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
political conflict in energy policy have noted that knowledge of resource limitations and 
limits mobilizes resistance against rational analysis, so much so that “… assumptions and 
values can play a combative, corrosive role in the generation of objective energy analysis, 
and in how energy decision-makers operate in practice” (Sovacool and Brown 2015: 38).
Critics are right to suggest that policy making has thus been steered onto a treacher -
ous path substituting denial for skepticism, autodidacticism for education and emotion for 
rationality as the lenses through which actors view policy inputs and evidence (Stevens 
et al. 2018). In the contemporary era “stories” which link, for example, the slaughter of 
young children in Sandy Hook with claims about the complicity of the US Government 
involvement in the 9–11 attacks (Berkowitz and Liu 2016), combine maliciousness and 
ignorance in a unique way (Johnson and Kaye 2013).
Role of social/internet media as a force multiplier: promoting views of all kinds 
and undermining expertise
While there is a clearly focused set of concerns about the problematic effects on policy-
making posed by the post-factual turn in policy discourse, the causes behind the dimin-
ishing influence of “objective” evidence are harder to pinpoint. Increased complexity is 
certainly an issue, but a heterogeneous array of sources and motivations have been identi-
fied in the popular press and in academic studies as disrupting the historical role played by 
knowledge and evidence in both policy-making and policy analysis (Bail et al. 2018).
The origins of manufactured misunderstanding are both endogenous and exogenous to 
the political system. Among the exogenous influences that work to separate evidence from 
reality, much has been made of government-backed initiatives to destabilize politics and 
generate controversy across borders such has occurred in recent years in several elections 
in Europe and Asia. Such international misinformation campaigns are increasingly propa-
gated and were particularly pronounced in the run up to major political milestones such 
as the 2016 US Presidential election and the UK referendum on Brexit (Vasu et al. 2018; 
Morgan 2018). But they have also been documented as extensions of, or compliments to, 
military and paramilitary conflict, as was the case with the Russian campaign to annex 
Crimea and disrupt political functioning in the Ukraine (Mejian and Vokuev 2017: 1028), 
and these and similar campaigns continue apace in new elections and jurisdictions, from 
India to Africa.
Similarly, but more endogenously, professionals who rely on scientific knowledge when 
making life or death decisions, such as physicians and emergency service professionals, for 
example, have been quick to voice their alarm at the pitfalls of post-factual policy making 
encountered through the proliferation of conspiracy theories and mis-stated or misleading, 
if not outright false, claims around topics such as vaccines and gun violence among others. 
Identifying the major risks to public health posed to the public from confusion caused by 
the introduction of alternative facts about vaccinations and climate change, for example, 
has been widely denounced by experts in these fields.
The role of social/internet media in both these processes is very clear. In many cases the 
endogenous influences cited above, for example, are comingled in Twitter and Facebook 
campaigns with an exogenous flow of alternative facts that originate from outside a polity 
and are transmitted and amplified by these media.
Some of the problems with social/internet media propagation of false views and 
accounts are anthropological. In one of the most extensive analyses to date of how news 
spread online, Vosoughi et al. (2018) found that false news spread farther and faster across
<<<PAGE=9>>>
589Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
social media than accurate information because individuals were more likely to propa-
gate misinformation than they were to pass along authentic accounts of social and politi-
cal events because it is “good gossip.” Furthermore, false news was likely to spread more 
widely over social media. While “… the truth rarely diffused to more than 1000 people 
[while] the top 1% of false news cascades routinely diffused to between 1000 and 100,000 
people (Vosoughi et al. 2018: 1148). Ultimately, as Jasanoff and Simmet (2017: 755) point 
out, the forum provided by social media sites allows a proliferation of unsubstantiated and 
uniformed opinion and commentary. “As much as enlightened moderns may deplore the 
pluralization of language, knowledge or perception on the internet, the digital medium 
teems with people every bit as intent on communicating their versions of the truth as 
Oxford Dons or Washington economists.”
However, while false knowledge is widely distributed, it is important to note that the 
capacity to reshape or undermine reality is also highly concentrated and thus subject to 
malicious manipulation. The information resources deployed through social networks turn 
out to be even more unequally distributed than the material resources used to analyze and 
organize knowledge through traditional means of research and dissemination. Syuntyu-
renko (2015: 207), for example, found that “Social activity and mass relaying of memes 
are usually initiated from a limited number of centers: 2% of Twitter users generate 60% of 
all of the content that is distributed online and 5% of all users create 75% of the content.” 
Not surprisingly, Vosoughi et al. 2018: 1147, for example, report that “… data also show 
clear increases in the total number of false political rumors during the 2012 and 2016 U.S. 
Presidential elections and a spike in rumors that contained partially true and partially false 
information during the Russian annexation of Crimea….” when state and partisan actors 
flooded websites with false information for propaganda, monetary and partisan purposes.
Scholars are thus correct in warning that emergent practices of manufacturing facts and 
evidence serve not only to diminish policy making capacity, but also erode politics by hav-
ing policy reinforce undemocratic interest articulation and repress representative modes 
of problem solving (Esberg and Mummolo 2017). In the new social media/internet real-
ity, “evidence” that does not align with the beliefs of powerful actors and pre-established 
beliefs and attitudes is rejected, marginalized, and often replaced in public discourse by 
elaborately crafted falsehoods promoting alternate and evidentiarily unsustainable views 
and positions (McKee and Stuckley 2017: 669).
How well do existing models of policy‑making deal with this new social 
media/internet mediated reality?
When governments make public policy, they embark on a political journey that begs to be 
explored. Understanding how and why policy outputs have emerged, and what their result-
ing political impacts might be, can enable scholars and citizens alike to find meaning in 
the policy process. Interpreting the interactions of analysis, authority, and organization 
can help to both explain what has occurred, and also understand what has not happened. 
This is true both in contexts where traditional forms of evidence prevail and in the era of 
alternative facts. Among the puzzles to be solved in either case are: Why are decisions 
taken at a particular time, but avoided at other apparently opportune moments? How do 
policy decisions interact with one another? Do cumulative acts of policy making yield rec-
ognizable patterns, or does policy content just amount to a random or quasi-random col-
lection of prior outputs? And, regardless of the existence of patterns based on accumulated
<<<PAGE=10>>>
590 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
experience, where should attention focus when analyzing a new, or amended, public policy 
and the initiative behind it?
There have been many approaches and structures put forward to help interpret the over -
whelming amount of information that is often available about a policy’s history, its func-
tion, and its impacts. Over time, researchers in the policy sciences have created many and 
varied conceptual constructs, models and framework that seek to aid understanding about 
how policy making occurs. Levels of analysis have included individual decision-making 
behavior, group action, institutional structures, or historical patterns and legacies (Howl-
ett et al. 2009). Do the current models found in policy studies cope well with the vulner -
abilities created by post-factual influences on policy, especially the growth of willful igno-
rance? If not, is an evolution of the “core” models and theories needed?
Here we gauge the resilience of three well-established conceptual frameworks when 
interpreting policy deliberations characterized by a disparate subjectivity among factual 
claims. We focus on three widely applied conceptualizations that were created to advance 
understanding about policy making during the twentieth century. These include the policy 
cycle model, the advocacy coalition framework, and the multiple streams framework and 
intended to illustrate how such frameworks help, or not, in analyzing and evaluating the 
politics and policy of truthiness. We consider the effect on the interpretive efficacy of each 
when the boundary between facts and values is blurred or abandoned in a post-fact world 
where discourse, identity, and normative beliefs are intermingled with, and often indistin-
guishable from, factual evidence.
The policy cycle model
In several ways, the policy cycle model offers the most open ended and supple framework 
among the intellectual constructs developed to interpret what goes on in the policy making 
process. It was inspired by a direct connection to the practice of making policy and sought 
to build understanding by examining the functions pursued to solve public problems. By 
subdividing the study of policy into consideration of what occurred during seven discrete, 
but related, functions, Lasswell (1956, 1971) pioneered the approach of examining what 
actors do along the pathway of policy development. Lasswell’s model was informed by his 
own experience working for the American government during the mid-twentieth century, 
when ambitious measures were initiated, and coordinated, across many sectors and disci-
plines to win the Second World War, and then prevail during the Cold War.
Refinement and elaboration of Lasswell’s stages into an iterative dynamic of policy con-
struction, and at times deconstruction, yielded a five or six stage policy cycle model which 
sought to capture feedback effects and inter-dependence among the various policy making 
functions including how policy learning occurs through evaluation and adjustment of exist-
ing processes in light of past and present experiences (Brewer 1974; Anderson 1975; Jones 
1984).
Within the universe of conceptual tools for examining empirical policy analysis, the 
policy cycle model stands out as the longest serving heuristic for illuminating how political 
actors, ideas about problems and potential solutions, and the structural influence of institu-
tions interact to influence policy making and policy-making dynamics (Capano 2012). The 
policy cycle model endures, offering guidance for those seeking to understand the interplay 
of policy subsystem participants through their initiative at particular points of action to 
solve public problems. The consideration of policy actors’ function during agenda setting,
<<<PAGE=11>>>
591Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
formulation, decision-making, implementation, and evaluation remains widely studied 
today (Howlett et al. 2009).
But can such resilience exhibit over the decades when evidence-based policy analysis 
was the norm carry forward into a process that is increasingly influenced by falsehoods 
presented as alternative facts? Future performance of the policy cycle model could depend 
on its ability to distinguish and examine the distribution and utilization of alternative facts 
across the various functions of policy deliberation.
The policy cycle model’s articulation of distinctive functions in policy making offers 
the opportunity to identify where and how disinformation and manipulation of evidence 
could influence analysis, or corrupt authority, during the course of policy deliberations. 
In general, the cycle model can be seen to adapt all too well to a post-factual universe but 
without a critical edge. That is, it embodies no defense of truth and allows a ready accom-
modation of misinformation and an embrace of truthiness.
This is because the cycle model is agnostic on type of knowledge/arguments deployed 
and the epistemological stances of policy actors. If falsehoods posing as alternative facts 
are introduced into policy deliberations through a particular focus of communication or 
coordination, the policy cycle model is well suited to capture this empirical reality.
Misinformation from any source, be it malicious selective interpretations of data or the 
results of conspiracy theories, for example, will be seen to influence the focus of a policy 
cycle when the bogus evidence becomes concentrated within the deliberations of one or 
two policy making stages, such as when fake news is targeted to generate a shift in the 
policy agenda, or biased evaluative methods are applied to discredit the performance of 
an existing policy. The resulting contrast between political dynamics in the stages where 
post-factual influences are directly focused, and the stages where more traditional policy 
deliberations remain the norm help to highlight the alternative factual manipulations of 
policy making, but also advance understanding about how elements of a policy subsystem 
respond and might (or might not) resist the influence of such “facts.” The political competi-
tion for legitimacy and credibility could occur in multiple stages of policy making, where 
actors and interests expose and rebut alternative facts that were introduced into delibera-
tions at another stage of the cycle.
Where the policy cycle model might be vulnerable to either overlooking or uncriti-
cally normalizing the influence of alternative facts would be when falsehoods are widely 
accepted and distributed across several, or most of, the stages of the policy cycle. In this 
case, the more even diffusion of influence by alternative facts would appear more innocu-
ous as an influence on policy deliberation. Importantly, cumulative and systemic effects of 
such influence would not, in themselves, stand out in the development of policy advice, but 
the idea that learning and evaluative feedback would normally improve policy-making and 
its calibrations is lost.
The advocacy coalition framework
A second commonly used framework of the policy process is the Advocacy Coalition 
Framework (ACF) developed by Sabatier (1993) and his colleagues. At the ACF’s heart are 
sets of policy actors drawn together into “… advocacy coalitions composed of people from 
various organizations who share a set of normative and causal beliefs and who often act in 
concert.” (Sabatier 1988: 133) Actors’ core beliefs are the glue that binds the ACF’s unit 
of analysis together. These beliefs at the center of each coalition include both normative 
values about the way the world should be, and axiomatic understandings of how policy can
<<<PAGE=12>>>
592 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
and does function in support of such a worldview. These principles motivate policy actors 
to cooperate with likeminded counterparts in formulating policy options that advance their 
preferred outcomes, and to learn from both advocacy and research efforts about how to 
expand the likelihood of those outcomes over time. That learning function is where the 
effects of post-factual policy influence could change the ways in which advocacy coalitions 
pursue their goals, both in competition with other coalitions and in relation to the govern-
mental structures surrounding them.
The ACF distinguishes between three cognitive strata that are nested inside each advo-
cacy coalition. Each coalition can be characterized by: first, its particular configuration of 
deep core beliefs, which are normative, next its near-core beliefs about appropriate and 
effective policy making, which connect policy preferences to the deep core beliefs, and 
finally by its secondary beliefs which form the practical understanding of what works to 
translate the near-core beliefs about policy into practice.
The ACF presumes that coalition members will maintain their core beliefs, even in the 
face of evidence that might call these beliefs into question. Near-core policy beliefs are 
less absolute, and evidence either that programs which have been advocated by a coalition 
are not delivering desired outcomes to support the normative worldview, or that program 
outputs advocated by a rival coalition are effective, are likely to prompt policy learning 
that adapts new means to serve core values. And secondary beliefs about how to frame and 
communicate policy options with the wider policy community to gain broad based support 
are quite supple and subject to pragmatic adjustment.
Since the advocacy coalition framework (ACF) is based on beliefs and not facts it also 
survives well in a truthiness era. Its focus was never on truth per se but on what beliefs 
exist and who holds them. That is, the ACF melds the influence of beliefs, values, and 
bounded rationality into an analytical structure for interpreting the ways in which policy 
subsystems design, debate, and deliver policy options.
These principal conceptual attributes of the ACF, however, suggest that inputs from a 
post-factual policy world would yield a different impact pattern than would appear in the 
policy cycle model. The durability of core beliefs that draw coalition members together 
suggests their resilience in the face of alternative facts and misinformation. Indeed, a 
stream of disruptive information could work to reinforce solidarity within established coa-
litions as their members are motivated to redouble their efforts to organize and advocate 
for preferred policy options in the face of perceived efforts to challenge or intimidate the 
policy subsystem. Another attribute of resilience emerges through the adaptation of a coa-
lition’s secondary beliefs. Coalitions can be quite pragmatic in letting their ends justify 
the means of advocacy, and if manufactured misinformation is seen to become sufficiently 
influential in a subsystem, then “fighting fire with fire” could lead a coalition to generate its 
own alternative facts and pursue its own forms of post-factual discourse. Such escalation of 
misinformation could contribute to the dynamic of propagating fake news and false infor -
mation analyzed by Vosoughi et al. (2018) discussed above.
Thus, the ACF offers a useful lens for seeking to understand the impact of truthiness on 
policy-making; that is, when and how exogenous post-factual misinformation can become 
endogenized within a policy subsystem.
The multiple streams framework
Kingdon (1984) developed the multiple streams framework (MSF) through inductive anal-
ysis of policy agenda setting in the US Congress. He was particularly attentive to the role
<<<PAGE=13>>>
593Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
of policy entrepreneurs, both inside government and beyond it in the policy subsystem, in 
creating the political conditions that could justify or compel public officials to focus their 
limited resources (particularly time) on a particular problem. But rather than assuming that 
some combination of persuasive skills, reputation, and material resources, would be the 
major influence on a policy entrepreneur’s leverage over agenda setting, Kingdon looked 
to a somewhat arbitrary, or at least less predictable opportunity window, or confluence of 
exogenous and endogenous inputs that influenced governance. Problems, policy, and poli-
tics fill three streams that configure Kingdon’s framework, and successful policy entrepre-
neurs are those adept at leveraging their interaction to advance the priority of a particular 
policy problem.
Each stream contains components of policy deliberations that originate independently 
from one another, but which can combine to transform policymaking at particular junc-
tures. Within the problem stream, one finds the ideas and information that can focus public 
attention on and characterize a specific problem as being worthy of government’s attention. 
The policy stream contains the expertise of specialists, scientists, and pundits who pre-
sent remedies and recommendations for addressing one or more public problems. And the 
political stream carries within it the claims of, and expectations about, governing authority 
that are generated by public opinion, the party organizations, and interest group efforts to 
gain or retain power in government. When these streams converge, the resulting accumula-
tion of ideas, interests, and information can either open or close a “policy window” which 
moves problems onto or off of the formal agenda, and thus influences whether government 
will attend to them in policymaking.
Since the 1980s, Kingdon’s Multiple Streams Framework has been applied very widely 
and used in interpreting policy deliberations that extend well beyond the agenda set-
ting stage. The limitations of trying to explain the full extent of policy making dynamics 
through interaction of the MSF’s three streams have prompted theory elaboration through 
a model that expands upon Kingdon’s problem, policy and politics streams to account for 
the distinctive inputs arising from analytical processes and government program delivery 
that follow agenda setting (Howlett et al. 2016). These channels of influence over policy 
deliberation are conceived as threads, rather than streams, to allow for the inter-weaving of 
these conceptual elements. Among the additions to Kingdon, the process thread contains 
the institutional and organizational structures that are established to analyze policy options 
and formulate a preferred strategy for government’s decision-making. And the program 
thread comprises policy outputs that create new effects on politics, as well as influencing 
participants’ perception of problems.
Whether the focus remains with Kingdon’s “classic” three stream MSF conceptualiza-
tion, or is expanded to consideration of a greater number, the influence of post-factual pol-
icy inputs would initially appear similar. On the one hand, the effect of alternative facts 
intended to misinform and misdirect policy-makers to doing something new would be con-
strained in the same fashion as all other policies, by the unpredictable confluence of prob-
lems, policy and politics. Thus, for example, a policy initiative based on false evidence 
may be held up by an institution like the courts which retains a more traditional view of 
the subject. But on the other hand, adding alternative facts into one or more streams could 
disrupt their interaction and thus inhibit or promote the critical junctures needed to place 
issues on the policy agenda.
To borrow a metaphor that inspired one of the MSF’s conceptual predecessors, the 
Garbage Can Model (Cohen et  al. 1972), the “organized anarchy” that often character -
izes policy deliberation contexts is seen as a challenge to navigate let alone manipulate 
toward a particular policy option through the strategic introduction of (mis)information.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
594 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
This is because the uncertain timing of the interactions between problem, policy and poli-
tics streams would increase the complexity of introducing independent, but complimentary, 
information of any kind into each stream in ways that could be counted on to open or close 
a policy window or enhance or diminish entrepreneurial activity. Introducing alternative 
facts into only one stream, however, would be more likely to disrupt their interaction and 
reduce the chances of a coherent connection between the contents of streams, thus frustrat-
ing the opening of a policy window. This is evident, for example, when populist mischarac-
terization of immigrant populations fails to lead to their internment or expulsion, or even to 
moves to diminish their number.
Thus, the MSF also does well in a truthiness era as the garbage can is simply bigger in a 
truthiness world than in one in which willful and other types of ignorance, and malicious-
ness, are reduced.
Conclusion: doing quite well, all things considered
There continues to be a growing disquiet among both scholars and practitioners that recent 
developments in the “co-creation” of public facts may have breached an established norm 
of democracy and that the ongoing transgression of evidence and expertise threatens the 
governmental institutions that undergird both democratic politics and successful policy-
making in the public interest (Kim et  al. 2018). Undermining the public acceptance of 
expertise and the willingness to defer to facts and evidence, for example, is a critical ele-
ment of many populist regimes and policy negating efforts such as climate change denial 
or immigrant scapegoating (Lewandowsky et  al. 2015). While some institutions are less 
vulnerable to these false claims than others, even the courts which are still focused on evi-
dence have been subject to malicious challenges to knowledge in the post-fact era (Ley 
2018).
These challenges are often thought to be devastating for the evidence-based policy 
movement, for example, and have led to questions about whether or not it can survive this 
challenge as it did earlier threats such as the faith-based vs reality-based attacks of the 
Bush Jr. era (Hula et  al. 2007; Kissane 2007). At the individual level, the credibility of 
professional analysts who incorporate influential, but unsubstantiated, alternative facts 
into policy assessments and recommendations can be compromised. Such analytical mal-
practice can spread among policy professionals who adopt or reproduce misinformation, 
whether intentionally or otherwise. And once the incorporation of erroneous evidence into 
policy deliberations reaches a critical mass, then the integrity of policy making institu-
tions can be diminished. As the practical capability to advance policy based on evidence 
declines among both the individual and institutional dimensions of the subsystem, there is 
a concern that the scholarly fallout from anomalous policy making routines and procedures 
on the utility of existing models and frameworks is likely to follow.
The results of the comparisons of existing mainstream policy theories presented above, 
however, reveals a different story. As summarized in Table 2, all three models highlight the 
very problematic aspects of epistemological stances based on willful ignorance and mal-
ice for policy-making and the likely impact of enhanced levels of such self-interested and 
self-absorbed attitudes toward knowledge on policy development processes. The increase 
in willful ignorance linked to social media and internet-based circulation of previously 
suppressed ideas is shown by each model to convolute and multiply the number of agenda 
items with which policy-makers must deal, make it harder for them to control their agendas
<<<PAGE=15>>>
595Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
and contributes to increased polarization between advocacy coalitions, making it harder to 
learn from experiences and adapt to environmental changes. And it enhances the anarchic 
nature of policy-making, making the matching of problems and solutions more problematic 
and prone to capriciousness than need be the case, thus undermining the ability of the sys-
tem to resolve issues.
Existing policy frameworks thus continue to remain very useful in a post-fact era and 
require little to no change in order to generate concrete expectations about future policy-
making behavior and outcomes. Overall, the models offer particular, but congruent, pre-
dictions of a lack of learning, an embrace of placebos and empty symbols, policy churn, 
loss of direction, and a record of failed policies in a post-fact world—all of which have 
been clearly manifested in the context of the two best exemplars of truthiness-inspired 
policy deliberations to date: the many activities of the Trump administration in the 
USA, and the British-EU negotiations over Brexit (Del Vicario et al. 2017).
Equally importantly, the policy sciences also continue to suggest several ways in 
which ignorance and maliciousness can be curbed in the effort to re-orient policy-mak -
ing toward a more traditional rationality and purpose. As discussed above, ignorance 
can be re-oriented toward reason through education and the provision and transmission 
of knowledge and, as government reform efforts throughout the ages have shown, malice 
can also be eliminated through the illumination of corrupt practices and the enhance-
ment of various mechanisms of accountability and transparency from open contracting 
to freedom of information legislation.
In the case of willful ignorance, it should also be noted that discouragement of the 
dissemination of false views has historically also been very significant and has taken 
many forms, from state censorship and common or civil law slander and libel prohibi-
tions, to voluntary film and television regulation and self-censorship on the part of the 
media and the motion picture industries, among others. The more insidious effects of 
social media and various websites in creating and promoting fake news and otherwise 
enhancing and promoting willful ignorance can also be addressed in this way. While 
government regulation remains embryonic, some aspects of this problem are being 
addressed by self-regulation of social media companies like Facebook, Twitter and Ins-
tagram in removing millions of false accounts and altering their advertising algorithms 
to remove the incentive and suppress the capacity of actors to promote false information 
or promote willful ignorance for monetary, partisan or other reasons.
While there will always be die-hard flat-earthers and alien conspiracy theorists 
among us, more critical reflection on the part of more open-minded individuals may 
relegate them once again back to the fringes of political and policy debate. Naming and 
Table 2  Summary table of framework accommodation of truthiness
Model Prescriptive aim Post-fact results
Policy cycle Learning and trial and error solutions 
approximation
Increased noise, loss of agenda control, stum-
bling from crisis to crisis, improper evalua-
tion, no learning, overloaded agendas
ACF Learning and persuasion around core 
and secondary beliefs
Polarization and churn, amplification of misin-
formation efforts
MSF Matching of problems and solutions in 
contingent fashion
Mismatching of tools and problems, failure of 
steering through opening of policy windows, 
anarchistic processes and outcomes
<<<PAGE=16>>>
596 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
shaming can also play an important role here in promoting citizen-driven suppression of 
wild speculation and a disregard of evidence. Past examples of the academic disrepute 
created by incorporating bogus evidence into previously legitimate analytical structures 
can be found in the reaction to twentieth century biological research conducted under 
the aegis of Soviet Communism, for example. The opprobrium attached to research that 
adopted Lysenko’s now discredited evidence of genetic inheritance from acquired char -
acteristics led to quite a large body of analytical output being delegitimated as pseudo-
science (Gordin 2012).
Although there may be a time lag, academic capability and credibility in assessing such 
deliberative degeneration can also help erode truthiness, if scholars persist in revealing the 
material effects influenced by misinformation in policymaking and individuals are subse-
quently more careful and skeptical about the veracity of what they read or view online. 
Policy scientists and scholars have a responsibility to explain and help society and policy-
makers understand policymaking in an era of truthiness and how they can deal with the 
growth, especially, of willful ignorance and obliviousness. This is at least as pressing as in 
the health sphere, where internet-inspired proliferation of self-help and conspiracy theo-
ries around health issues has led practitioners such as Dr. Lisa Rosenbaum (2017: 1609), 
for example, to urge physicians to speak out about the continued value of evidence-based 
health policy in a fashion inconceivable only a few years ago, in order to ensure that “… 
scientists are not alone in their determination to make the truth believable again.”
References
Anderson, J. E. (1975). Public policy making. New York: Prager.
Bail, C. A., Argyle, L. P., Brown, T. W., Bumpus, J. P., Chen, H., Fallin Hunzaker, M. B., et al. (2018). 
Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political polarization. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 115(37), 9216–9221. https ://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.18048 40115 .
Benegal, S. (2018). Overconfidence and the discounting of expertise: A commentary. Social Science & 
Medicine, 213, 95–97. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.socsc imed.2018.07.039.
Berkowitz, D., & Liu, Z. M. (2016). Media errors and the ‘nutty professor’: Riding the journalistic bounda-
ries of the Sandy Hook shootings. Journalism, 17(2), 155–172. https ://doi.org/10.1177/14648 84914 
55226 6.
Berling, T. V., & Bueger, C. (2017). Expertise in the age of post-factual politics: An outline of reflexive 
strategies. Geoforum, 84, 332–341.
Bhatta, G. (2002). Evidence-based analysis and the work of policy shops. Australian Journal of Public 
Administration, 61(3), 98–105.
Björnberg, K. E., Karlsson, M., Gilek, M., & Hansson, S. O. (2017). Climate and environmental science 
denial: A review of the scientific literature published in 1990–2015. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclep ro.2017.08.066.
Bloomberg, M. (2018). Commencement speech of Michael Bloomberg, May 12. Downloaded from https ://
www.mikeb loomb erg.com/news/mike-bloom berg-deliv ers-2018-comme nceme nt-addre ss-rice-unive 
rsity / Accessed 18 May 2018.
Bogers, T., & Wernersen, R. (2014). How ‘social’ are social news sites? Exploring the motivations 
for using Reddit.Com. IConference 2014 Proceedings, March 1, 2014, pp. 329–344. https ://doi.
org/10.9776/14108 .
Bovens, M., & t’Hart, P. (1996). Understanding policy fiascoes. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press.
Brewer, G. (1974). The policy sciences emerge; To nurture and structure a discipline. Policy Sciences, 5, 
239–244.
Cairney, P. (2016). The politics of evidence-based policy making. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Capano, G. (2012). Policy dynamics and change: The never-ending puzzle. In E. Araral, S. Fritzen, M. 
Howlett, M. Ramesh, & X. Wu (Eds.), Routledge handbook of public policy (pp. 451–472). New 
York: Routledge.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
597Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
Carlsson, L. (2017). Policy science at an impasse: A matter of conceptual stretching? Politics & Policy, 
45(2), 148–168. https ://doi.org/10.1111/polp.12196 .
Chow, C. C., & Sarin, R. K. (2002). Known, unknown, and unknowable uncertainties. Theory and Decision, 
52(2), 127–138. https ://doi.org/10.1023/A:10155 44715 608.
Cohen, M., March, J., & Olsen, J. (1972). A garbage can model of organizational choice. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 17, 1–25.
Croissant, J. L. (2014). Agnotology: Ignorance and absence or towards a sociology of things that aren’t 
there. Social Epistemology, 28(1), 4–25. https ://doi.org/10.1080/02691 728.2013.86288 0
Curzon, H. F., & Kontoleon, A. (2016). From ignorance to evidence? The use of programme evaluation 
in conservation: Evidence from a Delphi survey of conservation experts. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 180, 466–475. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvm an.2016.05.062.
Daviter, F. (2017). Policy analysis in the face of complexity: What kind of knowledge to tackle wicked prob-
lems? Public Policy and Administration. https ://doi.org/10.1177/09520 76717 73332 5.
Del Vicario, M., Zollo, F., Caldarelli, G., Scala, A., & Quattrociocchi, W. (2017). Mapping social dynam-
ics on Facebook: The Brexit debate. Social Networks, 50, 6–16. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.socne 
t.2017.02.002.
der Sluijs, V. (2005). Jeroen. “Uncertainty as a Monster in the Science-Policy Interface: Four Coping Strate-
gies”. Water Science and Technology: A Journal of the International Association on Water. Pollution 
Research, 52(6), 87–92.
Dossey, L. (2014). Agnotology: On the varieties of ignorance, criminal negligence, and crimes against 
humanity. EXPLORE: The Journal of Science and Healing, 10(6), 331–344. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.
explo re.2014.08.011.
Dunn, W. N. (1988). Methods of the second type: Coping with the wilderness of conventional policy analy-
sis. Policy Studies Review, 7(4), 720–737.
Dunn, W. N. (1991). Assessing the impact of policy analysis: The functions of usable ignorance. Knowledge 
and Policy, 4, 36–55. https ://doi.org/10.1007/BF026 92780 .
Esberg, J., & Mummolo, M. (2018). Explaining misperceptions of crime. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, 
NY: Social Science Research Network. https ://paper s.ssrn.com/abstr act=32083 03
Fischer, F. (Ed.). (1987). Confronting values in policy analysis: The politics of criteria. Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage.
Fischer, F., & Forester, J. (Eds.). (1993). The argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning. Durham: 
Duke University Press.
Foucault, M. (1979). On governmentality. Ideology and Consciousness, 6, 5–21.
Galanter, M. (1980). Legality and its discontents: A preliminary assessment of current theories of legaliza-
tion and delegalization. In E. Blankenburg, E. Klausa, & H. Rottleuthner (Eds.), Alternative Rechts-
foren Und Alternativen Zum Recht (pp. 11–26). Bonn: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Goodin, R. E. (1980). Manipulatory politics. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gordin, M. D. (2012). How lysenkoism became pseudoscience: Dobzhansky to velikovsky. Journal of the 
History of Biology, 45, 443–468.
Greenwood, M. M., Sorenson, M. E., & Warner, B. R. (2016). Ferguson on Facebook: Political persuasion 
in a new era of media effects. Computers in Human Behavior, 57, 1–10. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2015.12.003.
Gross, M. (2010). Ignorance and surprise: Science, society, and ecological design. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Habermas, J. (1974). Knowledge and human interests. Boston: Beacon Press.
Hawkesworth, M. (1992). Epistemology and policy analysis. In W. Dunn & R. M. Kelly (Eds.), Advances in 
policy studies (pp. 291–329). New Brunswick: Transaction Press.
Herz, M., & Molnar, P. (Eds.). (2012). The content and context of hate speech: Rethinking regulation and 
responses. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hong, S., & Nadler, D. (2016). The unheavenly chorus: Political voices of organized interests on social 
media. Policy & Internet, 8(1), 91–106. https ://doi.org/10.1002/poi3.110.
Howlett, M. (2012). The lessons of failure: Learning and blame avoidance in public policy-making. Interna-
tional Political Science Review, 33(5), 539–555. https ://doi.org/10.1177/01925 12112 45360 3.
Howlett, M., McConnell, A., & Perl, A. (2016). Weaving the fabric of public policies: Comparing and inte-
grating contemporary frameworks for the study of policy processes. Journal of Comparative Policy 
Analysis, 18(3), 273–289.
Howlett, M., & Nair, S. (2017). The central conundrums of policy formulation: Ill-structured problems and 
uncertainty. In M. Howlett and I. Mukherjee (Eds.), Handbook of policy formulation.
Howlett, M., Ramesh, M., & Perl, A. (2009). Studying public policy: Policy cycles & policy subsystems (3rd 
ed.). Don Mills, ON: Oxford University Press.
<<<PAGE=18>>>
598 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
Hula, R., Jackson-Elmoore, C., & Reese, L. (2007). Mixing God’s work and the public business: A frame-
work for the analysis of faith-based service delivery. Review of Policy Research, 24(1), 67–89.
Jasanoff, S., & Simmet, H. R. (2017). No funeral bells: Public reason in a post-truth age. Social Studies of 
Science, 47(5), 751–770.
Johnson, T. J., & Kaye, B. K. (2013). The dark side of the boon? Credibility, selective exposure and the 
proliferation of online sources of political information. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(4), 1862–
1871. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.02.011.
Johnson, T. J., & Kaye, B. K. (2016). Some like it lots: The influence of interactivity and reliance on cred-
ibility. Computers in Human Behavior, 61, 136–145. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.012.
Jones, C. O. (1984). An introduction to the study of public policy. Monterrey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Jones, B. D. (2002). Bounded rationality and public policy: Herbert A. Simon and the decisional foundation 
of collective choice. Policy Sciences, 35, 269–284.
Jones, R. A., & Lidsky, L. B. (2016). Of reasonable readers and unreasonable speakers: Libel law in a net-
worked world. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, February 8, 
2016. https ://paper s.ssrn.com/abstr act=27296 25.
Kakutani, M. (2018). The death of truth: Notes on falsehood in the age of Trump. New York: Tim Duggan 
Books.
Kavanagh, J., & Rich, M. D. (2018). Truth decay: An initial exploration of the diminishing role of facts and 
analysis in American public life. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Kim, Y. M., Hsu, J., Neiman, D., Kou, C., Bankston, L., Kim, S. Y., et al. (2018). The stealth media? Groups 
and targets behind divisive issue campaigns on Facebook. Political Communication. https ://doi.
org/10.1080/10584 609.2018.14764 25.
Kingdon, J. W. (1984). Agendas, alternatives and public policies. Boston: Little, Brown.
Kissane, R. J. (2007). How do faith-based organizations compare to secular providers? Nonprofit directors’ 
and poor women’s assessments of FBOs. Journal of Poverty, 11(4), 91–115.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one’s own 
incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 
1121–1134. https ://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.77.6.1121.
Lasswell, H. D. (1956). The decision process: Seven categories of functional analysis. College Park, 
MD: University of Maryland.
Lasswell, H. D. (1970). The emerging conception of the policy sciences. Policy Sciences, 1, 3–14.
Lasswell, H. D. (1971). A pre-view of policy sciences. New York: Elsevier.
Lasswell, H. D., & Lerner, D. (1951). The policy orientation. In H. D. Lasswell (Ed.), The policy sci-
ences: Recent developments in scope and method (pp. 3–15). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lemke, T (2000). Foucault, governmentality, and critique.
Lewandowsky, S., Oreskes, N., Risbey, J. S., Newell, B. R., & Smithson, M. (2015). Seepage: Climate 
change denial and its effect on the scientific community. Global Environmental Change, 33, 1–13. 
https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloen  vcha.2015.02.013.
Ley, A. J. (2018). Mobilizing doubt: The legal mobilization of climate denialist groups. Law & Policy. 
Accessed 18 May 2018. https ://doi.org/10.1111/lapo.12103 .
Logan, D. C. (2009). Known knowns, known unknowns, unknown unknowns and the propagation of 
scientific enquiry. Journal of Experimental Botany, 60(3), 712–714. https ://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/
erp04 3.
Macafee, T. (2013). Some of these things are not like the others: Examining motivations and political 
predispositions among political Facebook activity. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(6), 2766–
2775. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.07.019.
Manski, C. F. (2013). Public policy in an uncertain world: Analysis and decisions. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Maor, M. (2012). Policy overreaction. Journal of Public Policy, 32(03), 231–259. https ://doi.
org/10.1017/S0143 814X1 20001 3X.
Maor, M. (2014). Policy persistence, risk estimation and policy underreaction. Policy Sciences, 47(4), 
425–443. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1107 7-014-9203-8.
Maor, M. (2015). Emotion-driven negative policy bubbles. Policy Sciences, 49(2), 191–210. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1107 7-015-9228-7.
McIntyre, L. (2018). Post-truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mejias, U. A., & Vokuev, N. (2017). Disinformation and the media: The case of Russia and the Ukraine. 
Media, Culture and Society, 39(7), 1027–1042.
Mintrom, M. (2007). The policy analysis movement. In L. Dobuzinskis, M. Howlett, & D. Laycock (Eds.), 
Policy analysis in Canada: The state of the art (pp. 71–84). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
599Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600 
1 3
Moore, M. H. (1994). Public value as the focus of strategy. Australian Journal of Public Administration,  
53(3), 296–303.
Morgan, S. (2018). Fake news, disinformation, manipulation and online tactics to undermine democracy. 
Journal of Cyber Policy, 3(1), 39–43.
Morgan, M. G., & Henrion, M. (1990). Uncertainty: A guide to dealing with uncertainty in quantitative 
risk and policy analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Motta, M., Callaghan, T., & Sylvester, S. (2018). Knowing less but presuming more: Dunning–Kruger 
effects and the endorsement of anti-vaccine policy attitudes. Social Science and Medicine, 211, 
274–281. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.socsc imed.2018.06.032.
Newman, E. J., Garry, M., Bernstein, D. M., Kantner, J., & Lindsay, D. S. (2012). Nonprobative photo-
graphs (or words) inflate truthiness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19(5), 969–974. https ://doi.
org/10.3758/s1342 3-012-0292-0
Oliver, J. E., & Wood, T. J. (2014). Conspiracy theories and the paranoid style(s) of mass opinion. Amer -
ican Journal of Political Science. https ://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12084 .
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2011). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured the truth 
on issues from tobacco smoke to global warming (Export ed.). New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.
Packwood, A. (2002). Evidence-based policy: Rhetoric and reality. Social Policy & Society, 1(3), 267–272.
Pasek, J., Stark, T. H., Krosnick, J. A., & Tompson, T. (2015). What motivates a conspiracy theory? 
Birther beliefs, partisanship, liberal-conservative ideology, and anti-black attitudes. Electoral 
Studies, 40, 482–489. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.elect stud.2014.09.009.
Proctor, R., & Schiebinger, L. (Eds.). (2008). Agnotology: The making and unmaking of ignorance. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Richey, S. (2017). A birther and a truther: The influence of the authoritarian personality on conspiracy 
beliefs. Politics & Policy, 45(3), 465–485. https ://doi.org/10.1111/polp.12206 .
Riker, W. H. (1986). The art of political manipulation. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Rosenbaum, L. (2017). Resisting the suppression of science. The New England Journal of Medicine,  
356(17), 1607–1609.
Sabatier, P. A. (1988). An advocacy coalition framework of policy change and the role of policy-oriented 
learning therein. Policy Sciences, 21, 129–168.
Sabatier, P. A. (1993). Policy change over a decade or more. In P. A. Sabatier & H. C. Jenkins-Smith (Eds.), 
Policy change and learning: An advocacy coalition approach (pp. 13–39). Westview: Boulder.
Sanderson, I. (2002). Making sense of ‘what works’: Evidence based policymaking as instrumental rational-
ity? Public Policy and Administration, 17(3), 61–75.
Schneider, A., & Ingram, H. (1993). Social construction of target populations: Implications for politics and 
policy. American Political Science Review, 87(2), 334–347.
Schneider, A. L., & Ingram, H. M. (Eds.). (2005). Deserving and entitled: Social constructions and public 
policy. SUNY Series in Public Policy. Albany: State University of New York.
Schultz, D. (2017). Alternative facts and public affairs. Journal of Public Affairs Education, 23(3), 775–778.
Schultze, C. L. (1977). The public use of private interests. Washington: Brookings Institute.
Scott, J. C. (1969). The analysis of corruption in developing nations. Comparative Studies in Society and 
History, 11(03), 315–341. https ://doi.org/10.1017/S0010 41750 00053 63.
Simon, H. (1967). The logic of heuristic decision making. In N. Rescher (Ed.), The logic of decision and 
action (pp. 1–35). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Simon, H. A. (1978). Rationality as process and as product of thought. The American Economic Review, 
68(2), 1–16.
Southwell, B. G., Thorson, E. A., & Sheble, L. (Eds.). (2018). Misinformation and Mass Audiences. Austin: 
University of Texas Press.
Sovacool, B. K., & Brown, M. A. (2015). Deconstructing facts and frames in energy research: Maxims for 
evaluating contentious problems. Energy Policy, 86, 36–42.
Stevens, T. M., Aarts, N., Termeer, C. J. A. M., & Dewulf, A. (2018). Social media hypes about agro-food 
issues: Activism, scandals and conflicts. Food Policy. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodp ol.2018.04.009.
Stoker, G. (2018). Can the governance paradigm survive the rise of populism? Policy & Politics. https ://doi.
org/10.1332/03055 7318X 15333 03303 0897.
Syuntyurenko, O. V. (2015). Network technologies for information warfare and manipulation of public opin-
ion. Scientific and Technical Information Processing, 42(4), 205–210.
Theocharis, Y., & van Deth, J. W. (2018). The continuous expansion of citizen participation: A new taxon-
omy. European Political Science Review, 10(1), 139–163. https ://doi.org/10.1017/S1755 77391 60002 
30.
Treisman, D. (2007). What have we learned about the causes of corruption from ten years of cross-national 
empirical research? Annual Review of Political Science, 10, 211–244.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
600 Policy Sciences (2018) 51:581–600
1 3
Tribe, L. H. (1972). Policy science: Analysis or ideology? Philosophy & Public Affairs, 2(1), 66–110.
Vasu, N., Ang, B., Teo, T.-A., Jayakumar, S., Faizal, M., & Ahuja, J. (2018). Fake news: National security 
in the post-truth era. In Policy Report. Singapore: Nanyang Technological University. January 2018. 
Available at https ://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp-conte nt/uploa ds/2018/01/PR180 313_Fake-News_WEB.pdf. 
Accessed 3 June 2018.
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true and false news online. Science, 359, 1146–1151.
Wallace, J. (2018). Modelling contemporary gatekeeping. Digital Journalism, 6(3), 274–293. https ://doi.
org/10.1080/21670 811.2017.13436 48.
Warnier, J.-P. (2013). On agnotology as built-in ignorance. Africa Spectrum, 48(1), 113–116.
Webber, D. J. (1992). The distribution and use of policy knowledge in the policy process. In W. N. Dunn & 
R. M. Kelly (Eds.), Advances in policy studies since 1950 (pp. 383–418). New Brunswick, NJ: Trans-
action Publishers.
Wildavsky, A. B. (1979). Speaking truth to power: The art and craft of policy analysis. Boston: 
Little-Brown.