<<<PAGE=1>>>
27
2.  Review of National Evaluation  
Systems and Capacities for Evaluating 
Progress Towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals: Emerging Lessons 
Learned from the Asia-Pacific Region  
RICCARDO POLASTRO
Regional Evaluation Advisor 
UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office
MICHAELA PROKOP
Regional Programme Advisor 
2030 Agenda, Bangkok Regional Hub, UNDP
CONTEXT  
Many countries in the Asia and Pacific region have made significant progress in establishing 
the building blocks necessary to support implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustaina -
ble Development. Countries across the region have set up institutional arrangements to pro-
mote horizontal and vertical coordination to facilitate this implementation, have started to 
align their national (and sometimes subnational) development strategies and budgets with 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) targets10 and have assessed the availability of data and 
the capacities of data systems to monitor and evaluate progress. In this process, countries 
are also reviewing and adjusting their national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems. 
However, to date much of the attention has been on formulating targets and indicators as 
well as setting up systems for measuring progress against the SDGs and less on strengthen-
ing evaluation systems and capacities. 
10 While the Millennium Development Goals focused mainly focused on monitoring, the 2030 
Agenda has put evaluation at the centre, stating in paragraph 74 of General Assembly resolution 
70/1 that: “Follow-up and review processes at all levels will be guided by the following principles: 
[…] They will be rigorous and based on evidence, informed by country-led evaluations and data 
which is high-quality, accessible, timely, reliable and disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, eth -
nicity, migration status, disability and geographic location and other characteristics relevant in 
national contexts. They will require enhanced capacity-building support for developing countries, 
including the strengthening of national data systems and evaluation frameworks. […]” General 
Assembly resolution 69/237 on capacity-building for the evaluation of development activities at 
country level shows that Member States recognize that evaluation is a core component of devel -
opment processes, and recognize evaluation as a country-level tool that can help strengthen and 
support development results.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
PEOPLE, PLANET AND PROGRESS IN THE SDG ERA  
PROCEEDINGS FROM THE NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES CONFERENCE 2017
28
The 2030 Agenda proposes a balanced approach, with a set of interconnected goals and 
targets, which requires an understanding of how different policies and interventions interact 
with each other and affect an entire system. This and the ambition of the agenda of “leaving 
no one behind” and “reaching the furthest behind first” poses significant challenges to devel-
opment planners, policymakers and evaluators. It requires new approaches to planning and 
evaluating including mainstreaming equity-based evaluations and systems thinking-based 
approaches, and to learn what works best where, how, for whom, under which contexts and 
why to ensure value for money and enhanced efficiency and effectiveness.
Developing and strengthening systems and national capacities for evaluation and adopt-
ing new, more integrated approaches to institutional strengthening and capacity-building 
will be crucial to support this process. It will also need to be addressed as an integral part of 
the overall mainstreaming and implementation of the 2030 Agenda process. Figure 1 shows 
how evaluation and evaluative thinking inform a country’s planning and budgeting cycle 
and their importance in ensuring that progress towards a country’s development goals is 
equitable, that resources are allocated and spent efficiently and effectively and that it pro -
motes a balanced approach to sustainable development. 
National Development 
Strategy/Medium-Term 
Budget or Expenditure 
Frameworks
Annual Sector 
Allocations
Monitoring
Mid-term Review of 
National Development 
Strategy/Review of 
Sectoral Plans
Adjustment/ 
Revision
Final Evaluation
Prioritization
evaluation of trade oﬀs and
synergies/costing   
Adjustments to 
sectoral plans 
Annual budget
priorities
Evaluating
policy choices
Review progress
of expenditures
results
Sectoral Plans
to 
ns 
An
ting
 Review
Evaluation 
FIGURE 1.  EVALUATION: AN INTEGRAL PART OF MAINSTREAMING AND 
IMPLEMENTING THE 2030 AGENDA
<<<PAGE=3>>>
PART 2. NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS AND NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES IN THE SDG ERA 
CHAPTER 2
29
Governments consider evaluation as an oversight function that captures results and les-
sons learned to improve national development policies and programmes which contribute 
to meeting performance standards such as relevance, effectiveness, sustainability and equity. 
Evaluation can inform decision-making by putting the best available evidence at the cen-
tre of policy, planning and budgeting processes. However, this requires institutional arrange-
ments and at times legal frameworks allowing for feedback loops, strong national evaluation 
capacity and a culture of evaluation. Exercising evaluation in an independent, credible and 
useful way contributes to good governance, public accountability and transparency in the 
use of resources and results.
REVIEW OF NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS AND CAPACITIES: A JOINT  
UNDP/UNICEF INITIATIVE 11
As mentioned above, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs provides new entry 
points and opportunities to create institutional mechanisms for better feedback loops link -
ing planning, budgeting and monitoring and evaluation processes. There is increasing rec -
ognition globally and in the region of the importance of strengthening national evaluation 
systems and capacities to support this process.12 Among stakeholders there is strong interest 
in learning from emerging experiences across the region and beyond on key enablers for 
national development strategies and for the review, follow-up and evaluation processes of 
the 2030 Agenda. In response to this interest, the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) launched a joint initiative on reviewing 
national evaluation systems and capacities to evaluate progress towards the SDGs in the Asia 
and Pacific region. 
The initiative aims to showcase successes, lessons and learnings from national evalua -
tion systems, to foster peer learning among stakeholders and to inform global, regional and 
national evaluation capacity-development guidance through the production of readiness 
assessments at country level. Through an iterative process, outlined in Figure 2 below, coun-
try case studies are feeding into a regional synthesis report. A peer review group including 
members from the Asian Development Bank, UNDP , UNICEF and UN Women has been set up 
to provide overall guidance.
11 This section is based on the Review of National Evaluation Systems and Capacities for Evaluating 
Progress towards the SDGs – Country Case Studies – Methodology for the Country Case Studies,  May 
2017 (a report commissioned by UNDP and UNICEF).
12 At the regional level, several United Nations and government initiatives have contributed to this 
process including: NEC Bangkok Declaration from the Fourth International Conference on National 
Evaluation Capacities Conference 2015, organized by UNDP and the Government of Thailand in 2015; 
Parliamentarians Forum for Evaluations in Bangkok (2015), Kathmandu (2016) and Hanoi (2016) 
organized by EvalPartners in partnership with United Nations agencies; the first Asian Evaluation 
Week, co-sponsored by  the Ministry of Finance of China, Asia-Pacific Finance and Development 
Institute and the Asian Development Bank Independent Evaluation Department; a regional train -
ing workshop on “Developing National Evaluation Capacities to Support the Implementation of 
the 2030 Agenda” organized by UNDP and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research 
(UNITAR) with support from EVALSDGs and UNICEF; and the Asian Pacific Evaluation Association 
inaugural conference, “SDGs: making a difference through evaluation” .
<<<PAGE=4>>>
PEOPLE, PLANET AND PROGRESS IN THE SDG ERA  
PROCEEDINGS FROM THE NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES CONFERENCE 2017
30
Specifically, country case studies aim to:
zz Map national evaluation systems including institutions, actors, relationships and 
processes;
zz Identify lessons learned, good practices, challenges, gaps and success factors for 
evaluation capacity in each country;
zz Produce assessments of the readiness of national evaluation systems, including both 
state and non-state elements, to support progress towards the SDGs; and
zz Provide recommendations for strengthening systems and building national evalua -
tion capacities to support SDG implementation.
The regional synthesis will identify patterns and lessons emerging from the country cases 
related to strengths and weaknesses of the national evaluation systems, readiness to sup -
port evaluation for the SDGs and related trends and priorities in national evaluation capac -
ity development needs. The first phase of country case studies covers Indonesia, Malaysia,  
Sri Lanka and Thailand. Additional country case studies are being initiated in Mongolia, 
Myanmar and the Philippines. Governments have stressed the importance of ensuring that 
the country case studies provide concrete recommendations and feed into road maps for 
filling capacity gaps. 
The conceptual framework for the country case studies identifies key aspects of evalua -
tion systems and capacity. It builds on the EvalAgenda2020 (see Figure 3) and other literature 
on national evaluation capacity-building. 
Stakeholder
engagement and 
peer learning 
through case 
study process 
Guidance on 
National Evaluation
Capacity 
Development
for the SDGs
Country case
studies and
readiness
Regional synthesis and
National Evaluation
Capacity Development
lessons
Additional case
studies
FIGURE 2.  REVIEW OF NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS AND  
CAPACITIES: PROCESS AND KEY MILESTONES
Source: Review of National Evaluation Systems and Capacities for Evaluating Progress towards the SDGs – Country Case 
Studies – Methodology for the Country Case Studies, May 2017 (a report commissioned by UNDP and UNICEF)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
PART 2. NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS AND NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES IN THE SDG ERA 
CHAPTER 2
31
The conceptual framework for the country case studies, shown in Figure 4 below, is struc-
tured around three core dimensions of evaluation systems— enabling environment, institu -
tional capacity and individual capacity—and identifies seven key evaluation capacity factors: 
demand; use; leadership; resources; technical capacity; institutional arrangements; and values 
and standards. Cutting across these elements are four key principles of the 2030 Agenda: 
integration, inclusion, accountability and evidence. 
FIGURE 3. EVALAGENDA 2020 VISION OF EVALUATION
Source: Global Evaluation Agenda 2016-2020, (adapted from Review of National Evaluation Systems and Capacities for 
Evaluating Progress towards the SDGs – Country Case Studies – Methodology for the Country Case Studies, May 2017) p.7. 
* Voluntary organizations of professional evaluators
INSTITUTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVALUATION USERS  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 INDIVIDUAL EVALUATORS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation  
context and 
culture
Evaluation 
demand
Complexity 
scale, time  
and pace
Evaluation 
policies
Evaluation 
knowledge, 
methods, data 
and produc ts
Sector/
specialization
Evaluation 
systems
Networks & 
partnerships 
(VOPEs*, 
government, 
private sector, 
science)
Integration  
and synthesis  
of results
Evaluation 
resources
Resource 
mobilization  
and  
management
Evaluation  
use
Commissioners,  
users
Communication 
and 
dissemination
The enabling 
environment  
for evaluation
Institutional  
capacities
Individual 
capacities  
for  
evaluation
Inter- linkages 
among these /f_irst 
three dimensions
Positive 
Outcomes 
(incl SDGs)
<<<PAGE=6>>>
PEOPLE, PLANET AND PROGRESS IN THE SDG ERA  
PROCEEDINGS FROM THE NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES CONFERENCE 2017
32
FIGURE 4. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR COUNTRY CASE STUDIES
EMERGING LESSONS LEARNED FROM INITIAL COUNTRY CASE STUDIES 13
From the first round of country case studies, a few initial lessons learned and regional pri -
orities can be identified. While these are the subject of further refinement and discussion, a 
preliminary overview is provided below.
In most countries, there is limited awareness of the importance of evaluation for the 
process of mainstreaming and implementing the 2030 Agenda. As mentioned earlier, most 
efforts are focusing on indicators and data-gathering rather than on analysis and interpre -
tation, particularly in relation to the key ambitions of the 2030 Agenda of “leaving no one 
behind” and “reaching the furthest behind first” . Similarly, integrated approaches that bal -
ance the three dimensions of sustainable development—economic, social and environmen-
tal—and a review of synergies and trade-offs across sectors, interventions and investments, 
remain a key challenge.
Evaluative thinking that feeds back into strategy and policy development remains a 
challenge in all countries in the region. Although most countries have set up institutional 
mechanisms for coordinating and implementing the 2030 Agenda, siloed approaches still 
predominate.
13  At the NEC 2017, only initial findings from Sri Lanka and Malaysia were presented.
Source: Review of National Evaluation Systems and Capacities for Evaluating Progress towards the SDGs – Country Case 
Studies – Methodology for the Country Case Studies, May 2017 (a report commissioned by UNDP and UNICEF)
DIMENSIONS OF EVALUATION SYSTEMS
Enabling 
environment
Institutional 
development
Individual  
capacity
SDG principles                        Integration                                     Inclusion 
                  Accountability                                  Evidence
EVALUATION CAPACITY FACTORS
Demand
Use
Leadership
Resources
Technical capacity
Institutional arrangements
Values and standards
➞
<<<PAGE=7>>>
PART 2. NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS AND NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES IN THE SDG ERA 
CHAPTER 2
33
Below is a list of emerging regional priorities using above-mentioned review framework.
SUMMARY OF REGIONAL PRIORITIES
Enabling 
environment
•    Support policy or legal commitments and guidelines on roles and responsibilities in 
policy development and implementation.
•    Engage parliamentarians more extensively in evaluation planning and use.
•    Strengthen instruments and mechanisms to ensure policy commitments: (1) finalization 
of monitoring and evaluation framework for SDGs if not already in place; (2) establish-
ing mechanisms to allocate specific resources for evaluation; particularly in relation to 
SDGs; and (3) strengthening integrated data platforms.
Institutional 
development
•    Standards, guidelines and good practices that countries can tailor to their needs and 
that contribute to high-quality evaluations to inform decision-making.
•    Horizontal and vertical linkages to support policy coherence and multi-stakeholder 
involvement. This should include building feedback loops into the development 
planning and budgeting process (at national, subnational and sectoral levels).
Individual 
capacity
•    Training of trainers. Some countries are moving towards country-based certification. 
Regional support to standardized training of trainers could widen the pool of trained 
evaluators.
•    Continuation of peer learning activities and opportunities for regional knowledge 
exchange.
From three of the country case studies, the following are emerging as key priorities: 14
Malaysia
zz Establish evaluative policy feedback loops for the SDGs through the SDG Council. 
zz Improve data sharing through a new knowledge platform and portal for independ -
ent review and analysis of statistics and evaluation results for national learning for 
the SDGs. 
zz Build a more systematic approach to evaluation capacity development, drawing on 
existing institutional strengths. 
zz Strengthen and streamline the national evaluation system between govern -
ment, private sector, academia and civil society organizations/non-governmental 
organizations. 
zz Reflect the voices of vulnerable groups in keeping with the principle of “no one left 
behind” . 
Indonesia
zz Central agencies need to take an oversight role and lead national evaluation capacity 
and national evaluation system efforts as a centre of excellence. 
zz Develop an overarching policy on evaluation.
zz Develop a comprehensive capacity development plan.
14 For Malaysia and Thailand, findings are yet to be validated by key stakeholders, for Indonesia findings 
have been endorsed by the Government and for Sri Lanka recommendations are still being drafted.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
PEOPLE, PLANET AND PROGRESS IN THE SDG ERA  
PROCEEDINGS FROM THE NATIONAL EVALUATION CAPACITIES CONFERENCE 2017
34
zz Strengthen data quality assurance of all data producers at national and subnational 
levels. 
zz Strengthen feedback loops through the utilization of tested and available social 
accountability tools.
Thailand
zz Develop a stronger policy and strategic framework for values and standards for 
evaluation. 
zz Set up an independent body to oversee quality of evaluations and promote their use.
zz Create opportunities for building awareness and capacity on the SDGs in general and 
evaluation in particular. 
zz Establish an independent evaluation unit staffed by well-trained evaluators, includ -
ing in the areas of equity-focused and gender-responsive evaluation, to ensure that 
the voices of vulnerable groups are incorporated into evaluations in keeping with 
the principle of “no one left behind” .
Based on the emerging recommendations, the Governments of Indonesia and Thailand 
have indicated strong interest in developing national evaluation policies. 
NEXT STEPS
In each case study country, a workshop will be held with multiple stakeholders to foster peer 
learning and to validate the recommendations. Governments have expressed keen interest 
in going beyond the country case studies to develop a road map with a set of prioritized and 
sequenced activities based on the findings. Following the validation workshop, consulta -
tions will be held with development partners to support capacity-building needs.
 A synthesis report identifying national evaluation systems and capacity-building suc -
cesses and lessons learned will be produced and shared with governments and other stake-
holders in the region. The report aims to generate emerging good practices to guide national 
evaluation capacity development for the 2030 Agenda and will be shared with the United 
Nations Evaluation Group and other United Nations agencies. It aims to target policymakers 
and focal points for the 2030 Agenda and SDGs as well as members of the evaluation com -
munity to ensure that stronger linkages are being made.
Following bilateral consultations in 2018, additional country case studies including those 
for Mongolia, Myanmar and the Philippines will be conducted. There is also strong interest 
from other United Nations partners to join the initiative. In Malaysia, the initial assessment is 
being expanded to look at the subnational level. In Mongolia, the country case study could 
be linked to work on public finance and contribute to the follow-up to a recent Mainstream-
ing Acceleration and Policy Support (MAPS) mission.15
15 The mission included members from the Asian Development Bank, UNDP , UNFPA and UNICEF.