<<<PAGE=1>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
1 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 
© 2022, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may 
not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite 
without authors' permission. 
 
We Know This Much is (Meta-Analytically) True: 
A Meta-Review of Meta-Analytic Findings Evaluating Self-Determination Theory 
 
Richard M. Ryan1,2, Jasper J. Duineveld1, Stefano I. Di Domenico3,  
William S. Ryan4, Ben A. Steward5, and Emma L. Bradshaw1  
 
1 Institute for Positive Psychology and Education,  
Australian Catholic University, North Sydney, NSW, Australia 
2 Department of Education, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 
3 Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Scarborough, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
4 Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, St. George, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
5 Research School of Psychology, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 
Author Note 
Richard M. Ryan  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2355-6154 
Jasper J. Duineveld  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2974-4543 
Stefano I. Di Domenico  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7137-7364 
William S. Ryan  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0158-3810 
Ben A. Steward  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7517-9215  
Emma L. Bradshaw  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6423-5499 
 
Transparency and Openness: The complete data that underpin this narrative synthesis of 
meta-analyses is included in Online Supplementary Materials Table S1. This review of meta-
analyses was not preregistered.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
2 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: 
Richard M. Ryan, Institute for Positive Psychology and Education, Australian Catholic 
University, North Sydney Level 9, 33 Berry St, North Sydney, Australia 
E-mail: richard.ryan@acu.edu.au
<<<PAGE=3>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
3 
Abstract 
Self-determination theory (SDT) is a theoretical framework for addressing human motivation 
and wellness that has been actively and increasingly researched over four decades. As a 
cumulative knowledge base, many of SDT’s fundamental tenets have been repeatedly 
examined. We identified 60 meta-analyses that tested many of the propositions of SDT’s six 
mini-theories, other theory-based hypotheses, and SDT’s utility in applied domains. In this 
review we examine what these meta-analyses establish, highlighting the support they lend to 
the validity of SDT’s motivational taxonomy and its hypotheses regarding the respective 
effects of basic psychological need satisfaction and frustration on well-being and ill-being. 
Meta-analytic evidence also strongly supports the relevance of SDT for organizations, health 
care, parenting, and education among other domains, with identifiable gaps in the meta-
analytic literature. We conclude by discussing the importance of broad theory and the use of 
meta-analytic knowledge as scaffolding for further theory and research, albeit with its own 
methodological limitations. 
  
Keywords: self-determination theory, meta-analysis, basic psychological needs, 
autonomy, intrinsic motivation 
 
Public significance statement: This systematic review includes a comprehensive 
narrative synthesis of sixty meta-analyses, each of which tests various principles from Self-
Determination Theory (SDT). Such a review is of broad public significance because SDT has 
become one of the most widely applied approaches to human motivation and is the basis for 
interventions in many domains including work and organizations, healthcare, education, 
physical activity, and sport, among others.
<<<PAGE=4>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
4 
Self-determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2017) is a broad theory of human 
motivation, personality development, and well-being that has emerged as among the most 
researched and applied in psychology today. In part, this strong interest in SDT stems from 
the theory’s relatively unique focus on the important issues of human autonomy and volition, 
and how support for people’s basic psychological needs for autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness can enhance learning, personality and identity growth, and sustained behavior 
change. SDT is therefore relevant not only to the basic science of motivation and 
development, but also to applied fields as diverse as parenting, education, organizations, 
sport, healthcare, and technology (Ryan, Soenens, & Vansteenkiste, 2019). In all these areas 
of life, SDT assumes that the extent to which people undertake tasks and activities with a 
sense of choice, ownership, and agency is linked with higher quality performance, greater 
persistence, and higher well-being when compared to more controlled forms of motivation. 
SDT began in the 1970s with studies on the facilitation and undermining of intrinsic 
motivation—or activities done for inherent enjoyment (Deci & Ryan, 1980). From there, the 
theory expanded to extrinsic motivation and to model the drivers of extrinsic or instrumental 
behaviors as they vary in their relative autonomy (Ryan & Connell, 1989). Based on repeated 
empirical findings that social and intra-personal supports for autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness enhanced not only high-quality motivation but also individual’s reports of 
wellness and vitality, SDT expanded to address well-being and life goals (Ryan & Deci, 
2000; 2017), establishing it as a fuller framework for the study of personality (Sheldon & 
Prentice, 2019).  
Among major theories of human motivation, SDT’s emphasis on autonomy and basic 
need satisfaction early on stood in contrast to behavioral theories that largely focused on 
external causation of actions (e.g., Skinner, 1971), and to cognitive theories which focused on 
the mediation of such external causation (Bem, 1972). It also contrasts with Bandura’s social-
<<<PAGE=5>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
5 
cognitive theory (SCT; Bandura, 1989). Although both SDT and SCT view experiences of 
competence as essential to self-motivation, Bandura explicitly denied the importance of 
autonomy and more generally eschewed the concept of psychological needs. In contrast, 
more recent “third wave” behaviorists have taken interest in issues of basic psychological 
needs and the importance of autonomy and relatedness, including acceptance and 
commitment therapy (e.g., Hayes, 2019) and motivational interviewing (e.g., Markland et al., 
2005; 2007) among other contemporary approaches to behavior change.  
Because SDT’s organismic approach focuses on basic psychological needs as 
essential foundations of growth and wellness, it interfaces with theoretical work by Doyal 
and Gough on basic needs (see Dover, 2016; Doyal & Gough, 1991; Gough, 2019). SDT 
constructs have also been applied within Personality Systems Integration (PSI) theory (Kuhl 
& Bauman, 2021; Kuhl, Quirin & Koole, 2015), especially regarding measurement and 
hypotheses concerning autonomy (Bauman & Kuhl, 2005; Koole, et al 2019). SDT overlaps 
with Leary and Baumeister’s (2000) sociometer theory in focusing on the psychological need 
for belonging or relatedness as central to healthy self-functioning, using similar criteria in 
defining relatedness as a basic need. SDT has also been integrated with the theory of planned 
behavior (TPB; Ajzen, 1985), with autonomous motivation as defined in SDT being 
positively and significantly associated with TPB factors, behavioral intentions, and adherence 
(e.g., see Wan, Hagger et al., 2022). Finally, because SDT is a broad framework, it has 
inspired related theories such as Vallerand’s (2015) theory of harmonious and obsessive 
passion and Sheldon and Elliot’s (1999) self-concordance theory, among others.  
An important and guiding focus of SDT is providing an evidence-based framework 
for real-world practice and interventions. As a general theory, SDT expresses broad 
principles expected to generalize across domains of activity, so examining SDT’s 
propositions and hypotheses in distinct contexts is important both for basic theory testing and
<<<PAGE=6>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
6 
differentiations and refinements, as each domain of application involves its own unique 
embodiments of SDT variables and challenges to the theory’s implementation. Thus, 
coaches’ autonomy support and control on the sports field differs from autonomy and control 
in the clinic in both content and social context. Secondarily, the effects of SDT interventions 
can also be meta-analytically reviewed, as has been done with other behavior change 
approaches such as “nudge” (Mertens et al., 2022; Maier et al., 2022) or mindset (Yeager & 
Dweck, 2020) interventions. 
Recently, Ryan and Deci (2019) described the development of SDT over a four-
decade period as a “brick by brick” (p. 111) process of conservatively building upon an open 
and convergent evidence base. One advantage of a slow-maturing theory is that it can 
generate sufficient research to allow for meta-analyses. In this article we take stock of 60 
meta-analyses that have tested various hypotheses and propositions derived from SDT, 
discussing their significance, overlap, and meaning, as well as identifying gaps in the 
literature where more data is needed. Determining what is meta-analytically supported within 
and between parts of SDT can reveal the relative solidity of its current theoretical 
propositions, applications, and interventions, as well as foundations that remain in need of 
further testing. 
Why Meta-Analyses? 
Meta-analyses are reviews that combine empirical results from multiple studies with 
the typical purpose of estimating the reliability and magnitude of effect sizes and research 
findings testing specific hypotheses. Data across studies are systematically gathered from the 
literature, analyzed, and evaluated. In contrast to narrative reviews, meta-analyses provide a 
statistically focused evaluation of collective findings, potentially reducing interpretive biases. 
Meta-analyses also enhance understanding of effect sizes and their heterogeneity, which can
<<<PAGE=7>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
7 
help identify potential sources of measurement error, moderating variables (or the need to 
look for them), and limiting conditions.  
As a widely engaged theory of motivation and wellness and the conditions that 
facilitate them, SDT has forwarded many empirical claims that have been widely tested. 
Some of these claims are in the form of formal theoretical propositions (see Supplemental 
Material, Table S2), and others are hypotheses following from or extending elements of the 
theory or its principles of application. Many arguments central to SDT entail universal claims 
or principles that are argued to apply across genders, age groups, countries, cultures, and 
contexts. Meta-analysis is an apt method for assessing such claims of universality because it 
allows group-level variables (e.g., age, cultural membership) to be included as possible 
moderators of a specific pooled effect. Depending upon the availability of sufficient data, if a 
group-level variable does not substantially moderate the main effect, it can be considered 
common across groups. Noting that occasional anomalous results could be a function of Type 
I or Type II errors, sample characteristics rather than population characteristics, or various 
method effects, pooling effect sizes and assessing moderators meta-analytically thus 
contributes to greater rigor when estimating the “true” effects across studies. 
Meta-analyses are also valuable because they facilitate the identification of gaps and 
guide maturing fields of research toward addressing unanswered questions. At a certain point, 
additional studies of the same variables in similar contexts using identical outcomes 
contribute little new knowledge. Therefore, meta-analyses facilitate the identification of 
effects both for which there is little data or support, and those with more robust standing. 
Meta-analyses also can be used to identify variation in effect sizes beyond sampling error, or 
heterogeneity (Higgins & Thompson, 2002), which can suggest the presence of potential 
moderators and measurement variations, and thus areas in need of further research.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
8 
Finally, meta-analyses are also instrumental in quantifying the strength of relations 
between constructs. Meta-analyses allow for the calculation of average effect sizes and the 
comparison of these values against other known effects and established thresholds. 
Historically, the import and utility of statistical effects have been interpreted according to the 
effect size thresholds proposed by Cohen (1988). Cohen (1988) recommended interpreting r 
= .10, r = .30, and r = .50 as small, medium, and large effects, respectively. Yet more recent 
research has indicated that Cohen’s (1988) interpretations may be too stringent (Gignac & 
Szodorai, 2016). In their review of 708 meta-analytic effects, Gignac and Szodorai (2016) 
reported that r = .11, r = .19, and r = .29 represented the 25%, 50%, and 75% percentiles of 
the observed effects, respectively. In a similar vein, Funder and Ozer’s (2019) review of 
effect size benchmarks and the “concrete consequences” (p. 156) associated with them 
reported that r = .05 is a very small effect, r = .10 is a small effect that has more potential to 
be consequential, r = .20 is a medium-sized effect that could be meaningful in the short- and 
long-term, and r = .30 is a large effect that is likely substantially consequential in the short- 
and long-term. 
 Gignac and Szodorai’s (2016) and Funder and Ozer’s (2019) conclusions are just two 
examples of a growing consensus (e.g., Brydges, 2019; Hemphill, 2003) that Cohen’s (1988) 
thresho “overestimate effect sizes” (Brydges, 2019, p. 1). These more recent studies of effect 
sizes (Brydges, 2019; Funder & Ozer, 2019, Gignac & Szodorai, 2016; Hemphill, 2003) 
refocus the interpretation on representativeness and probable utility. As a result, the field has 
an updated yardstick for the evaluation of effect sizes, particularly meta-analytic effects. 
Instead of the average effect size in psychology (r = .21; Richard et al., 2003) being a small 
effect (according to Cohen’s (1988) guidelines), evidence increasingly suggests that such 
effects are medium-sized, or “typical” (Gignac & Szodorai, 2016, p. 75), and possibly of 
explanatory and practical utility in both the short- and long-term. That said, one also expects
<<<PAGE=9>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
9 
variations in effect size, both because in SDT the strength of relations is predicted to vary for 
substantive reasons (e.g., as a function of relative autonomy), and because effect sizes vary in 
magnitude because of factors such as shared method variance or overlaps in content. Thus, 
effect sizes must always be interpreted in both theoretical and methodological context. In this 
review we hope to capture what meta-analytic studies have identified with respect to the 
constructs and assumptions underpinning SDT. 
Self-Determination Theory in Brief 
SDT is an organismic psychology, concerned with the active organization and 
development of the self (Ryan & Deci, 2017). As an organismic approach, SDT assumes 
humans are inherently prone toward active assimilation and integration when under nurturing 
or supportive conditions (Ryan, 1995). Conversely, it proposes that deprivations in 
psychological nurturance and supports can lead to passivity, defensiveness, integrative 
blocks, and compromised functioning (Ryan et al., 2016; Vansteenkiste & Ryan, 2013). In 
understanding the effects of contexts on psychological development and wellness, SDT 
focuses on three basic psychological needs, those for autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness, of which the satisfactions are seen as essential nutriments to healthy motivation, 
integrative functioning and striving, and ultimately, wellness. Social environments strongly 
influence the satisfaction and frustration of these needs, leading to optimized versus 
compromised psychological functioning. Over the years, specific claims following from this 
“broad strokes” description of SDT have been organized as six mini-theories. 
SDT’s Six Mini-Theories  
SDT is currently built around six overlapping mini-theories (Vansteenkiste, Ryan, & 
Soenens, 2020). Each of these formal mini-theories contains a set of formal hypotheses, 
stated as propositions, which are related to numerous hypotheses. SDT’s propositions have 
historically been articulated after assembling convergent evidence, so as not to make errors of
<<<PAGE=10>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
10 
commission in formal theory building (Ryan & Deci, 2019). The mini-theories also emerged 
individually over time in response to a widening evidence base. 
SDT’s first mini-theory, cognitive evaluation theory (CET; Deci & Ryan, 1980; 
1985b) was concerned exclusively with how social and intrapersonal events and contexts 
affect intrinsic motivation—especially the roles of autonomy and competence satisfactions in 
sustaining intrinsic motivation. Subsequently, expanding from the study of intrinsic 
motivation, organismic integration theory (OIT; Ryan & Connell, 1989) was introduced to 
address extrinsically motivated behaviors and their internalization. It specifies a taxonomy of 
distinct motives or regulatory styles that systematically vary in their relative autonomy and 
their consequences for quality of motivation, performance, and wellness. Having developed a 
fuller view of motivation, a third mini-theory, causality orientation theory (COT; Deci & 
Ryan, 1985a) was proposed to address individual differences in motivational orientations and 
their correlates.  
A turning point toward a broader theory of wellness emerged with the development of 
the fourth mini-theory, basic psychological needs theory (BPNT; Ryan, 1995; Vansteenkiste, 
Soenens, & Ryan, 2022). Having examined conditions supporting optimal motivation, BPNT 
proposes the universal importance of autonomy, competence, and relatedness satisfactions for 
human flourishing, and the robust role of psychological need satisfactions and frustrations in 
outcomes from wellness and vitality, on the positive side, to violence and psychopathology, 
on the negative side. Goal contents theory (GCT; Bradshaw, 2023; Vansteenkiste et al., 
2010) built on BPNT by specifying the differing effects that intrinsic and extrinsic aspirations 
and life goals have on people’s wellness through their impact on fundamental psychological 
needs. Finally, the most recent mini-theory, relationships motivation theory (RMT; Ryan & 
Deci, 2017), focuses on the motivational underpinnings of close social relationships and 
attachments. RMT is concerned with basic psychological need satisfactions in relationships,
<<<PAGE=11>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
11 
in particular the mutuality of autonomy support and the positive associations between 
autonomy and relatedness satisfactions.  
Experimental and correlational studies have empirically examined many of the 
hypotheses central to SDT’s mini-theories. In addition, SDT-based hypotheses have proven 
testable and useful in a variety of specific and applied domains. In fact, many of the most 
important claims forwarded by SDT concern its applied value and practical import in various 
domains. Although the earliest applied studies occurred mainly in educational and work 
contexts (see Deci & Ryan, 1985b), over time research and intervention studies have 
accumulated, especially in the areas of health care, parenting, sport, and physical activity.  
We accordingly organized this review into two parts. In Results Part I: Meta-Analyses 
Related to SDT Mini-Theories we focus on basic research testing both formal propositions 
and hypotheses stemming from SDT’s six mini-theories. In Results Part II: SDT Meta-
Analyses in Applied Areas we focus on meta-analyses examining SDT’s utility in practical 
domains. We conclude with an overarching discussion about what the collective meta-
analyses to date suggest about SDT’s framework, its empirical supports, and areas of either 
weakness or insufficient knowledge. 
Method 
Search Strategy 
 As an initial step, records were readily identified within the personal databases of the 
paper’s authors, each of whom is conversant in SDT, and from the Center for Self-
Determination Theory website (www.selfdeterminationtheory.org), where research papers 
and findings are listed. Additionally, a systematic search was conducted in February 2021 
using the databases APA PsycInfo, CINAHL, SPORTdiscus, ERIC, and SCOPUS; this 
search was later repeated at the end of July 2021. Both searches included keywords of Self-
Determination Theory ("SDT"  OR  "Self-Determination Theory"), or Basic Psychological
<<<PAGE=12>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
12 
Needs ("Basic Psychological Need*"), or Autonomy Support ("Autonom* Support"), and 
Meta-analysis (meta-analys*). 
Study Selection 
 Studies were considered eligible for inclusion when they 1) were identified as meta-
analysis or systematic review, 2) completed studies (not protocols of ongoing studies), 3) 
included relevant SDT variables (e.g., basic psychological need support, intrinsic/extrinsic 
aspirations, motivational regulation), 4) tested SDT hypotheses, and 5) were published in 
English. All studies suitable for screening were gathered in an Endnote library and duplicate 
papers were removed. Two independent reviewers then assessed the title and abstract of each 
study. Studies that were excluded by both reviewers were removed from the screening. 
Studies that were included by both reviewers proceeded to the full-text round of review. 
Studies for which there was rater disagreement were discussed and negotiated by the two 
raters. The same two reviewers then independently screened the full-texts of the remaining 
articles for eligibility. Any discrepancies regarding eligibility were discussed to reach 
consensus. When consensus was not reached, a third independent reviewer was consulted. 
Supplemental Material, Table S3 presents the 33 articles that were excluded at the full text 
review stage, along with the specific reason for exclusion.  
 The search and selection process ultimately resulted in 60 articles eligible for this 
review. Inspection of publication dates reveals that the vast majority of these reports 
appeared within the last 10 years (> 75%), suggesting a point at which a critical mass of 
studies had emerged for many SDT hypotheses to be meta-analytically examined. Of the 60 
included articles, 58 were published. Although journal quality of these published articles is 
varied, many have appeared in top tier outlets within the field, both basic (e.g., Psychological 
Bulletin, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology) and applied (e.g., Educational 
Psychology Review; Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology). Noteworthy as well is
<<<PAGE=13>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
13 
that more recent meta-analyses are better documented, typically applying methods to detect 
bias and outliers (e.g., funnel plots) and providing estimates of heterogeneity in effects, 
consistent with trends reported by Appelbaum et al., 2018).  
Figure 1 provides a flow diagram of the search results and study selection steps, 
including the number of articles screened and excluded. Table 1 lists SDT’s six mini-theories 
and the meta-analyses most directly related to each. We note that one mini-theory, RMT, 
which is the most recent in SDT’s formal framework (Ryan & Deci, 2017), has no entry in its 
column within Table 1, already suggesting a gap in meta-analytic knowledge. Table 2 lists 
the applied domains and the relevant meta-analyses. There is some overlap between entries in 
Tables 1 and 2 because some of the primary meta-analytic tests of SDT mini-theory 
hypotheses and propositions have been carried out within applied domains (e.g., Fong, et al., 
2019; Slemp et al., 2018). 
Data Collection 
 We extracted the effect sizes from the eligible articles. Our goal was to describe the 
magnitude of the relevant effect sizes and their alignment with the hypotheses stemming from 
each SDT mini-theory. A secondary aim was to provide readers with a ready summary of 
previous meta-analytic results. A summary of all extracted effect sizes can be found in 
Supplemental Material, Table S1. Extracted data included the effect size, the type of effect 
size (e.g., Cohen’s d, Pearson’s r, Hedge’s g, Spearman’s ρ), whether the mean effect size 
was statistically corrected for unreliability, the mini-theory to which the effect size pertained, 
the topic to which the effect size pertained, and the pair of variables to which the effect size 
was related. To increase comparability of effect sizes across studies, we transformed all effect 
sizes to Pearson’s r. To convert from a standardized mean difference (d) to a correlation (r) 
we used the formula 𝑟 =  
𝑑
√𝑑2+𝑎 where a = 4 as specified by Borenstein et al. (2009). In 
addition to meta-analytic effect sizes, Supplemental Material, Table S1 lists the number of
<<<PAGE=14>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
14 
studies in each meta-analysis (k), the total sample size of each meta-analysis (N). Table S1 
also includes Higgins’ and Thompson’s (2002) I2 measure of heterogeneity, τ2 measure of 
heterogeneity variance, as well as Cochran’s (1954) Q statistic for each meta-analysis where 
these were available, to represent the percentage of variation not attributable to sampling 
error.  
Transparency and Openness 
 This review was not preregistered. The complete data that underpin this narrative 
synthesis of meta-analyses is included in online Supplementary Materials, Table S1. To help 
readers locate the meta-analyses focused on testing formal propositions within each of SDT’s 
mini-theories, we provide a listing of each of the propositions and the relevant meta-analyses 
and statistics (see Supplemental Material, Table S2). Note that these tests of propositions 
represent only a subset of the effects listed in Table S1, which reflect a broader set of 
questions examined meta-analytically with respect to SDT and its assumptions. 
Results Part I: Meta-Analyses Related to SDT Mini-Theories 
Cognitive Evaluation Theory 
Cognitive Evaluation Theory (CET) developed from early experimental studies within 
SDT that examined the factors influencing people’s intrinsic motivation for activities. 
Intrinsic motivation was typically assessed during behavioral “free choice” periods, 
operationalized as time engaged in an activity in the absence of external regulators such as 
rewards or interpersonal directives (Deci, 1975). These experiments primarily focused on 
exposing people to conditions expected to affect perceptions of autonomy (the sense of 
willing versus feeling controlled in doing something) and competence (one’s sense of being 
able to effectively perform a task) (Deci & Ryan, 1980). 
This SDT conceptualization of autonomy grew out of de Charms’ (1968) theory of 
personal causation and the idea that intentional behaviors can vary in their perceived locus of
<<<PAGE=15>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
15 
causality (PLOC). An internal PLOC refers to experiencing oneself as willingly engaged in 
an act, or being an “origin” (de Charms, 1968, p.272) whereas an external PLOC refers to 
experiencing one’s behavior as being brought about by forces external to the self, an 
experience that de Charms described as feeling like a “pawn” (p. 274). SDT’s conception of 
competence was drawn from White’s (1959) concept of effectance motivation—the desire to 
experience mastery and effectiveness in acting. Three central propositions concerning the 
main effects of situational conditions affecting intrinsic motivation emerged based on these 
two central constructs: 
1. Events that enhance an internal perceived internal locus of causality—or the 
relative autonomy of motivation—will sustain or enhance intrinsic motivation; those that 
foster an external perceived locus of causality—or heteronomous control over behavior— 
will or undermine intrinsic motivation. 
2. Events that enhance perceived competence sustain or enhance intrinsic motivation, 
whereas those that diminish perceived competence decrease intrinsic motivation. 
3. Events vary in their functional significance or meaning to the recipient. Events 
perceived as ‘informational’ support an internal PLOC and feelings of competence; those 
perceived as ‘controlling’ conduce an external PLOC and undermine intrinsic motivation; 
those perceived as ‘amotivating’ conduce incompetence or absence of value. Whereas events 
experienced as informational support intrinsic motivation, those experienced as controlling 
or amotivating undermine intrinsic motivation. 
This third proposition regarding functional significance suggests that experiences of 
autonomy versus control, and of competence versus lack of it, mediate the relations between 
external events and their positive, neutral, or negative effects on intrinsic motivation. This 
proposition is important in part because it suggests that an external pressure, such as a 
deadline, demand, or a constraining rule can have a less controlling meaning if, for example,
<<<PAGE=16>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
16 
it is accompanied by autonomy-supportive elements such as a rationale (Jang, 2008), choice 
(Bao & Lam, 2008) or expression of acknowledgment or empathy (Koestner et al., 1984), 
factors that can ameliorate its controlling functional significance and thus its negative effects 
on intrinsic motivation. This proposition therefore further suggests that perceived competence 
alone is not enough to yield intrinsic motivation, as autonomy is a necessary condition. 
A fourth proposition adds that general interpersonal contexts that support people’s 
satisfaction of basic psychological needs, lend a more informational functional significance 
to events, whereas generally controlling relational contexts have an opposing impact, with 
associated positive and negative effects on intrinsic motivation respectively. 
A final, fifth, proposition of CET concerns the fact that intrapersonal factors can also 
have varied functional significance, with effects paralleling those for external events (Ryan, 
1982). Thus, internally controlling processes such as ego-involvement, evaluative self-
comparisons, and contingent self-esteem, representing controlling pressures, tend to 
undermine intrinsic motivation, relative to more self-supporting and task-focused 
orientations. Excessive self-criticism, and maladaptive perfectionism can similarly undermine 
perceived competence and be amotivating. 
As noted, these propositions have typically been tested by experimentally 
manipulating factors affecting autonomy and competence or by measuring variations in their 
experience between different social conditions. Regarding autonomy, factors such as external 
rewards, deadlines, and pressures toward specific outcomes have been used to induce an 
external PLOC and a sense of being controlled, whereas factors such as choice and rationale 
are used to foster an internal PLOC and sense of autonomy. Studies also often contrast 
autonomy supportive versus controlling general climates (e.g., in a workplace or classroom) 
through survey or observational methods (Ryan & Grolnick, 1986; Baard et al., 2004). 
Similarly, on the competence side, some experiments manipulate the presence and valence of
<<<PAGE=17>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
17 
feedback, level of difficulty, and other factors (Grouzet et al., 2004; Mouratidis et al, 2008). 
Still other studies look at variations in experiences of competence under different challenges 
(e.g., Peng et al., 2012). CET argues that negative or critical feedback tends to undermine 
perceived competence, as do persistent negative outcomes. CET also holds that a lack of 
feedback undermines competence satisfaction, and thus intrinsic motivation because it 
represents an absence of informational inputs. In contrast, constructive, effectance-relevant 
inputs, even when critical, can be experienced as informational, supporting perceived 
competence and thus intrinsic motivation (Niemiec & Ryan, 2009). 
What is important in such hypotheses is that they allow researchers and practitioners 
to vary conditions in the environment to facilitate autonomy and competence. Events such as 
shifts in specific features of reward contingencies, styles of communicating deadlines or 
rules, the perceived intent of external evaluations, or the locution used in external directives, 
can be studied in terms of their expected functional significance, and impact on intrinsically 
motivated behavior and its associated phenomenology. Traditional narrative reviews of this 
literature are available elsewhere (e.g., Ryan & Deci, 2017, 2019) but herein we focus more 
narrowly on how CET’s general propositions and hypotheses linked to them have been tested 
via meta-analyses. 
Meta-Analyses within CET 
Choice and Intrinsic Motivation. The first meta-analysis we consider is by Patall et 
al. (2008), which tested a very basic CET proposition, namely that events that support an 
internal PLOC or sense of autonomy will tend to maintain or enhance intrinsic motivation. 
Patall et al. specifically tested the role of choice, a factor argued in SDT to generally (i.e., 
under many conditions) enhance autonomy, and thus intrinsic motivation and related 
outcomes. Patall et al.’s (2008) literature search spanned three decades (1974-2004),
<<<PAGE=18>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
18 
identifying 41 studies on the effect of choice on intrinsic motivation, comprised of 46 total 
samples, yielding 290 separate effect sizes. 
Using both fixed- and random-effects modeling, Patall and colleagues (2008) found 
that choice was generally associated with greater intrinsic motivation as expected within CET 
(r = .15). Choice was also associated with more effort (r = .11), and strongly linked with 
greater preference for challenge (r = .33), though the latter effect is based on few studies (k = 
3). Choice was also found to yield a positive effect on subsequent learning, although this 
effect size was small (r = .05). Results for creativity were not statistically significant (r = 
.08), though a limited number of studies (k = 2) have examined the effects of choice on 
creativity.  
Patall et al.’s (2008) analysis of heterogeneity suggested important moderating 
variables. First, smaller effect sizes emerged from studies where the choices were highly 
effortful, such as those associated with important consequences. It is likely that when it 
comes to important choices, how intrinsically motivated a person feels may have other 
determinants. They also found that more choices may be better than fewer, but only up to a 
point, where again choices may become too effortful or tiring. Finally, and again in line with 
CET, Patall et al. (2008) found that the positive effects of choice on intrinsic motivation may 
be reduced when rewards external to the choice are provided, as rewards may lead people to 
experience an external PLOC. 
In an interesting moderator analysis, Patall et al. (2008) coded for different types of 
choice manipulations and found that “instructionally irrelevant” choices were most strongly 
associated with intrinsic motivation. In contrast to other types of choice manipulations in the 
studies reviewed by Patall et al. (2008)—choices between activities, choices between 
versions of an activity, choices between rewards, and instructionally relevant choices that 
could affect participants’ learning—instructionally irrelevant choices had no direct bearing
<<<PAGE=19>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
19 
on the activity that participants were asked to perform. Examples of instructionally irrelevant 
choices included allowing participants to choose what color pen to use and what music to 
play to when exercising. Patall et al. (2008) speculated that such choices offered participants 
meaningful ways to express their personal identities. Like Patall et al. (2008), we surmise that 
these instructionally irrelevant choices increased participants’ autonomy and, accordingly, 
their intrinsic motivation. Yet, CET does not offer a more specific explanation for this 
moderator effect and future research is needed to understand the functional significance of 
instructionally irrelevant choices. With interest, we observe that one of the benefits of meta-
analytic moderator analyses, like Patall et al.’s (2008), is their potential to identify new 
targets for research, even for topics that have long been studied. 
Positive and Negative Feedback. Whereas choice would be considered a facilitator 
of perceived autonomy, positive feedback would be considered a facilitator of competence, 
the other essential psychological need satisfaction for intrinsic motivation. CET suggests that 
conditions where there is little or no feedback also undermine intrinsic motivation because 
they supply no effectance-relevant input. 
Meta-analyses by Fong et al. (2019) examined this CET proposition, specifically 
looking at the effects of negative feedback, positive feedback, and no feedback or neutral 
feedback (collapsed together) on intrinsic motivation. These authors located 78 relevant 
studies testing these effects, made up of 102 samples, from which 431 effect sizes were 
extracted. Meta-analytic results, using both fixed- and random-error models, showed that 
negative feedback was, as expected, moderately associated with decreased intrinsic 
motivation relative to positive feedback (r = -.18). There were no statistically significant 
differences in the effect of negative versus no feedback. Fitting with CET, results also 
showed that the effects of negative feedback (compared to positive) on intrinsic motivation 
was less negative, or even positive, if the feedback was effectance relevant—that is, when it
<<<PAGE=20>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
20 
could help guide the person to improve performance (Ryan & Deci, 2017). Similarly, the 
negative effect of negative feedback (compared to positive) on intrinsic motivation was 
reduced when feedback was not based on social comparison (normative feedback) but on 
specific criteria or standards, as the latter presumably makes it more informational. 
Additional moderation effects suggested that negative feedback could be less undermining 
when delivered in person compared to technologically mediated delivery. Generally, then, 
these results supported the competence-relevant propositions of CET, as well as the more 
general notion that when feedback is informational and competence supportive it can enhance 
intrinsic motivation. 
Fong et al. (2019) also include in their meta-analysis a comparison of negative 
feedback and no feedback or neutral feedback (collapsed together) on intrinsic motivation. 
Interestingly, there was no statistically significant difference in the effects of negative versus 
no or neutral feedback. Although it seems odd at first glance that across studies getting 
negative feedback would not be more undermining of motivation than getting neutral or no 
feedback, 
wide confidence intervals suggest that data were highly heterogeneous reflecting wide 
variation in effects across studies. This could be for a variety of reasons including differences 
in the type of neutral feedback provided. Depending on expectations/context participants may 
have interpreted neutral feedback as negative (Holroyd, Hajcak, & Larsen, 2006). Given that 
people tend to see themselves as above average (Alicke & Sedikides, 2009), getting neutral 
feedback may conflict with this assessment of self. As well, depending on context, receiving 
no feedback could feel like neglect (competence thwarting) or a trust in one’s ability 
(competence enhancing). Such findings are not inconsistent with SDT, which would focus on 
the functional significance of the neutral or no feedback on competence and autonomy. These 
heterogeneous effects indicate significant variance left to explain and thus represents an area
<<<PAGE=21>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
21 
for future work. Indeed, of the 45 studies included in the negative versus neutral/no feedback 
comparison, only 15 have been published, again suggesting this as an emerging research 
question. 
Fong et al. (2019) began to answer this question by examining several possible 
moderators of null effect of negative vs. neutral/no feedback on intrinsic motivation. First, 
across studies where feedback was delivered in person, negative feedback had a small, but 
positive effect on intrinsic motivation (compared to neutral or no feedback). Yet, when 
feedback delivery was not in person, the effect was moderate and negative. This finding 
again highlights the importance of considering context when seeking to understand the 
motivational impact of negative compared to neutral or no feedback. Thus, neutral feedback 
may be interpreted differently depending on its mechanism of delivery. 
Considering the feedback standard (criterion-based or normative), significant 
moderation emerged with effects changing direction. In this case, negative feedback 
(compared to neutral/no feedback) had a negative effect on intrinsic motivation, but only 
when that feedback was normative. When criterion-based feedback was given a small but 
positive effect of negative (compared to neutral/no feedback) emerged. This suggests that 
informational feedback, even when negative, may be more beneficial to intrinsic motivation 
than no or neutral feedback, supporting CET principles. 
Examining age as a moderator, the authors found that for college students negative 
feedback was worse for intrinsic motivation than neutral feedback whereas for K-12 students 
the opposite pattern emerged, with negative feedback being associated with greater intrinsic 
motivation compared to no or neutral feedback. Future research could examine the 
developmental and contextual influences driving this difference. 
Perhaps most curiously, looking at publication status, Fong and colleagues (2019) 
found that across the 15 published studies comparing negative feedback to no/neutral
<<<PAGE=22>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
22 
feedback a positive effect of negative feedback on intrinsic motivation emerged, whereas this 
effect was negative in the 30 unpublished studies included in this analysis. Although it is 
always concerning to see a significant moderating effect of publication status, the wide 
confidence intervals around these effects (especially the unpublished ones) and their 
significance under fixed effects models only, suggests that there may be other differences 
between these comparison groups that more directly explain these disparate effects. It is 
worth noting that for the effect about which SDT does make strong claims (negative 
compared to positive feedback), effects are stronger in unpublished compared to published 
studies, providing evidence against a more systematic publication bias. 
CET and Reward Effects: A Tale of Five Meta-Analyses. Among the most 
controversial aspects of CET, especially in its early years, were findings that controlling 
rewards could have negative effects on intrinsic motivation. To be clear, CET has never 
claimed that all rewards negatively impact intrinsic motivation (see Deci, 1972; Deci & 
Ryan, 1980a; Ryan & Deci, 2017). CET does claim, however, that when rewards are used to 
externally pressure or induce people to behave a certain way or to reach a specific outcome, 
they tend to foster an external PLOC and thus undermine a sense of autonomy and intrinsic 
motivation. CET also proposes that rewards can, when well-structured, be informational, 
supplying acknowledgement or positive feedback that enhances perceived competence and 
does not undermine intrinsic motivation. 
Ryan et al. (1983) presented and empirically tested a CET-based taxonomy of 
different types of reward contingencies theorized to have more informational or more 
controlling functional significance to the recipient, and therefore differentially affect intrinsic 
motivation. For example, task-non-contingent rewards and unexpected rewards (because they 
are not typically experienced as controlling one’s behavior) were expected and found to not 
undermine motivation, whereas task contingent and many types of performance-contingent
<<<PAGE=23>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
23 
rewards (because they typically convey a sense of behavior being externally controlled) were 
undermining. 
Yet this formulation was, and to some extent remains, highly controversial especially 
for some behaviorists, who view the idea that rewards can diminish subsequent motivation as 
anathema (e.g., Catania, 2013). Nonetheless, in the 1970s and early 1980s, evidence relevant 
to the undermining effect of contingent rewards on intrinsic motivation was sustained by 
studies both within CET (Deci & Ryan, 1980) and by attribution theorists such as Lepper et 
al. (1973) who dubbed such results the “overjustification effect” (p. 130). 
Three early meta-analyses in the area of rewards and intrinsic motivation, listed in 
Table 1, helped to clarify the literature. Rummel and Feinberg’s (1988) meta-analysis 
included 45 studies and showed, across reward conditions, a substantial undermining effect. 
Subsequently, Wiersma (1992) also conducted a meta-analysis of 16 experimental studies in 
which tangible rewards were examined for their effects on free choice behavioral measures. 
Here too, meta-analytic results supported an undermining effect. Finally, Tang and Hall 
(1995) presented a meta-analysis of 50 studies. Rather than focusing on overall effects, and 
more in line with CET’s differentiated formulations, they found that both task-contingent 
rewards and performance-contingent rewards undermined intrinsic motivation. 
Around the same time as Tang and Hall (1995) presented their analysis, however, 
Cameron and Pierce (1994) presented a separate meta-analysis contradicting the three prior 
ones and reporting no meaningful undermining effects of rewards. Cameron and Pierce 
(1994) strongly concluded that the time had come for “abandoning cognitive evaluation 
theory” (p. 396). This highly contrasting set of findings and formulations was disputed by 
Ryan and Deci (1996) in a narrative review. Nonetheless, Cameron and Pierce’s (1994) meta-
analysis with only minor changes was presented by Eisenberger and Cameron (1996) in 
American Psychologist, where it received great attention after claiming, even in its title, that
<<<PAGE=24>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
24 
the undermining effect was a “myth” (p. 1154). Eisenberger and Cameron’s (1996) meta-
analysis found no evidence for the undermining effects of completion-contingent or 
performance-contingent rewards and their paper appeared to vindicate long-standing 
behaviorist critiques in this area. 
Disputing the accuracy of Eisenberger and Cameron’s (1996) analyses, Deci et al. 
(1999) performed a new meta-analysis of the same data presented by Eisenberger and 
Cameron (1996), also including (at reviewers’ requests) all available additional unpublished 
and omitted studies. More importantly, Deci et al. (1999) documented how the data as 
extracted by Eisenberger and Cameron was compromised by omissions of results, 
misclassifications of conditions, and even numerical recording errors. With such issues 
corrected, the findings looked quite different. First, although CET does not propose that all 
rewards have negative effects on intrinsic motivation, across all types of rewards—both 
verbal and tangible—there was a negative effect on behaviorally measured intrinsic 
motivation (r = -.12). Within that overall effect, however, and in accord with CET, “verbal 
rewards” (Eisenberger & Cameron, 1996, p. 1157)—which CET would call positive 
feedback—yielded a positive effect on intrinsic motivation (r = .16), whereas tangible 
rewards yielded a negative effect (r = -.17). 
As emphasized above, CET further argues that the effect of tangible rewards depends 
on their functional significance, and thus Deci et al. (1999) broke down tangible rewards 
further, with results showing, in line with Ryan et al. (1983), no negative effect of unexpected 
tangible rewards on intrinsic motivation (r = .00), but a statistically significant undermining 
effect for expected rewards (r = -.18). Finally, the effect of expected rewards was further 
differentiated in line with CET’s taxonomy. Again, supporting CET’s differentiated 
predictions, task noncontingent rewards did not undermine intrinsic motivation to a 
statistically significant degree (r = -.07), whereas engagement-contingent (r = -.20),
<<<PAGE=25>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
25 
completion-contingent (r = -.18), and performance-contingent (r = -.14) rewards all showed 
small-to-moderate statistically significant negative impacts on intrinsic motivation. 
Eisenberger et al. (1999) were invited to comment on these results in the same Psychological 
Bulletin issue in which Deci et al. (1999) presented their findings, and notably, although still 
disagreeing with CET, Eisenberger et al. (1999) did not dispute the errors discovered within 
their prior analyses. As we shall see, these findings concerning rewards and incentives on 
intrinsic motivation have implications for applied fields such as organizational psychology 
where rewards are often used to motivate performance (e.g., Cerasoli et al., 2016) 
This set of disputes also tells an important story about meta-analysis generally, 
namely that although the term often carries with it an air of definitiveness, all meta-analytic 
studies need to be critically reviewed and can themselves be biased in terms of the studies 
included and the tabulation of effects. Even how studies are classified within a meta-analysis 
is often not just a matter of data, but of the quality of conceptual frameworks and 
transparency in methods (Polanin et al., 2020), a point to which we shall later return. Before 
turning to such issues, we next review one last meta-analysis on this question of incentives, 
intrinsic motivation, and performance. 
Intrinsic Motivation and Performance. Previous studies suggest that intrinsic 
motivation enhances performance, especially for activities that are complex, involve learning 
and problem-solving, and benefit from deeper engagement. External incentives, on the other 
hand, can enhance performance on tasks that are algorithmic in nature, but insofar as they 
undermine intrinsic motivation or autonomy, they may compromise performance on more 
complex or creative tasks (Ryan & Deci, 2017). Though not a formal proposition of CET, the 
link between intrinsic motivation and performance has been a topic of many empirical 
reports. Cerasoli et al. (2014) conducted a set of meta-analyses examining the relationship 
between intrinsic motivation and performance across the workplace, classroom, and sports
<<<PAGE=26>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
26 
field. Their meta-analytic review included studies in which external incentives were present 
and examined the nature of incentive contingencies (directly performance-salient versus 
indirectly performance-salient) as a possible moderator of the link between intrinsic 
motivation and performance.  
Using random-effects meta-analytic methods with a large number of included studies 
(k = 183), Cerasoli et al. (2014) found that intrinsic motivation was a medium-to-strong 
predictor of performance overall (r = .21), a finding that held regardless of whether 
incentives were present (r = .27, k = 40) or absent (r = .21, k = 34). Cerasoli et al. (2014) also 
found that intrinsic motivation was less important to performance when incentives were 
directly tied to performance (r = .21) than when incentives were indirectly tied to 
performance outcomes (r = .34) because the latter are presumed to have a more controlling 
functional significance (Deci et al., 1999). These results indicate that intrinsic motivation is a 
robust predictor of performance, even when external incentives are strong, but that type of 
reward contingency matters. 
In another set of moderator analyses, Cerasoli et al. (2014) distinguished between 
performance quality and performance quantity. Performance outcomes were coded as quality 
criteria when some evaluative standard could be used to judge the performed work (e.g., 
works requiring creativity). Quantity criteria were performance outcomes that could be 
summarized as discrete units of output (e.g., a number of tasks completed). Criteria that did 
not explicitly fall into either category or had elements of both (e.g., academic performance) 
constituted the third set of performance outcomes. Cerasoli et al. (2014) found that intrinsic 
motivation was associated with performance quality (r = .28), performance quantity (r = .20), 
and outcomes encompassing both quality and quantity (r = .25).  
Cerasoli et al. (2014) further specified meta-analytic regression models in which 
external incentives and intrinsic motivation were entered as simultaneous predictors of
<<<PAGE=27>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
27 
performance. Results indicated that whereas intrinsic motivation predicted more unique 
variance in performance quality than external incentives (β = .35 and β = .06, respectively), 
external incentives were a better predictor of performance quantity than intrinsic motivation 
(β = .33 and β = .24, respectively). These results accord well with previous arguments in SDT 
that the use of external incentives to motivate performance on interesting or cognitively 
complex activities may narrow people’s focus on attainting extrinsic outcomes and may 
detract from fuller engagement (Ryan & Deci, 2017). We hope to see this hypothesis further 
tested in future studies. Finally, Cerasoli et al. (2014) found that intrinsic motivation and 
external incentives were similarly associated with performance in tasks coded for both 
quality and quantity (β = .29 and β = .29, respectively). Consistent with SDT, from these 
results we can infer that intrinsic motivation is especially relevant for performance on 
complex or heuristic tasks, whereas incentives can promote performance on more algorithmic 
endeavors that do not typically require interested engagement (Deci & Ryan, 1985b). 
Summary 
Consistent with CET, meta-analyses indicate that choice is associated with greater 
intrinsic motivation, effort, and preference for challenge; that negative feedback is associated 
with decreased intrinsic motivation; and that tangible rewards can undermine intrinsic 
motivation. Intrinsic motivation is also associated with enhanced quality of performance, 
which can be compromised by the controlling use of rewards.  
Organismic Integration Theory 
Expanding on the idea that humans are inclined toward assimilation and integration, 
OIT suggests that people are not only prone to intrinsic motivation, but also toward the 
internalization and integration of the values and practices endorsed by significant others in 
their social contexts. Indeed, the first proposition of OIT is that people are prone to 
internalize ambient behavioral regulations to different degrees, with some regulations
<<<PAGE=28>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
28 
retaining an external PLOC and others being more fully assimilated to self and thus having an 
internal PLOC. 
Accordingly, OIT specifies a taxonomy of regulatory styles, or types of motivation, 
that are theorized to systematically vary in their relative autonomy. Figure 1 depicts these 
varied motives or regulatory styles. Amotivation is the lack of motivation, where there is an 
absence of intentional regulation of behavior, typically involving either a lack of value and/or 
a lack of perceived competence. External regulation is a controlled form of motivation, in 
which behavior is experienced as being regulated by external rewards and punishments. 
Somewhat less controlled is introjected regulation, in which behavior is regulated by internal 
contingencies of self-esteem and self-regard, representing intrapersonal rewards and 
punishments that motivate action and performance efforts. Relatively more internalized and 
therefore autonomous is identified regulation, in which behaviors are assimilated by the self 
and experienced as worthwhile and personally valued. Finally, and even more autonomous, is 
integrated regulation, when that with which one identifies is fully self-endorsed and 
congruent with one’s other values, as well as flexibly open to information and revision. 
Testing the Simplex Model 
These regulatory styles differ in their antecedents, experience, neuropsychology, and 
consequences, and yet relate to each other in a pattern consistent with their theoretically 
specified positions on a continuum of autonomy. OIT argues that extrinsic motivations can be 
described as lying along a “continuum that spans from relatively heteronomous or controlled 
regulation to relatively autonomous self-regulation” (OIT Proposition II, Ryan & Deci, 2017, 
p. 191).  
The specification of this continuum of motives that differ in character but nonetheless 
systematically align along a continuum of autonomy has clear statistical implications. 
Specifically, Ryan and Connell (1989) argued that such motives will be interrelated in a
<<<PAGE=29>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
29 
quasi-simplex pattern, or as ordered correlations such that those adjacent on the continuum 
will be most highly correlated and those more separated on this hypothetical continuum will 
be less positively correlated. Since the introduction of OIT, many studies have assessed each 
of these motivation types and their interrelations. This literature has in turn generated two 
meta-analyses focused on the claim that these motives array in a simplex fashion or represent 
a continuum. 
The first of these was a meta-analytic review of the OIT continuum in the domains of 
sport, exercise, and physical education by Chatzisarantis et al. (2003). They identified 21 
published articles and their meta-analytic results supported the existence of a simplex-type 
pattern reflecting a continuum. They also did an overarching path analysis to show that 
PLOC (relative autonomy) mediated the positive associations between perceived competence 
and intentions to act. 
Subsequently, a broader meta-analysis of the theorized continuum of motivation was 
undertaken by Howard et al. (2017). They examined the relations between OIT’s motivation 
categories to determine if they reliably conformed to a continuum-like pattern across multiple 
domains. They gathered data from 486 samples (N > 200,000) using varied OIT-based scales. 
Howard et al.’s (2017) results largely supported a continuum-like structure of motivational 
regulations. However, due in part to both too few studies measuring integration and its high 
correlation with identified regulation, results did not support the differentiation of integrated 
regulation from identified regulation. In addition, some SDT-based research scales (e.g., 
Vallerand et al., 1992) have attempted to differentiate intrinsic motivation into three subtypes 
(i.e., intrinsic motivation to know, to experience stimulation, and to achieve) but Howard et 
al.’s (2017) meta-analysis provided no support for those distinctions. Overall, the meta-
analysis provided strong support for a continuum of self-determination as specified with OIT. 
Basic Needs and Internalization
<<<PAGE=30>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
30 
Although OIT establishes a taxonomy of motives arrayed along a continuum of 
relative autonomy, it also argues (Proposition III) that conditions that support basic 
psychological needs facilitate greater internalization and thus more autonomous forms of 
motivation. Furthermore, OIT states that motivations characterized by greater autonomy will 
tend to foster better behavioral outcomes such as sustained motivation and quality of 
performance (Proposition IV), as well as greater subjective well-being, positive experiences, 
and psychological health (Proposition V). We now turn to meta-analyses that have examined 
these propositions either separately or jointly, as well as hypotheses linked to them. 
A first relevant piece is a meta-analysis by Slemp et al. (2018) that was aimed at 
identifying the positive effects of manager’s autonomy support in the workplace as providing 
support for all three needs, in turn promoting more autonomous forms of motivation as 
described in OIT. They assembled a database of 754 correlations drawn from 72 studies, 
involving samples from nine countries of varied cultural types. Slemp et al. (2018) showed 
that leaders’ support for autonomy was moderately-to-strongly, positively associated with 
more autonomous forms of work motivation such as identification (r = .26) and intrinsic 
motivation (r = .34). Indeed, the more internalized the type of work motivation the more 
positive its relations with leadership autonomy support, as predicted by Proposition IV. A 
meta-analytic path analysis more specifically supported the idea that autonomy support was 
positively associated with all three basic need satisfactions, and these in turn were associated 
with more autonomous forms of motivation, and less correlated with the more controlled or 
amotivated regulatory styles. Notably, these relations were not moderated by the country 
from which data were drawn, supporting OIT’s universality claims. 
Subsequently, Slemp et al. (2020) performed a similar meta-analysis that was more 
narrowly focused on teachers as employees, and how their motivation and wellness is 
associated with motivational climate. They found that a supportive workplace climate was
<<<PAGE=31>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
31 
related to more autonomous and less controlled motivations to teach. In turn, more 
autonomous motivation was positively associated with teacher well-being outcomes, as well 
as higher job satisfaction (r = .56) and autonomy-supportive teaching (r = .31), and lower 
teacher distress (r = -.40) and burnout (r = -.45). Findings for controlled teacher motivation 
were generally in the opposite direction. These results were generally not moderated by 
educational settings or culture. Taking a further step, Slemp et al. (2020) presented a meta-
analytic path analysis, which demonstrated that teachers' basic psychological need 
satisfaction was associated with greater well-being (r = .49), lower distress (r = -.42), and 
more autonomy-supportive teaching (r = .32) indirectly through autonomous motivation as a 
mediator. In sum, Slemp et al.’s (2020) meta-analysis broadly tested and supported the OIT 
model. 
Lochbaum and Jean-Noel (2016) looked within the literature of physical education at 
the impact of autonomy-supportive teaching on need satisfactions and the array of 
motivational constructs from OIT’s taxonomy, as well as varied outcome measures. Most 
relevant to OIT is that, as would be predicted by SDT more broadly, autonomy-supportive 
teaching is associated with the autonomy continuum in a graded way, with very strong 
associations with autonomous motives (intrinsic motivation, r = .54; identified motivation, r 
= .50), weaker relations with introjection (r = .20), and negative links with external regulation 
(r = -.15) and amotivation (r = -.19). The link between autonomy-supportive teaching and the 
relative autonomy index was large (r = .42), as were those for satisfactions of autonomy (r = 
.57), competence (r = .41), and relatedness (r = .46) needs. These relations support OIT’s 
proposition that autonomy support enhances processes associated with internalization. 
Greater Internalization, Better Outcomes 
Recently, Howard et al. (2021) supplied a meta-analysis that specifically looked at 
whether more autonomous forms of motivation show relations with positive and negative
<<<PAGE=32>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
32 
behavioral and well-being outcomes. Drawing on 344 samples (N = 223,209) in the education 
domain, Howard et al. (2021) related measures of the OIT taxonomy to 26 different 
performance, well-being, goal-orientation, and persistence-related outcomes. As predicted, 
findings revealed that both intrinsic and identified motivations were related to higher student 
performance and greater student well-being. Identified regulation was particularly important 
for persistence-related variables. Also as predicted by OIT, introjected motivation was only 
weakly predictive of persistence and performance goals, and it was negatively associated 
with a number of well-being outcomes. External regulation was generally unrelated to 
performance or persistence and showed negative relations with indicators of well-being. 
Finally, the category of amotivation was the most strongly associated with poor outcomes in 
both performance and well-being areas.  
One meta-analysis reported null results for OIT categories in predicting 
environmental behaviors. In this unpublished dissertation, Osbaldiston (2005) rated pro-
environmental interventions in terms of whether they emphasized incentives (which they 
classified as external regulation) guilt (which was classified as introjection) and value or 
importance (classified as identification). These ratings did not predict outcomes. 
Mindfulness and the OIT Continuum 
SDT specifically argues that mindfulness conduces to greater autonomy (Ryan et al., 
2021). Mindfulness, which represents an open and receptive stance with respect to inner and 
outer events, allows for a more reflective perspective and more informed choice. Brown and 
Ryan (2003) addressed the proposed link between mindfulness and autonomy, arguing that 
open and receptive awareness conduces to a greater sense of choice and congruence in 
action—that is, greater autonomy, and to lower defensiveness (e.g., Niemiec et al., 2010). 
Thus, when mindful, people are more able to formulate and enact what is authentic.
<<<PAGE=33>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
33 
Donald et al. (2020) meta-analytically examined how mindfulness is related to the 
varied types of motivation specified within SDT, and more specifically the continuum of 
motives detailed in OIT. The authors presented a theoretical model for how mindfulness 
supports different forms of motivation, with greater mindfulness relating in a graded manner 
to the varied types of motivation along SDT’s relative autonomy continuum. They identified 
89 papers (N = 25,176), comprising 104 independent data sets and 200 effect sizes. Using a 
three-level modeling approach to meta-analyze these data they found consistent support for 
mindfulness predicting more autonomous forms of motivation, across both correlational and 
intervention studies. Among correlational studies only, mindfulness moderately predicted less 
external motivation (r = -.19) and amotivation (r = -.23). 
Autonomy, Control, and Prosociality 
SDT further suggests that, when people are more autonomous, they act with more 
integrity, and are more in touch with abiding values and interest. In a recent narrative review, 
Ryan and Deci (2017) argued that when acting autonomously people are more likely to 
behave in prosocial ways, as such actions are more often experienced as volitional and 
congruent (Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). In contrast, Ryan and Deci (2017) suggested that anti-
social actions are typically experienced as controlled, more as something a person ‘had to do’ 
rather than ‘wanted to do’. Thus, SDT predicts a positive relation between controlled 
motivations and anti-social behaviors and a positive link between experiences of autonomy 
and prosocial behaviors. This, however, does not mean that prosocial behavior is always 
experienced as autonomous. SDT research shows that when prosocial behavior is 
heteronomous (e.g., feelings of guilt), it does not provide the same benefits as prosocial 
behavior that is experienced as autonomous (e.g., Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). 
Donald and colleagues (2021) recently presented a meta-analysis that specifically 
explored if experiences of autonomy support, autonomy satisfaction, and autonomous
<<<PAGE=34>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
34 
motivation conduce to prosocial behavior, and more controlled motives or conditions lead to 
more anti-social outcomes. Searching for studies linking measures of autonomy or control 
and indicators of prosocial and antisocial attitudes and behaviors, they identified 138 studies 
yielding 1,077 relevant effect sizes. Using a two-stage multi-level structural equation 
modeling approach, and segregating correlational, longitudinal, and experimental study 
designs, Donald et al. (2021) found multi-method support for several of the key predictions. 
As expected, experiences of autonomy were moderately positively associated with prosocial 
outcomes (r = .28), whereas controlled motivation had a small positive association with 
antisocial outcomes (r = .16). However, the longitudinal effect of control on antisociality was 
non-different from zero, and there appeared to be too few intervention studies (k = 1) to 
evaluate the causal effect. Moderator analyses assessed the generalizability of the 
correlational results, showing that the hypothesized relations were consistent across cultures 
and genders, albeit with some moderation by age. 
Summary 
Meta-analyses support OIT’s proposition that different motivational regulations are 
arrayed along a continuum of relative autonomy, though additional work is necessary to 
clarify the relative positions of integrated regulation and intrinsic motivation within this 
continuum. Meta-analyses also support the proposition that autonomy support and basic 
psychological need satisfactions are differentially associated with the quality of people’s 
motivations, and that more autonomous forms of motivation are associated with better 
performance and wellness outcomes whereas controlled motivations and amotivation are 
associated with poorer outcomes. Mindfulness is positively associated with autonomous 
motivations. Finally, more autonomous forms of motivation are also positively associated 
with pro-sociality, and more controlled motives with anti-sociality.
<<<PAGE=35>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
35 
Causality Orientations Theory 
SDT’s taxonomy of motives encompasses three general and broad categories of 
motivation, namely those that are autonomous (such as intrinsic motivation and identified 
regulation), those that are controlled (such as external regulation and introjection), and those 
representing forms of amotivation (lack of value or felt competence). Early on in SDT 
research, individual differences in people’s general tendencies to react to external events in 
autonomous, controlled, or amotivated ways was recognized and formulated in COT, which 
proposes three different motivation sets or orientations called causality orientations that 
represent individual differences in propensities to focus on certain aspects of environments 
and inner capacities when initiating behavior. COT specifies how these three dispositions 
relate to each other, and to behavioral and well-being outcomes. 
When autonomy-oriented, the tendency is to interpret events in the environment as 
informational, and thus to take interest in events and emotions, and feel choice with respect to 
actions and reactions. A controlled orientation describes the tendency to primarily orient to 
external or introjected controls, contingencies, pressures, and rewards. Whether compliant or 
defiant, when in a controlled orientation what is salient is what others are thinking, 
rewarding, or sanctioning. Finally, an impersonal orientation is characterized by feeling an 
absence of control, and involves the tendency to readily see obstacles, hazards, and to 
anticipate anxiety when facing challenges. SDT sees the orientations as propensities that 
develop over time, in large part as a function of the autonomy-supportive, controlled, and 
amotivating influences people have experienced. Autonomy orientations in particular are 
expected to predict fuller, more adaptive functioning (Deci & Ryan, 1985a). SDT also argues 
that any of the three causality orientations can be primed, and thus have more salience in a 
given situation (e.g., Murphy & Taylor, 2020; Weinstein et al., 2010).
<<<PAGE=36>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
36 
To date, there have been only two meta-analyses examining COT and its implications 
of which we are aware. The most comprehensive study is by Hagger and Hamilton (2021) 
who performed a meta-analysis on aspects of COT, including testing a process model in 
which the relations between general causality orientations and behavioral outcomes were 
mediated by autonomous and controlled motivations. They identified 69 studies entailing 83 
independent samples reporting correlations between causality orientations, autonomous and 
controlled forms of motivation, and behavioral outcomes. Data were analyzed using both 
fixed- and random-effects meta-analysis methods and meta-analytic structural equation 
modeling. 
Meta-analyzed correlations revealed a theoretically consistent pattern of relations 
between autonomy, control, and impersonal causality orientations, both with each other and 
with the forms of motivation specified within OIT. Noteworthy was the large positive 
correlation between impersonal and controlled orientations (r = .27), which suggests shared 
variance possibly because both are lacking a sense of personal endorsement and volition. 
Hagger and Hamilton (2021) also examined the relations between causality 
orientations and OIT’s motivational regulations. As expected, results revealed larger 
correlations between autonomy orientation and intrinsic and identified regulations, and 
weaker associations with more controlled forms of motivation such as introjection and 
external regulation. An opposing graduated pattern was observed for controlled orientation, 
which had larger correlations with the external and introjected regulations and smaller 
associations with identified regulation and intrinsic motivation. Finally, the impersonal 
orientation was positively related only with external regulation and was negatively related to 
identified and intrinsic motivations. Hagger and Hamilton summarized these patterns in a 
SDT-based meta-analytic process model, which revealed theoretically consistent relations 
with motivational and behavioral outcomes (Deci & Ryan, 1985a; Ryan & Deci, 2017). In
<<<PAGE=37>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
37 
Hagger and Hamilton’s (2021) model, autonomy orientation showed the most reliable ties 
with behavior. Correlations between causality orientations and outcomes were, however, 
small-to-medium in size, with considerable room for situational influences. 
Recently a specific meta-analysis was performed by Murphy and Steel (2021) to 
examine studies within SDT that use priming to alter motivational orientations, and 
specifically whether studies in this area were subject to p-hacking, which would compromise 
their scientific value. The authors identified 30 experiments using autonomy or control 
priming yielding 33 effects. In their focused meta-analysis, results showed that even after 
removing especially large effects, the effects of these SDT-based primes had solid evidential 
value. This result is important in a priming literature that often leaves reliability of results in 
question.  
Summary 
COT proposes three causality orientations that are differentially associated with 
people’s regulatory styles. Only one meta-analysis has thus far examined this proposition. As 
predicted by COT, the autonomy orientation was positively associated with autonomous 
forms of motivation, and the controlled and impersonal orientations were negatively 
associated with autonomous regulations and positively associated with controlled motivation 
and amotivation. Priming of autonomy and controlled orientations also appears to yield 
reliable effects in hypothesized directions.  
Basic Psychological Needs Theory 
The issue of how basic psychological needs support wellness and vitality brings us to 
BPNT, which concerns the cross-developmental, contextual, and cultural assumption that all 
three basic psychological need satisfactions are associated with greater flourishing and that 
all three basic need frustrations are detrimental. BPNT entails several specific propositions
<<<PAGE=38>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
38 
(Ryan & Deci, 2017), but for the sake of brevity we include only the central ones, 
summarized as follows: 
1. Three basic psychological needs, those for autonomy, competence and relatedness, 
are essential to wellness and thriving; frustration of these needs leads to greater ill-being 
and impoverished functioning. 
1a. This proposition holds across development (age) and cultural variations (e.g., 
collectivist, individualist), and will be evident despite people’s values or desires for these 
needs. 
2. Events and contexts lead to variations in psychological need satisfactions and 
frustrations, with corresponding changes in well-being. This mediational model is thus 
expected at both between- and within-person levels of analysis. 
3. Autonomy support is expected to facilitate all three basic need satisfactions, 
whereas controlling contexts frustrate needs, with consequent enhanced or diminished 
wellness, respectively. 
Additional propositions and hypotheses in BPNT (Ryan & Deci, 2017) concern issues 
such as vitality versus depletion, exposure to nature, mindfulness, deficit needs, and other 
matters. We will not review these topics here because meta-analyses have yet to be directed 
at these specific propositions. 
Needs and Well-Being 
We begin with perhaps the most recent meta-analysis concerning BPNT because it 
tests one simple and main hypothesis of this mini-theory—that there should be positive 
associations between need satisfactions for autonomy, competence, and relatedness and 
indicators of wellness and thriving. Stanley et al. (2021) focused on positive and negative 
emotions and their relations with need satisfaction, as well as potential moderators of these 
relationships. Stanley et al. (2021) identified 16 studies examining these relations. Across
<<<PAGE=39>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
39 
studies, higher positive affect was strongly associated with greater autonomy (r = .39), 
competence (r = .45), and relatedness (r = .39) satisfaction. To examine how basic 
psychological need satisfaction predicted negative affect, the authors identified 11 samples 
containing measures of autonomy, 13 containing competence, and 11 containing relatedness. 
Across studies, lower negative affect was strongly associated with higher autonomy (r = -
.30), competence (r = -.33), and relatedness (r = -.30) satisfaction. Additional analyses 
suggested that gender, sample type (employee versus student), and the basic psychological 
need satisfaction measure used, moderated the strength of associations, with relations being 
stronger for females versus males, students versus employees, and more recently developed 
versus older SDT measures. Unfortunately, this meta-analysis did not examine the emotional 
consequences of need frustration. 
Tang et al. (2020) performed a meta-analysis to examine the role of SDT’s basic 
psychological needs and autonomous motivation to well-being among elderly persons. 
Aggregating across 17 studies they found that autonomy need satisfaction was negatively to 
related to depression (r = -.27) as was competence (r = -.37) and relatedness (r = -.17). 
Autonomy satisfaction also predicted subjective health (r = .21) whereas relatedness 
satisfaction was negatively associated (r = -.07), which was an unexpected result. Finally 
global need satisfaction (all three needs combined) was associated with both depression (r = -
.48) and general life satisfaction (.37) in expected directions. There were several other effects 
reported in the manuscript supporting the hypothesis that basic psychological need 
satisfaction is positively related to well-being (e.g., life satisfaction, positive affect, vitality, 
etc., r’s ranging from = .21 to .49), and negatively with negative indicators of well- being 
(depression, apathy, etc., r = -.55 to -.27). The authors concluded that there was general 
support for the importance of basic need satisfactions and autonomous motives among the 
elderly.
<<<PAGE=40>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
40 
Recently Serie et al. (2021) reported a meta-analysis of constructs they labeled 
primary goods, which are associated with the Good Lives Model of wellness (GLM; Ward & 
Fortune, 2013). The GLM suggests 11 primary goods necessary for a good life and in this 
meta-analysis proxy measures for each were assembled. Connecting with SDT, Serie et al. 
argued that each of SDT’s basic needs were reflected in specific GLM primary goods 
variables and these should each be associated with an overall well-being index. Their 
findings supported this view showing that excellence in agency, corresponding to autonomy, 
was correlated with overall well-being at r = .35; relatedness, corresponding to SDT’s 
relatedness at r = .37, and excellence in work, reflecting SDT’s competence need, at r = .28.  
Testing Universality. An important element in BPNT is the notion that basic needs, 
including autonomy, are universally positive variables in their relations with wellness. Yet 
many authors have disputed their universal importance, some arguing that autonomy, in 
particular, is not essential especially in collectivistic nations in East Asia. To directly 
examine this issue, Yu et al. (2018) meta-analytically examined how measures of 
autonomous motivation or autonomy need satisfaction, as measured within SDT, are 
associated with subjective well-being in both East Asian and Western countries. Random-
effects analyses using 36 independent samples and involving almost 13,000 participants 
showed a large, positive correlation between autonomy and subjective well-being (r = .46). 
The positive association was not moderated by the type of culture from which the sample was 
drawn, suggesting that in both collectivist and individualist cultures, autonomy is positively 
related to wellness.  
Earlier in discussing OIT we reviewed a meta-analysis by Slemp et al. (2018) on data 
from work settings from around the globe that also tested some central hypotheses within 
BPNT. Again, Slemp et al. (2018) drew from a database of 83 unique samples with over 
32,000 participants. As predicted within BPNT, autonomy-supportive leadership was
<<<PAGE=41>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
41 
strongly and positively associated with autonomy (r = .46), competence (r = .34), and 
relatedness (r = .38) satisfactions. Each of the three basic psychological needs were 
associated with more autonomous work motivation, greater well-being, more positive work 
behaviors, and less distress. Important for BPNT (see Proposition 1a) these relations were not 
moderated by the collectivist or individualist backdrop of the country from which the samples 
were drawn, suggesting invariant relations across cultural contexts. The authors also provided 
a meta-analytic path analysis testing the central propositions of BPNT. The path model 
specified autonomy support being associated with all three need satisfactions, in turn 
predicting more autonomous forms of work motivation, and resulting in job-related and 
wellness outcomes. Presented in Figure 3, the Slemp et al. (2018) model strongly supported 
the basic propositions of BPNT and shows the importance of autonomy-supportive leadership 
for employees’ optimal functioning at work and their more general psychological wellness. 
We present the full figure from Slemp et al. (2018) in part because this meta-analytic 
path model captures multiple aspects of BPNT’s propositions—namely that autonomy-
supportive environments lead to all three need satisfactions, which in turn fosters more 
volitional motivations and greater flourishing. Although this is limited to the organizational 
domain, Slemp et al. (2020) more recently replicated this basic model in the domain of 
education in a meta-analysis of the SDT literature on teacher motivation and wellness, which 
we shall also later review in Part II. Important in these models is the support for the 
mediational processes important to SDT’s psychological theorizing in which need-related 
experiences proximally predict outcomes (Ryan, Deci, Vansteenkiste, & Soenens, 2021). 
Summary 
BPNT maintains that autonomy, competence, and relatedness satisfactions are 
essential for wellness and the available meta-analytic evidence supports this proposition. The 
proposition that frustration of these needs is associated with ill-being has yet to be meta-
<<<PAGE=42>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
42 
analytically investigated. The positive associations between need satisfactions and wellness 
are not moderated by culture in the several metanalyses that included it as a moderator (e.g., 
Slemp et al., 2018; 2020; Yu et al., 2018). However the meta-analysis by Stanley et al. (2021) 
suggests possible moderation by gender, sample characteristics, and measurement 
instruments. Finally, meta-analyses of studies conducted in work settings support the BPNT 
proposition that autonomy supports fosters greater need satisfaction and that need satisfaction 
is associated with autonomous motivation and enhanced functioning.  
Goal Contents Theory 
 The fifth of SDT’s mini-theories, GCT, diverges from preceding SDT mini-theories 
by focusing less on why people do things, and instead studies what they do. GCT specifies 
that the prioritization of extrinsically-oriented life goals—such as those for wealth, fame, 
beauty, and power—will not directly satisfy basic psychological needs, thereby failing to 
optimally support wellness. In contrast, more intrinsic goals that emphasize personal growth 
and self-expression, close relationships, contributing to the community, and maintaining 
physical health, directly bolster psychological need satisfactions and thus wellness (Kasser & 
Ryan, 1993, 1996, 2001; Martela et al., 2019).  
Goal Contents and Wellness 
A central proposition of GCT is that intrinsic and extrinsic aspirations link 
differentially with indices of well-being and ill-being. Bradshaw et al. (2022) examined this 
key proposition by meta-analyzing 92 studies containing correlations between intrinsic and 
extrinsic aspirations with well-being and ill-being, together comprising 1,808 effect sizes and 
70,110 participants from 27 countries. Using multi-level meta-analytic multilevel structural 
equation modeling, Bradshaw et al.’s (2022) results found that intrinsic aspirations linked 
moderately and positively with indices of well-being (r = .24), and negatively with ill-being 
(r = -.11). Meanwhile, extrinsic aspirations were not associated with well-being (r = .02).
<<<PAGE=43>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
43 
A core tenet of GCT is that extrinsic aspirations are not ‘bad’ per se, but that they 
have the potential to be detrimental the more they predominate relative to intrinsic 
aspirations. In this regard, Bradshaw et al.’s (2022) meta-analysis was decisive. When the 
effect sizes on extrinsic aspirations were analyzed according to whether extrinsic aspirations 
were calculated as a ‘simple score’ (i.e., the mean across all extrinsic aspirations) or a 
‘relative centrality score’ (i.e., the mean across extrinsic aspirations minus, or controlling for, 
the mean across all aspirations), the effect sizes diverged both in terms of magnitude and 
direction. The meta-analytic link between well-being and extrinsic aspirations as simple 
scores was very small and positive (r = .07) because these scores capture a ‘general striving’ 
component. Striving for anything, it seems, is better for wellness than not striving. However, 
when extrinsic aspirations were calculated as a relative centrality score, the link with well-
being became moderately negative (r = -.22). A similarly divergent pattern emerged for the 
link between extrinsic aspirations and ill-being. When extrinsic aspirations were calculated as 
a simple score their link to well-being was positive but very small (r = .07). When calculated 
as a relative centrality score, however, the effect of extrinsic aspiring on ill-being was 
positive (r = .23). Taken together, the results of Bradshaw et al.’s (2022) meta-analysis 
indicated that to the extent that extrinsic aspirations dominate in the overall pattern of 
aspiring, the more they both hinder well-being and conduce to ill-being. The effects 
associated with the relative centrality of extrinsic aspirations were not moderated by gender, 
age, region, or socioeconomic status, suggesting that the negative consequences of 
prioritizing extrinsic aspirations appear universal. Bradshaw et al.’s (2022) results could be 
interpreted as contradicting evidence that national (Hagerty & Veenhoven, 2003) and 
personal wealth (Tan et al., 2020) are associated with gains in individuals’ well-being, but 
such a conclusion would be a misinterpretation. As Bradshaw et al. (2022) outlines, extrinsic 
goals can serve positive functions; money can provide security and safety, maintaining a
<<<PAGE=44>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
44 
positive image can support feelings of esteem and confidence. However, regardless of the 
underlying motivation, Bradshaw et al.’s (2022) results suggest that if extrinsic pursuits are 
allowed to predominate the overall pattern of aspiring any possible gains will be undermined 
to some extent. 
Materialism, Wellness, and Need Satisfaction. Dittmar et al. (2014) used a meta-
analysis to examine the effects of materialism on well-being, defining materialism as 
“individual differences in people’s long-term endorsement of values, goals, and associated 
beliefs that center on the importance of acquiring money and possessions that convey status” 
(p. 886). Recognizing the close relation of this definition to some aspects of SDT’s 
conception of extrinsic goals, Dittmar et al. (2014) explicitly tested several hypotheses from 
GCT. They identified 259 independent samples examining materialism and wellness, 
comprising 753 effect sizes. Their meta-analyses showed that materialism was associated 
with decrements across a variety of well-being indices, although the effect sizes varied as a 
function of how materialism was measured. Materialism measures that were multifaceted 
(e.g., tapping both materialist values and beliefs), and those assessing the relative importance 
of materialist goals, fared better in predicting wellness (negatively) than measures focused on 
money-seeking alone, or those that did not assess the relative strength of materialism vis-à-
vis other values. The predictive strength of materialism also depended on the type of well-
being outcome. Small-to-moderate negative correlations were observed between materialism 
measures and well-being outcomes including life satisfaction (r = -.13), positive (r = -.23) 
and negative affect (r = -.15), positive self-appraisal (r = -.17), anxiety (r = -.17), depression 
(r = -.19), and self-reported physical health (r = -.15). Larger effects emerged for negative 
self-appraisal (r = -.28), health risk behaviors (r = -.29), and especially compulsive buying (r 
= -.44).
<<<PAGE=45>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
45 
Importantly, Dittmar et al. (2014) also included a mediation analysis to test the third 
GCT proposition, which is that the detrimental link between extrinsic aspirations and well-
being is mediated by decrements in basic psychological need satisfaction. Results supported 
the proposition, suggesting that the negative link can be explained by diminished need 
satisfaction. 
It’s important to note that GCT does not argue that having wealth or attaining a higher 
income hurts people’s wellness; on the contrary several SDT research papers confirm that 
greater wealth is correlated with greater wellness, and moreover, that this result is mediated 
by greater basic psychological need satisfaction (e.g., see Di Domenico & Fournier, 2014; 
Martela et al., 2022). Instead, what GCT argues is that a strong focus on wealth, fame, or 
appearances relative to a focus on growth, intimacy, and community is harmful to wellness, 
regardless of one’s attainments. 
Summary 
Meta-analyses support the main proposition of GCT. Whereas intrinsic aspirations are 
positively associated with wellness and negatively associated with ill-being, extrinsic 
aspirations have opposite effects. These relationships most clearly emerge when people’s 
overall levels of goal striving are statistically controlled. Notably, these effects have not been 
found to be moderated by demographic characteristics. Meta-analyses also confer support for 
the proposition that the negative associations between relatively strong extrinsic aspirations 
and wellness are mediated by diminished need satisfaction. Still, the mediational effect of 
need satisfactions has yet to be meta-analytically established for intrinsic aspirations.  
Results Part II: SDT Meta-Analyses in Applied Areas 
 
An important reason why interest in SDT has grown is because of its applied value. 
Specifically, SDT targets aspects of the environment that facilitate or undermine optimal
<<<PAGE=46>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
46 
qualities of motivation, and thus has utility in areas such as education, sport, health care and 
work, where practitioners are looking for ways to optimize engagement and productivity. 
Education 
Some of the earliest applied work in SDT was in education and how classroom 
climate affects the motivation of students (e.g., Deci et al., 1981). Since then, hundreds of 
applied studies across the globe have used SDT in the areas of both learning and formal 
education (see Ryan & Deci, 2020). Surprisingly, we could not find meta-analyses 
summarizing some of the basic SDT ideas in this domain, such as whether classroom need 
satisfaction predicts greater engagement and flourishing, even though that has been 
demonstrated in numerous individual studies. 
Taylor et al. (2014) did, however, present a meta-analysis of SDT’s motivational 
constructs in the prediction of school achievement over time. In fact, the meta-analysis was 
the first in a series of four studies in their paper, which Taylor et al. (2014) described as a 
systematic attempt to use both meta-analysis and controlled, longitudinal investigations to 
examine how SDT’s specific types of motivation, and particularly intrinsic motivation, 
related to academic achievement. Regarding the Taylor et al. (2014) meta-analysis itself, 
however, the literature search was focused exclusively on papers that: (a) used the Academic 
Motivation Scale (AMS; Vallerand et al., 1992), a commonly used SDT measure of academic 
motivation at that time, and (b) a measure of academic achievement (e.g., test score, self-
reported GPA, report card grade). Taylor et al. (2014) found 18 such studies, spanning 
elementary, high school, and college samples, most of which were cross-sectional in design. 
Their meta-analysis showed that, in general, academic achievement had positive links with 
intrinsic motivation (r = .13) and identified regulation (r = .17) and that introjection (r = -.06) 
and external regulation (r = -.11) both had negative relations to achievement. Finally, also 
consistent with expectations, amotivation was strongly negatively related to achievement (r =
<<<PAGE=47>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
47 
-.29). Thus, the Taylor et al. (2014) meta-analysis supported SDT’s expectations concerning 
the relations of more autonomous forms of motivation and achievement, but also highlighted 
how such findings are heavily based on cross-sectional work that, however reliable, cannot 
untangle the causal relations. We thus note that the next three studies in the Taylor et al. 
(2014) series were longitudinal designs done in French Canadian and Swedish schools, all 
showing the importance of intrinsic motivation in predicting higher academic achievement 
over time. 
Autonomy Support and Motivation  
Bureau et al. (2022) recently presented a meta-analysis of 144 studies involving more 
than 79,000 students that examined relations between parent and teacher autonomy supports, 
basic need satisfactions, and variations in student motivation. First, in line with BPN, basic 
need satisfactions were highly related across studies (all r’s > .63). All three basic needs 
related to the motivational continuum in the expected graded pattern, with greater need 
satisfactions predicting more autonomous forms of motivation and lower amotivation. The 
evidence pointed to teacher autonomy support as more strongly related to motivational 
outcomes than parental autonomy support. Teacher autonomy support was related to intrinsic 
(r = .48), identified (r =. 44), introjected (r = .17), external (r = -.10), and amotivation (r = -
.32) whereas the corresponding r's for parent autonomy support were .23, .28, .15, .05, 
and -.23 respectively. The meta-analysis also presented a path model in which autonomy 
support predicted more autonomous forms of motivation via mediation by needs in which 
autonomy and competence needs proved to be the significant mediators. 
Rationale Provision. According to OIT, the provision of a meaningful rationale is an 
important aspect of autonomy support and thus contributes to more autonomous 
internalization. When a reason for acting is understandable and coherent, a person is more 
able to volitionally ‘get on board.’ Thus, a rationale can support autonomy and facilitate
<<<PAGE=48>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
48 
internalization. Testing this idea was a meta-analysis of 23 experimental studies by Steingut 
et al. (2017) that examined the effect of rationale provision (versus control) on an array of 
relevant variables including subjective task value, autonomous motivation, engagement, 
performance, perceived autonomy, perceived competence, perceived relatedness, and 
controlled motivation. The findings suggested that providing a rationale was, as expected 
within OIT, positively associated with enhanced task value (r = .16), engagement (r = .10), 
performance (r = .08), and perceived autonomy (r = .20). Interestingly, the findings also 
indicated that rationale provision had a small negative effect on perceived competence (r = -
.10). Additionally, rationale provision appeared to also have more positive effects in samples 
with more females. Based on their review of the existing data, Steingut et al. (2017) 
suggested that rationales were most effective when their delivery is prosocial or autonomous 
in nature rather than controlling and when they are provided for uninteresting tasks for which 
volition becomes especially relevant to initiation. 
The impact of perceived autonomy support has also been studied in higher education 
contexts, as recently reviewed by Okada (2022). As part of the review Okada meta-analyzed 
the relations of perceived instructor autonomy support with the OIT taxonomy of motivation, 
finding that autonomy support was related to autonomous (r = .37) but not to controlled (r = 
.03) forms of motivation, and to both cognitive (r = .31) and emotional (r = .40) academic 
engagement. Autonomy support, which SDT expects to facilitate all three need satisfactions, 
was accordingly associated with satisfactions for autonomy (r = .50), competence (r = .45), 
and relatedness (r = .39). This meta-analysis thus helps establish the generalizability of these 
constructs to college and university students. 
Teacher Motivation 
Slemp et al. (2020) presented an analysis (briefly discussed earlier) on the antecedents 
and consequences of autonomous and controlled teacher motivation by drawing on a database
<<<PAGE=49>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
49 
of 1,117 correlations derived from 102 independent samples. Findings indicated that 
workplace autonomy (r = .48), competence (r = .53), and relatedness (r = .38) satisfactions 
predicted more autonomous motivation to teach. Teachers’ autonomous motivation was 
strongly and positively associated with their job satisfaction (r = .56), work commitment (r = 
.51), work engagement (r = .69), and general well-being (r = .46), whereas teachers’ 
controlled motivation was weakly positively associated with distress (r = .16), burnout (r = 
.18), and stress (r = .19). Perhaps most important, Slemp et al.’s findings indicated that 
autonomously motivated teachers are more competence and autonomy supportive in their 
practices, which in turn may foster students’ basic need satisfactions and lead to better 
student-related outcomes (Pelletier et al., 2002). These results were generally not moderated 
by educational setting or the type of teaching, but some associations were moderated by 
teacher age and time in career. 
Intervention Studies in Education 
Su and Reeve (2011) performed a meta-analysis to determine the effectiveness of 
interventions designed to support autonomy in others. They presented a meta-analysis of 
findings from 19 studies (20 effect sizes) showing that the training programs focused on 
increasing autonomy support were, overall, effective at doing so (r = .30). 
Moderator analyses revealed, among other findings, that the more effective programs 
were those focused on training for multiple elements of autonomy support, a finding later 
supported by Gillison et al.’s (2019) meta-analysis of health-care interventions. Also, 
programs were more effective when offered to teachers (rather than to other professionals) 
and for individuals with an autonomy (rather than a control) causality orientation. In fact, 
several conditions appeared to impact program effectiveness that require some deeper 
analyses. Still, the overall results suggested that training in autonomy support, which is a 
crucial component of all SDT interventions, can be designed to be highly effective.
<<<PAGE=50>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
50 
Burke et al. (2020) argued that interventions fostering self-determination in persons 
with disabilities are critical to enabling their educational success, community participation, 
and overall quality of life. To look at effectiveness, Burke et al. (2020) conducted a meta-
analysis of interventions to promote self-determination and associated skills in samples of 
students with disabilities. As with Su and Reeve’s (2011) findings, they found that 
interventions to promote self-determination are effective across age and grade, disability 
types, and school settings (average r = .41). They suggested that training in self-regulatory 
skills such as choice-making, problem-solving, planning and goal setting, self-management, 
self-advocacy, and self-knowledge can help prepare students to make more autonomous and 
adaptive purposeful decisions and choices. Nonetheless, there remains a need for an 
increased focus on promoting self-determination within education settings for both students 
with and without disabilities. 
Summary 
A number of meta-analyses support the applied significance of SDT in educational 
settings. Higher autonomous motivation among students is associated with greater academic 
achievement and students who are provided with meaningful rationales for their school 
activities perform more optimally, and report enhanced experiences. More autonomously 
motivated teachers experience a host of positive workplace outcomes, including greater job 
satisfaction and commitment. They are also more likely to adopt an autonomy-supportive 
approach in their teaching. Intervention studies have established the effectiveness of SDT 
principles within educational contexts, including among students with disabilities.  
Work and Organizations 
The SDT Motivational Taxonomy in the Workplace 
 Van den Broeck and colleagues (2021) performed a meta-analysis of SDT’s 
taxonomy of motivation specified within the OIT mini-theory. The meta-analysis was
<<<PAGE=51>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
51 
comprehensive in that it examined the findings from 124 samples from several analytic 
perspectives. However, among the summary findings was that progressively autonomous 
forms of motivation related increasingly positively with beneficial work outcomes and 
negatively with undesired work outcomes. Intrinsic motivation was found to be the most 
robust predictor of job satisfaction (r = .57), and engagement (r = .67). Identified motivation 
was a somewhat better predictor of performance (r = .43) than intrinsic motivation (r = .36). 
Van den Broeck et al. (2021) also found that external regulation did not predict performance 
(r = .04) and that amotivation was negatively related to performance (r = -.28), job 
satisfaction (r = -.32), and work engagement (r = -.27). Indeed, patterns across measures of 
work attitudes, employee well-being, and work behaviors were aligned with SDT’s 
hypotheses. One final highlight was that these investigators found that the category of 
integrated regulation was rarely measured in workplace studies, and where it was measured it 
did not show differentiation from identified motivation.  
Modeling SDT in Organizations 
We previously described a meta-analysis by Slemp et al. (2018) that examined, using 
meta-analytic path analysis, several elements of SDT’s approach to organizations. The model 
(Figure 2) examined the effects of managers’ autonomy support on employee outcomes 
across a fairly large database drawn from 83 samples (N = 32,870). Among their findings was 
that leader or manager autonomy support was strongly and positively associated with more 
autonomous forms of work motivation in employees but was unrelated to their levels of more 
controlled forms of motivation. As the type of motivation became more relatively 
autonomous, the correlations with leader autonomy support became increasingly positive. 
Thus there were stronger associations between autonomy support and each type of motivation 
moving left to right in Figure 2. Leader autonomy support was also positively associated with 
basic psychological need satisfactions, well-being, and positive work behaviors, and
<<<PAGE=52>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
52 
negatively linked with work distress. Important to SDT’s assumptions about needs, these 
relations were not moderated by the country from which the samples were drawn. 
Basic Needs, Work Wellness, and Motivation 
In a test of BPNT and OIT applications to organizations, Van den Broeck et al. (2016) 
assembled 99 studies with 119 samples to assess antecedents and consequences of SDT’s 
basic psychological need satisfaction at work. Their meta-analytic findings largely supported 
SDT, in that all three needs contributed to a variety of wellness outcomes, and were related 
negatively to role stressors, work-family conflict, and job insecurity. However, because basic 
needs more robustly predicted positive than negative outcomes, the authors questioned if they 
should be considered truly basic needs, which might show more bi-directional effects 
(Vansteenkiste & Ryan, 2013; Vansteenkiste et al, 2022). It is noteworthy that Van den 
Broeck et al.’s (2016) meta-analysis appeared just as SDT’s emphasis on also measuring 
need frustration in addition to measuring need satisfaction (e.g., Bartholomew et al., 2011) 
was having an impact. Today there is a fuller account of why satisfaction items are less 
predictive of negative outcomes, whereas frustration ratings are less apt at predicting positive 
ones (Ryan et al., 2016). Returning to Van den Broeck et al. (2016), they also found that 
basic psychological need satisfactions generally demonstrated positive relations with positive 
leader and organizational variables, fairness perceptions, and person-environment fit, and 
negative relations with perceived mistreatment. 
Basic Needs, Incentives, and Performance at Work. Earlier we reviewed a meta-
analysis by Cerasoli et al. (2014) concerning intrinsic motivation. Cerasoli et al. (2016) 
presented a separate meta-analysis concerning how needs for autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness, when placed alongside incentives, relate to performance. For this meta-analysis, 
they obtained 108 samples (N = 30,648). As expected within SDT, each of the three basic 
psychological need satisfactions predicted performance, with moderate-to-large effects for
<<<PAGE=53>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
53 
relatedness (r = .20), autonomy (r = .22), and competence (r = .30). Incentives per se had 
little impact on need satisfaction. Instead, the need-satisfaction-to-performance relation was 
moderated by incentive salience. Consistent with the ‘crowding-out’ hypothesis, Cerasoli et 
al. (2016) found that need satisfaction mattered less to performance when incentives were 
directly salient (r = .19) but mattered more when incentives were indirectly salient (r = .37). 
Direct salience typically translates into a more controlling functional significance—which 
means that under such systems, SDT expects need satisfaction would be both less evident and 
less predictive of performance. In contrast, indirectly salient incentives would tend to have a 
less controlling functional significance and thus not decrease the salience and positive effects 
of need satisfaction. Cerasoli et al.’s (2016) results supplied support for these relatively 
nuanced expectations of SDT in performance contexts. 
Bauer et al. (2016) performed a meta-analysis that examined motivational factors in 
reactions to, and outcomes of, business training and development settings. They did not use 
the full SDT motivational model, however, instead only assessing measures of intrinsic 
motivation, which may not be the only relevant subtype, especially given the mandated 
nature and content of many corporate training interventions. Nonetheless, intrinsic motivation 
had an expectably large effect on employee satisfaction and enjoyment reactions (r = .70), 
but small effects on declarative knowledge (r = .12) and no reliable effect on initial skill 
acquisition (r = .02).  
Good et al. (2022) analyzed results from 127 studies comprised of 293 effect sizes (N 
= 77,560) to assess the relations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation to performance in 
salespersons. The findings showed first that motivation in general is meaningfully related to 
sales performance (r = .25). Findings further indicated that intrinsic motivation was more 
strongly associated with performance (r = .30) than extrinsic motivation (r = .18), a
<<<PAGE=54>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
54 
difference effect that remained when controlling for age, gender, and job tenure. Results thus 
suggested attending to intrinsic as well as extrinsic motivators for salespeople. 
Summary 
In the workplace, more autonomously motivated employees report greater job 
satisfaction and evince better workplace performance. Leader or manager autonomy support 
is positively associated with more autonomous qualities of motivation, basic need 
satisfactions, and wellness among employees. Basic psychological need satisfactions at work 
are robustly related to well-being and workplace outcomes, including perceptions of fairness 
and leadership. Consistent with CET, need satisfactions are particularly strong predictors of 
performance when external incentives are less salient. Thus, as SDT argues both intrinsic 
motivation and extrinsic motivations appear to be important for work performance and 
sustained engagement, with basic need satisfactions being a key to workplace wellness. 
Health and Health Care 
Practitioner Autonomy Support 
As a theory of motivation and behavior change, SDT has spawned considerable 
research in healthcare settings. This led to an early meta-analysis by Ng et al. (2012) focused 
on SDT’s utility in healthcare contexts. Specifically, they examined the relations between the 
SDT-based constructs of practitioner autonomy support and patients’ experiences of 
psychological need satisfaction and indices of mental and physical health. They extracted 
data from 184 independent published and unpublished studies focused on health behaviors 
such as weight change, physical activity, diabetes care, and smoking. Research in related 
areas such as sport and physical education were excluded.  
Ng et al.’s (2012) results showed the expected positive relations between basic 
psychological need satisfactions and autonomous motivation to a host of beneficial health 
outcomes. Ng et al. (2012) also used path analyses of the meta-analyzed correlations to test
<<<PAGE=55>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
55 
the interrelations of SDT’s healthcare model as specified in Ryan et al. (2008). Results were 
generally consistent with Ryan et al.’s (2008) model, albeit showing generally small effect 
sizes for the direct paths from autonomous motivation to health outcomes, and stronger 
indirect paths such that autonomous motivation was associated with increases in perceived 
competence, which in turn was associated with health outcomes (e.g., see Williams et al., 
2006). This finding resonates with practice, where so often finding strategies to alter difficult-
to-change health behaviors is a key to maintaining volition. Overall, the authors suggested 
that SDT constructs appear useful both in predicting health-related behaviors and helping 
describe the conditions that facilitate them. 
SDT-based Interventions 
Gillison et al. (2019) conducted a comprehensive meta-analysis of the techniques 
used within SDT-based interventions to facilitate motivation for health behavior. They began 
with a systematic review, followed by meta-analysis of the techniques and strategies used to 
enhance basic psychological need satisfaction and motivation within health interventions 
based on SDT. Databases were searched from 1970-2017 for studies with either children or 
adults that minimally included a control group and pre- and post-intervention ratings of SDT-
related psychosocial mediators (namely perceived autonomy support, basic psychological 
need satisfaction, and motivation). A total of 74 studies met these inclusion criteria, 80% of 
which were RCTs or cluster RCTs. Gillison et al. (2019) applied two established taxonomies 
for the coding of techniques to enhance basic psychological need satisfaction, as well 
drawing from a list of 21 SDT-specific techniques, grouped into 18 SDT-based strategies. 
Results showed strong positive effects for perceived autonomy support (r = .39), autonomy 
satisfaction (r = .38), and competence satisfaction (r = .30), as well as small-to-moderate 
effects for relatedness satisfaction (r = .14), and autonomous motivation (r = .20). One-to-one 
interventions (r = .43) resulted in more competence satisfaction than group-based
<<<PAGE=56>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
56 
interventions (r = .14), and competence satisfaction was greater for adults (r = .43) than for 
children (r = .06). Meta-analytic regression showed that individual strategies had limited 
independent impact on outcomes, suggesting that a need-supportive environment entails the 
combination of multiple co-acting techniques, as also found by Su and Reeve (2011) in 
educational interventions. 
Sheeran et al. (2020) conducted another meta-analysis focused on randomized, 
controlled trials using health behavior change interventions based on SDT and testing 
theoretically specified mediation processes, and potential moderators. The authors identified 
56 articles that included 65 independent tests of SDT interventions. Random effects meta-
analysis and meta-regressions showed a sample-weighted average effect size for SDT 
interventions was r = .11. There were small but statistically significant intervention effects on 
physical activity (r = .12), sedentary behavior (r = .11), diet (r = .10), screen time (r = .09), 
alcohol consumption (r = .13), and smoking cessation (r = .08). A meta-analytic structural 
equation model suggested that autonomous motivation and perceived competence mediated 
intervention effects on behavior.  
Ntoumanis et al. (2021) recently did yet another meta-analysis of SDT-based health 
promotion and disease management intervention results and follow-up results. Their aim was 
to meta-analyze such interventions if they: (a) used an experimental design, (b) tested an 
intervention that was clearly based on SDT, and (c) measured at least one SDT-based 
motivational construct, and at least one indicator of health behavior, or physical- or 
psychological health. Seventy-three studies met these criteria. Results using a random-effects 
meta-analytic model showed that SDT-based interventions produced small-to-medium 
changes in most health behaviors at the end of the intervention period and at the follow-up. 
Small positive changes in physical and psychological health outcomes were also observed at 
the end of the interventions. Increases in need support and autonomous motivation (but not
<<<PAGE=57>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
57 
controlled motivation or amotivation) were associated with positive changes in health 
behavior. The authors concluded that SDT-based interventions positively affect health 
outcomes, with effects that are typically modest in size. 
SDT and Theory of Planned Behavior 
Hagger and Chatzisarantis (2009) used meta-analysis toward showing a potential 
integration of theory of planned behavior (TPB; Ajzen, 1991) and SDT in the realm of health 
behavior. Specifically, Hagger and Chatzisarantis (2009) sought to derive empirical support 
for a proposed model combining TPB and SDT through a motivational sequence in which 
autonomous motivation (as assessed in SDT) predicts the proximal predictors of intentions 
and behavior (as assessed within TPB). Hagger and Chatzisarantis (2009) identified 34 
studies testing the relations between SDT and TPB constructs, including perceived autonomy 
support and autonomous motivation constructs from SDT, and the attitude, subjective norms, 
perceived behavioral control, intention, and behavior constructs from the TPB. A path-
analysis using meta-analytically derived correlations revealed direct effects of autonomous 
motivation on intentions and behavior, as well showing these relations being partially 
mediated by some, though not all, of proximal predictors from the TPB. Thus, evidence 
supported the proposed motivational sequence, especially links between autonomous 
motivation and intention. These meta-analytic results suggest that TPB and SDT can be 
simultaneously modeled, given there is relative independence of constructs, and both 
perspectives have been used to address a broad range of health behaviors. Yet, as our focus 
here is only on SDT-based hypotheses independent of TPB, regarding which several relations 
were examined. Specifically, the relation of autonomy support to self-determined motivation 
was found to be strong and positive (r = .38) as was the relation of self-determined 
motivation to behavior (r = .37). Perceived autonomy support was moderately linked to 
behavior (r = .25).
<<<PAGE=58>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
58 
Subsequently, Hagger and Chatzisarantis (2016) reported a separate meta-analysis, 
this time investigating their trans-contextual model of how motivation in physical education 
may transfer to out-of-school motivation for physical activity. Again, their analysis finds 
support for the trans-contextual model, which involves the mediation by TPB variables. Of 
the multiple analyses performed only one, however, directly tested an SDT-specific 
hypothesis, finding, as the theory predicts, that instructor autonomy support strongly and 
positively predicted students’ motivation for physical activity in school (r = .42). 
Summary 
A relatively large body of meta-analytic work supports the application of SDT in 
healthcare settings. More autonomous qualities of motivation and basic psychological need 
satisfactions are positively associated with a variety of health-related behaviors (e.g., weight 
management, physical activity, diabetes care). SDT-based interventions for improving 
motivation have proven effective for positively affecting health behaviors. SDT-based 
interventions have also shown themselves to complement those based on the TPB, another 
longstanding model for positive behavioral change.  
Sport, Physical Education, and Physical Activity 
Testing OIT’s Simplex Model in Sport 
Chatzisarantis et al. (2003) did a meta-analysis of perceived locus of causality in 
exercise, sport, and physical education contexts. They focused their literature search on three 
main areas: (a) research using instruments that assessed perceived locus of causality or OIT’s 
taxonomy, (b) research bearing on the construct validity of perceived locus of causality 
including its antecedents and outcomes, and (c) integration of Nicholls’ (1984) concepts of 
task- and ego-orientation with perceived locus of causality. A meta-analysis using 21 
published articles supported the existence of a self-determination continuum from external 
regulation to introjection and identification. In addition, path analysis of corrected effect sizes
<<<PAGE=59>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
59 
supported the mediating effects of perceived locus of causality on the relationship between 
perceived competence and intentions. 
Autonomous Motivation and Physical Activity 
Data such as that presented by Chatzisarantis et al. (2003) suggest the importance of 
autonomous motivation for intentions to be physically active. Owen et al. (2014) also 
explored the relations of autonomous motivation and physical activity but in children and 
adolescents using the SDT framework. Forty-six studies (N = 15,984 participants) met their 
inclusion criteria. Consistent with SDT the meta-analysis showed that more autonomous 
motivation had small-to-moderate positive associations with physical activity. Specifically, 
autonomous forms of motivation (i.e., intrinsic motivation and identified regulation) had 
moderate, positive associations with physical activity (r = .27 to .38), whereas controlled 
forms of motivation (i.e., introjection and external regulation) had weak, negative 
associations with physical activity (r = − .03 to −.17). Amotivation was also negatively 
related to activity (r = − .11 to − .21). Owen et al. (2014) concluded that the evidence 
provided some support for SDT, but also pointed to the fact that there was substantial 
heterogeneity in most of the associations. Such heterogeneity likely reflects the diverse 
contexts and types of PA, as well as the fact that PA is itself a multiply determined outcome 
in which motivation plays a part. The authors also argued that many of the studies included in 
their analyses had methodological shortcomings. 
Another meta-analysis by Sierra-Díaz et al. (2019) examined psychosocial factors 
thought to affect physical activity and sport engagement, in educational and extracurricular 
settings. They found, in line with SDT, that sustained physical activities and sport practice 
engagement are strongly positively related to self-determined motivation (r = .40). 
A meta-analysis by Teixeira et al. (2018) examined the relations between SDT’s basic 
psychological needs and positive and negative affect in exercise contexts. They identified 10
<<<PAGE=60>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
60 
studies in which basic psychological need satisfaction variables and affect were measured in 
an exercise setting. Positive affect was related very strongly and positively with competence 
(r = .52), and moderately positively with autonomy (r = .25) and relatedness (r = .20). 
Results for the effects on negative affect were more mixed. Competence satisfaction was 
strongly negatively associated with negative affect (r = -.27), autonomy was not related to 
negative affect (r = .03), and relatedness was unexpectedly strongly positively correlated with 
negative affect (r = .41), Noteworthy was the considerable heterogeneity identified across the 
studies, which reflects both varied methods and exercise settings. It is also likely, from SDT’s 
dual-process view, that measures of need frustration would better predict negative affect than 
would low need satisfaction scores. The authors suggested that, nonetheless, results support 
the view that basic need satisfactions are important for positive affect in exercise contexts. 
Autonomy Support, Basic Needs, and Physical Activity. A recent and 
comprehensive meta-analysis by Mossman et al. (2022) focused on the role of coach 
autonomy support in sport and exercise settings. The review encompassed both sport 
coaching and coaching in PE settings. Drawing from 1,320 correlations extracted from 131 
independent samples (N=38,844), their findings showed that coach autonomy support was 
positively related to athletes’ motivation and wellness. 
Regarding motivation, meta-analyzed correlations were strongest for autonomous 
forms of athlete motivation (intrinsic, r = .32; integrated, r = .37; identified, r = .31) and 
weaker for controlled forms of motivation (introjected regulation, r =.13; external regulation, 
r = .00), and negative with amotivation (r = −.16). Positively associated regarding athletes’ 
general well-being (r = .41), vitality (r = .30), self-esteem (r = .23) among other indicators of 
wellness. Coach autonomy support was further predictably negatively associated with general 
ill-being (r = -.15), burnout (r =-.24), and depression (r = -.25) among other signs of distress 
(see Supplemental Material, Table S1 for all meta-analyzed outcomes). Finally, in 15 studies
<<<PAGE=61>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
61 
performance or achievement outcomes were reported, and were positively related to coach 
autonomy support (r = .18). 
There were also strong associations between autonomy support and athletes’ basic 
autonomy (r = .46), competence (r = .28), and relatedness (r = .39) need satisfactions. 
Autonomy support was further associated with other measured behavioral supports for basic 
psychological needs such as relatedness support, structure, involvement, and task-involving 
climates, adding to convergent validity. Finally, and important for SDT’s universality claims, 
these effects of autonomy support were not moderated by culture.  
Burnout and Dropout in Sport. Li et al. (2013) provided a systematic review and 
meta-analysis on the relations of burnout to basic psychological needs and motivation among 
athletes. There were eighteen studies that met inclusion criteria, and these were described as 
highly varied in terms of study characteristics such as type of participants, study design, and 
measures used. Despite such variations, results revealed that autonomy (r = -.50), 
competence (r = -.52), and relatedness (r = -.43) satisfactions, intrinsic motivation (r = -.46), 
extrinsic autonomous regulation (r = -.27), controlled regulation (r = .48), and amotivation (r 
= .68) had large and theoretically-congruent effects on global burnout across studies. 
Li et al.’s findings were complemented by another recent meta-analysis by Zhang et 
al. (2022) on sport persistence. They examined factors such as enjoyment, and coach, peer, 
and parent supports, all of which had positive relations with persistence, but which were not 
assessed in an SDT specific manner. Included however, was a meta-analysis of three studies, 
together showing positive effects of SDT basic need satisfaction on athletes’ persistence 
intentions (r = .41).  
Back et al. (2022) also presented a systematic review and metanalysis on dropout in 
team sports, with a focus on adolescents in team sports. Twelve studies met their criteria, the 
results of which appeared heterogeneous, bespeaking multiple determinants of dropout during
<<<PAGE=62>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
62 
this developmental period. Nonetheless, the overall findings indicated that not dropping out 
from team sports was associated with lower controlled motivation (r = -.11) and amotivation 
(r = -.37), and higher self-determined motivation (r = .13). They also reported a positive 
relation of need satisfaction to not dropping out (r = .21). Again, the small number of studies 
in these analyses suggest caution, as does the variability in the study methods summarized. 
Motivation in Physical Education 
Lochbaum and Jean-Noel (2016) examined the direct effects of instructor autonomy 
support on outcomes stemming from physical education. Their review focused on both 
outcomes in-class, as well as out-of-school or leisure-time physical activities. They identified 
39 papers that met their inclusion criteria, comprising samples from 15 countries totaling 
over 23,000 participants, of which 46.5% were female. Regarding in-class effects, autonomy 
support from physical education teachers was very strongly and positively associated with 
students’ autonomy (r = .57), competence (r = .41), and relatedness (r = .46) satisfactions, as 
well as their intrinsic (r = .54) and identified (r = .50) motivation. Large effects on effort (r = 
.33) and small effects on physical activity (r = .10) were also detected. In terms of the 
transfer effects from autonomy support from physical education instructor to leisure time 
outcomes, the effects were moderate to large in magnitude, though they were smaller than 
they were for effects in class, underscoring the difficulty of creating trans-contextual change. 
Subsequently, Vasconcellos et al. (2020) provided a thorough systematic review and 
meta-analysis of SDT within the context of school physical education programs. 
Vasconcellos et al. (2020) utilized a multilevel structural equation modeling approach to 
meta-analyze data from 265 studies identified as meeting their criteria. In line with SDT, the 
meta-analytic results showed that autonomous motivation was strongly, positively associated 
with adaptive outcomes (r = .54) and moderately, negatively linked with maladaptive ones (r 
= -.25) in school physical education programs. Introjected regulation was positively
<<<PAGE=63>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
63 
correlated with both adaptive (r = .26) and maladaptive (r = .13) outcomes, again as SDT 
would expect. External regulation was strongly positively linked to maladaptive outcomes (r 
= .25), and very weakly, negatively linked with adaptive ones (r = -.07). Finally, amotivation 
was both very strongly positively associated with maladaptive outcomes (r = .45), as well as 
negatively associated with adaptive ones (r = -.37). Also supporting SDT, autonomy (r = 
.57), competence (r = .60), and relatedness (r = .51) satisfactions were very strongly 
positively related with students’ autonomous student motivation, and less strongly, but still 
positively, correlated with introjected regulation (r = .35, r = .27, r = .27, for autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness, respectively). Small to very small negative correlations were 
found between autonomy (r = -.13), competence (r = -.10), and relatedness (r = -.07) and 
external regulation. Amotivation had strong negative correlations with autonomy (r = -.29), 
competence (r = -.42), and relatedness (r = -.30). Vasconcellos et al.’s (2020) findings further 
revealed that teachers more greatly impact classroom experiences of autonomy and 
competence, whereas relatedness in physical education is associated with both peer and 
teacher influences. 
Whereas the prior meta-analyses looked at how motivational variables and 
satisfactions impacted physical education outcomes, Kelso et al. (2020) provided a meta-
analysis of how school-based interventions that are meant to increase physical activity 
affected motivational outcomes and experiences. Because the physical activity interventions 
were both varied and multi-component, Kelso et al.’s (2020) meta-analysis, which included a 
large array of SDT variables as outcomes, does not specifically test any SDT propositions, 
Nonetheless, the findings show that physical activity interventions generally had small to 
moderate positive effects on perceived autonomy, identified regulation, intrinsic motivation, 
and motivational climate. Significant moderate to large effects were also identified for the
<<<PAGE=64>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
64 
relative autonomy index (RAI or SDI) used in many studies (see Supplemental Material, 
Table S1). 
Gender Differences in Exercise Motivation 
Guérin et al. (2012) examined differences between men and women on SDT’s 
motivational regulations for exercise. The meta-analysis was restricted, however, to a single 
measure, namely the Behavioral Regulations in Exercise Questionnaire (BREQ; Mullan et 
al., 1997). With this focus, 27 studies were identified that reported gender differences for 
each of the basic SDT forms of regulation assessed with the BREQ, as well as for a 
composite self-determination score. Overall, results reflected the expected relations between 
forms of regulation, but negligible differences between men and women on each of the 
regulations. The findings were interpreted as supporting the applicability across genders of 
autonomy-related constructs within OIT and reflected in the Mullan et al. (1997) measure. 
Summary 
Meta-analyses support SDT’s motivational continuum within the sporting domain. 
Autonomous motivation is positively associated with physical activity, sport practice, and 
engagement. Basic psychological need satisfactions are associated with more positive 
affective experiences, and both need satisfactions and autonomous qualities of motivation are 
negatively associated with burnout. Instructor autonomy support is positively associated with 
students’ need satisfaction, effort, and level of activity within physical education. SDT’s 
motivational constructs have proven applicable for both men and women within the exercise 
domain. 
Parenting 
Parental Autonomy Support 
Rosenzweig (2000), in an unpublished dissertation, provided a meta-analytic review 
of parenting practices and their effects on student achievement. The practices examined were
<<<PAGE=65>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
65 
drawn from multiple theories and focused on broad constructs such as emotional support as 
well as theory-specific constructs such as parental autonomy support. Rosenzweig (2000) 
identified 12 studies including autonomy support, with findings revealing a small, positive 
correlation between parental autonomy support and student achievement (r = .16). The use of 
external rewards, a parenting behavior that SDT has criticized as too often controlling, was 
negatively associated with student achievement (r = -.28). More generally looking across 
both positive and negative parenting styles, Rosenzweig (2000) concluded that autonomy 
support and authoritative parenting styles positively promoted children’s school success, 
whereas controlling, uninvolved or critical parental behavior, which in SDT would be seen as 
need thwarting, negatively predicted student success. 
Subsequently, Vasquez et al. (2016) presented a more extensive and SDT-focused 
look at parent autonomy support and its effects on school achievement, motivation, and 
positive functioning in a meta-analysis of 36 studies. Parent autonomy support was related to 
greater academic achievement (r = .11) and indicators of adaptive psychosocial functioning, 
including greater autonomous motivation (r = .19), greater extrinsic motivation (r = .22), 
higher perceived competence (r = .21), more engagement (r = .12), and more positive school-
related attitudes (r = .22). However, the strongest relation was found between parent 
autonomy support and child psychological health (r = .38). Vasquez et al.’s (2016) results 
also suggested that the parent autonomy support relation was stronger when both parents 
were autonomy supportive. Moderator analyses also suggested that the relations between 
parent autonomy support and psychosocial outcomes may vary by grade level. 
Valcan et al. (2017) examined the impact of parental behaviors on children’s 
executive functioning. SDT holds that particularly autonomy support and competence 
scaffolding enhance executive functioning in development (e.g., Bindman et al., 2015). 
Valcan et al. included autonomy support, responsiveness and scaffolding in a variable called
<<<PAGE=66>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
66 
positive parenting, which was positively associated with executive functioning (r = .25), 
whereas negative parent behaviors, which included control, rejection, negative regard, power 
assertion and intrusiveness were negatively related (r = -.22). 
Finally, a meta-analysis under review by Bradshaw and colleagues (2021) provides 
perhaps the most comprehensive review of the effects of parental autonomy support and 
control on child well-being. The review included 211 eligible reports, spanning 49 years, and 
including N=92,634 participants. Using meta-analytic multilevel structural equation 
modelling, Bradshaw et al. (2021) demonstrated that parental autonomy support was 
moderately, positively associated with child well-being (r = .28), and moderately, negatively 
associated with child ill-being (r = -.22). Controlling parenting was moderately, positively 
associated with child ill-being (r = .19), and weakly, negatively linked with child well-being 
(r = -.12). The ‘cross-path’ effects observed in the review are further evidence of SDT’s so-
called dual-process model. Parent autonomy support does more to support wellness than it 
does to protect against ill-being, and similarly, controlling parenting conduces to harm more 
than it undermines existing wellness. Moderator analyses further indicated that psychological 
control (as compared to behavioral control) may be particularly detrimental to child wellness, 
whereas the negative effects of behavioral control are weaker, perhaps reflecting their role as 
a structural or boundary-setting component of parenting. Importantly, child age, child gender, 
and the region from which the sample was drawn did not moderate the effects of parent 
autonomy support or parent control, suggesting they are largely universal. 
Bradshaw et al. (2021) also sought to settle debate within the literature concerning 
autonomy versus independence. Early in SDT’s development, disagreements arose about 
whether people genuinely need autonomy. Most often, such debate was based on a definition 
of autonomy as ‘independence from others’ rather than autonomy as ‘agency and volition’, 
the latter of which is what SDT specifies. In their review, Bradshaw et al. (2021) separated
<<<PAGE=67>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
67 
studies that measured parenting practices consistent with SDT’s definition of autonomy from 
those that conflated autonomy support with independence-oriented parenting. They used the 
resulting binary variable as a moderator of the links between autonomy support and child 
well-being and ill-being. While ‘conflation’ was not a statistically significant moderator of 
the pooled effects, compared to the studies of ‘pure’ autonomy, the confidence intervals for 
studies in which autonomy and independence were conflated were much wider. This suggests 
that although there may be an average positive effect of conflating autonomy-supportive with 
independence-supportive parenting, the effect is associated with greater uncertainty, meaning 
the degree to which it will be beneficial to a specific child is harder to predict. As compared 
to autonomy support, for which the confidence intervals were tight, suggesting the effect is 
reliably beneficial across children. These results further emphasize SDT’s longstanding 
distinction between autonomy and independence (Ryan & Lynch, 1989), and its importance 
in the domain of parenting. 
Are Autonomy Support and Control Opposites?  
Duineveld, et al. (2018) did a meta-analysis of the relations between autonomy 
supportive and psychologically controlling parenting across developmental stages. Autonomy 
support and psychological control are two of the most highly researched parenting 
dimensions, yet research is inconsistent about how these parenting approaches relate to each 
other: are they polar opposites or separate parenting dimensions? Suspecting heterogeneity, 
Duineveld et al. (2018) conducted a meta-analysis of the link between autonomous and 
psychologically controlling parenting, and whether this link was moderated by age, an 
important issue given varied beliefs about younger children’s rights to and capacities for 
autonomy. A meta-analytic structural equation model was conducted on findings from 51 
studies, involving 88 separate data points. A large negative relationship was found between 
autonomy support and psychological control (r = -.50), but this relation was moderated by
<<<PAGE=68>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
68 
developmental stage, which explained almost 50% of the heterogeneity in effect sizes. In 
fact, starting from early childhood, there was a general monotonic increase in the 
relationship, while autonomy support and psychological control were strongly negatively 
associated in measures of parenting of emerging adults (r = -.72), these dimensions are 
distinct in studies of parenting in early childhood (r = .10). 
Koehn and Kerns (2018) applied meta-analysis to examine the relations between 
parenting strategies and child attachment styles in children 5 to 18 years of age. Neither the 
variables nor the hypotheses were restricted to or framed using SDT, but SDT authors have 
clearly argued that one important component of secure attachments is parental autonomy 
support (La Guardia et al., 2000; Ryan et al., 2016). Koehn and Kerns (2018) identified 10 
studies testing this relation, revealing a small-to-moderate, positive effect (r = .18), indicating 
that autonomy-supportive parents had children with more secure attachments. Fourteen 
studies also examined the relations of attachment security to harsh control from parents, a 
relation that from an SDT view should clearly be negative. Results showed such a negative 
effect (r = -.20). No statistically significant results were found for other attachment styles, 
likely due to the small number of studies tracking those relations.  
Although also not couched in SDT, Crandell et al. (2018) did a meta-analysis of 
parenting styles related to children’s mental health outcomes using Skinner et al.’s (2005) 
six-dimensional model which draws from and strongly parallels SDT’s model of parental 
autonomy support, structure, and positive involvement as the nutriments for development 
(Grolnick & Ryan, 1989). Skinner et al. (2005) instead assess autonomy support and 
coercion, structure and chaos, and warmth versus rejection, as six dimensions. SDT would 
predict positive effects from autonomy support, structure, and warmth, and opposite effects 
from coercion, chaos, and rejection. Across outcomes including anxiety, depression, quality 
of life, and internalizing and externalizing symptoms this pattern was generally true, although
<<<PAGE=69>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
69 
not all variables predicted outcomes. Autonomy support, for example, was associated with 
less anxiety (r = -.22), higher quality of life (r = .24), and fewer externalizing symptoms (r = 
-.27). Autonomy support’s opposing dimension, coercion, predicted higher anxiety (r = .22), 
depression (r = .33), internalizing symptoms (r = .17), and lower quality of life (r = -.20). 
Summary 
 Parental autonomy support is related to a host of positive child outcomes, including 
greater academic achievement, adaptive psychosocial functioning, and more positive school-
related attitudes. Whereas autonomy-supportive parenting is particularly predictive of 
children’s well-being, controlling parenting is predictive of children’s ill-being. The 
association between autonomy-supportive and controlling parenting changes over the course 
of development: in early childhood, these constructs are distinct, but by emerging adulthood 
these constructs are strongly negatively correlated. Autonomy-supportive parents have 
children with more secure attachments, and harsh parental controls are associated with 
insecure child attachments. 
Summary and Conclusions 
SDT is a broad and multi-aspect framework that has developed slowly over time. At 
this point a sufficient pool of meta-analyses has started to distinguish the broad outlines of 
what is reliably known, at least meta-analytically speaking. In these conclusions, we 
summarize some of those ‘truths’. However, we should begin with a comment about the 
nature of meta-analyses and the strengths and limitations of the evidence they can provide. 
The most striking feature of these meta-analyses, when examined collectively, is their 
typical (though not invariant) reliance on cross-sectional datasets. Even in areas where 
multiple longitudinal studies and intervention data exist, for methodological reasons often 
only one time point is included from each dataset so as not to bias the overall meta-analysis. 
In an era of psychological science that focuses on causal rather than associative links, the
<<<PAGE=70>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
70 
knowledge revealed by aggregations of cross-sectional data can be unsatisfying. Helping to 
ameliorate that, a few meta-analyses of intervention effects (e.g., Gillison et al., 2019; Su & 
Reeve, 2011) and experimental studies (e.g., Deci et al., 1999), both of which have causal 
implications, provided supportive evidence for SDT propositions and hypotheses. 
Additionally, several recent meta-analyses took strides to examine longitudinal effects or 
change (e.g., Ntoumanis et al., 2021; Sheeran et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the main body of 
meta-analyses here is focused on establishing the reliability of hypothesized relations 
between SDT’s constructs, and between those constructs and various predicted antecedents 
and consequences. 
Yet, from the standpoint of theory construction, these meta-analytic demonstrations of 
hypothesized associations between constructs, and predictive relations between constructs 
and outcomes, provide an important scaffolding for continuing science. As just one example, 
within SDT a central issue is the role of basic psychological need satisfaction and frustration 
as mediators between environments and outcomes. Evidence of mediation by basic needs 
points toward important points for leverage in applied work—particularly because on the 
environmental side, interventions can enhance autonomy and basic need supports and, on the 
individual side, changes in awareness, emotion regulation, and motivation can also alter these 
mediators. In addition, mapping out existing meta-analytic knowledge highlights what has 
not yet been reliably established, and what relations are heterogeneous and perhaps strongly 
moderated. Thus, in what follows we highlight findings that appear to be ‘meta-analytically 
true’ as well as some gaps in knowledge and needed future directions for research. 
First, there is support for CET in the evidence for multiple factors that can enhance 
(e.g., choice, positive feedback) or diminish (e.g., negative feedback, controlling rewards) 
intrinsic motivation as the theory proposes. Regarding OIT, there does seem to be a clear 
relative autonomy continuum structure to motives, and a generally graded set of relations
<<<PAGE=71>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
71 
between motives and outcomes such as burnout, job satisfaction, academic performance 
(Howard et al., 2017; Van den Broeck et al., 2021), and mindfulness (Donald et al., 2020) 
such that the more autonomous the type of motive, the better the outcome, and the more 
mindful the person, the more likely they are acting with autonomy. Moreover, need-
supportive environments appear to enhance autonomous motivation, and its associated 
positive consequences, including prosociality (e.g., Donald et al., 2021). Third, SDT’s basic 
psychological needs are reliably related to wellness outcomes with effect sizes typically in 
the medium to large range (e.g., Stanley et al., 2021).  
Whereas CET, OIT, and BPNT mini-theories have received strong meta-analytic 
support, support is much thinner where COT and GCT are concerned. In each case, only one 
primary meta-analysis exists, and though they each provided promising results, more research 
is needed, especially to unravel moderators and more detail on causal relationships. Indeed, 
one general observation from the review is that while many findings support SDT 
formulations, many central propositions remain to be meta-analytically confirmed. In this 
regard, the science of SDT remains incomplete and, hopefully, this meta-analytic skeleton of 
knowledge can continue to be fleshed out by a much more nuanced and complex surrounding 
literature.  
Heterogeneity in Effect Sizes 
Another common finding across these meta-analyses is a high degree of heterogeneity 
in many study findings (see Supplemental Material, Table S1). Thus, even though meta-
analyses have generally supported SDT hypotheses in terms of both direction and 
significance, there is substantial variation in effect sizes between individual studies. Such 
heterogeneity suggests the potential presence of moderators and/or variations or unreliability 
in measures and methods. To date, accounts of heterogeneity have been far from 
comprehensive.
<<<PAGE=72>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
72 
Several meta-analyses examined moderation by age. Duineveld (2018) found 
important age differences in the relations between perceived autonomy support and perceived 
control, reflecting a developmental effect. However, other meta-analyses have found little 
effect of age (e.g., Donald et al., 2021; Bradshaw, 2022). Gender has also been examined but 
has not emerged as a significant moderator (with an exception being Stanley et al., 2021).  
The most common focus of moderation testing has been on the theoretically relevant 
dimensions of individualism and collectivism. These dimensions have been especially salient 
because some authors have suggested that autonomy is more valued and relevant in 
individualistic cultures than in collectivist contexts (Chirkov et al., 2003). Accordingly, and 
especially in recent reports, the issue of moderation by individualism and collectivism has 
been examined (e.g., Bradshaw et al., 2021; Slemp et al., 2018, Slemp et al., 2020; Yu et al., 
2018). These analyses have consistently shown no moderation effects for this cultural 
dimension, providing support for this aspect of SDT’s universality assumption. Several meta-
analyses also examined moderation by country, which has also not emerged as significant 
(e.g., Bradshaw et al., 2022; Slemp 2018). Yet, specific dimensions of culture such as 
vertical-versus-horizontal (Singelis et al., 1995) or tight-versus-loose (Gelfand, 2019) 
distinctions have yet to be explored as moderators.. Also, although Bradshaw et al. (2022) 
found no effects for socioeconomic status, we note that economic factors have not been 
widely examined at a meta-analytic level. Future research should address these and other 
underexplored possibilities. From an inductive standpoint, a universality assumption can 
never be thoroughly enough tested. 
Heterogeneity in meta-analyses can also reflect variations in methods and measures 
employed across studies. Variance of this nature is likely within SDT research, as a variety of 
instruments have been used to measure outcomes such as wellness, engagement, or 
performance. In addition, key theoretical constructs such as autonomy and intrinsic
<<<PAGE=73>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
73 
motivation are often measured in a variety of different—though related—ways across studies. 
Meta-analytic results reveal, for example, that differing scoring systems can moderate effects, 
(e.g., Bradshaw, 2022; Howard, 2021). Finally, many SDT variables are broad, and can be 
intervened upon in myriad ways, as shown in intervention meta-analyses (e.g., Gillison et al., 
2019; Ntoumanis et al., 2021). This multi-determination in predicted effects is yet another 
factor that may contribute to heterogeneity within this literature. 
In sum, there have been efforts to account for heterogeneity in effect sizes within SDT 
meta-analyses, but much remains to be understood. The substantial variation documented for 
many of the effects listed in Supplemental Material, Table S1 suggests the importance of both 
further refinements in terms of both measurement reliabilities and identification of 
moderators.  
Additional Limitations 
Our review focused on English language publications and papers, which can 
contribute to a mono-language bias. This limitation also applies to many of the meta-analyses 
we reviewed within this paper. Especially where hypotheses may potentially be moderated by 
regional or cultural contexts, global publications may have particular importance and future 
reviews should seek out non-English meta-analytic studies. Also as noted above, several 
meta-analyses have included samples from multiple countries and examined for moderation 
effects. Nonetheless, the preponderance of studies comprising these meta-analyses are based 
on North American, European, Australian, and Asian samples with many fewer studies 
stemming from African or South American nations. This limitation in the extant literature 
lends caution to statements of generalizability. Because SDT claims many of its principles to 
be universal in nature, more research in underrepresented regions is needed. 
Another salient limitation is our focus in this review only on clearly SDT-based meta-
analyses. As we noted in the introduction, other contemporary theories focus on some
<<<PAGE=74>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
74 
questions and issues overlapping with the content of SDT, and we did not attempt to 
synthesize those into the current review. 
Conclusions 
Within behavioral sciences attitudes toward broad theory vary, but recently many 
have suggested that there is a theory crisis within psychology (e.g., see Muthukrishna & 
Henrich, 2019). The claim is that broad theories have not taken root or been sustained over 
time, resulting in an absence of cumulative and actionable knowledge. Eronen and 
Bringmann (2021) argue that theory building in psychology suffers, in part, because “not 
enough attention is paid to defining and validating constructs…” (p. 785), which they see as 
essential to solid theory construction. McPhetres et al. (2021) add that much if not most of 
the published research in psychology is not theory driven. Finally, Berkman and Wilson 
(2021) suggest that contemporary theories rarely pass a practicality criterion—too often they 
are simply not useful and have meaning only within academia. 
These are all problems with which SDT researchers have been contending by 
carefully validating constructs, testing explicit propositions and hypotheses, and focusing on 
practicality and translational value. SDT’s “brick by brick” approach (Ryan & Deci, 2019, p. 
111) layers newer SDT constructs upon already well-validated constructs and corroborates 
findings, leading to an ever-widening scope of research and utility. In this way the theory has 
grown from a narrow theory of the dynamics of intrinsic motivation, to the wider spheres of 
both intrinsic and extrinsic motivations, and then further to the study of personality 
development and the psychological and social supports necessary for wellness and 
flourishing. The progress and the limitations of that growth are hopefully brought into greater 
clarity by this review of what we meta-analytically know about SDT.
<<<PAGE=75>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
75 
References 
*Citations preceded with an asterisk were studies included in the meta-review. 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behavior. In: Kuhl, J., 
Beckmann, J. (eds) Action Control. SSSP Springer Series in Social Psychology. 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-69746-3_2 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50(2), 179-211. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T  
Alicke, M. D., & Sedikides, C. (2009). Self-enhancement and self protection: What they are 
and what they do. European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 1–48. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10463280802613866 
Appelbaum, M., Cooper, H., Kline, R. B., Mayo-Wilson, E., Nezu, A. M., & Rao, S. M. 
(2018). Journal article reporting standards for quantitative research in psychology: 
The APA Publications and Communications Board Task Force report. American 
Psychologist, 73(1), 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000191 
Baard, P. P., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2004). Intrinsic need satisfaction: A motivational 
basis of performance and wellbeing in two work settings. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 34(10), 2045–2068. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2004.tb02690.x 
*Back, J., Johnson, U., Svedberg, P., McCall, A., & Ivarsson, A. (2022). Drop-out from team 
sport among adolescents: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective 
studies. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 102205. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2022.102205 
Bandura, A. (1989). Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist, 44(9), 
1175.
<<<PAGE=76>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
76 
Bao, X.-H., & Lam, S.-F. (2008). Who makes the choice? Rethinking the role of autonomy 
and relatedness in Chinese childrens motivation. Child Development, 79(2), 269-283. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01125.x  
Bartholomew, K., Ntoumanis, N., Ryan, R. M., Bosch, J., & Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C. (2011). 
Self-determination theory and diminished functioning: The role of interpersonal 
control and psychological need thwarting. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 37(11), 1459-1473. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167211413125 
*Bauer, K. N., Orvis, K. A., Ely, K., & Surface, E. A. (2016). Re-examination of motivation 
in learning contexts: Meta-analytically investigating the role type of motivation plays 
in the prediction of key training outcomes. Journal of Business and Psychology, 
31(1), 33-50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-015-9401-1  
Baumann, N., & Kuhl, J. (2005). How to resist temptation: The effects of external control 
versus autonomy support on self‐regulatory dynamics. Journal of Personality, 73(2), 
443-470. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.2005.00315.x 
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.) Advances in experimental 
social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1-62). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-
2601(08)60024-6 
Berkman, E. T., & Wilson, S. M. (2021). So useful as a good theory? The practicality crisis 
in (social) psychological theory. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(4), 864-
874. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620969650 
Bindman, S. W., Pomerantz, E. M., & Roisman, G. I. (2015). Do children’s executive 
functions account for associations between early autonomy-supportive parenting and 
achievement through high school? Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 756-770. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000017
<<<PAGE=77>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
77 
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L.V., Higgins, J. P. T., Rothstein, H. R. (2009). Introduction to 
meta-analysis. John Wiley & Sons. 
Bradshaw, E. L. (2023). Causes, costs, and caveats: Reflections, and future directions for 
goal contents theory. In R. M. Ryan (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of self-determination 
theory. Oxford University Press. 
*Bradshaw, E. L., Conigrave, J. H., Steward, B. A., Ferber, K. A., Parker, P. D., & Ryan, R. 
M. (2022). A meta-analysis of the dark side of the American dream: Evidence for the 
universal wellness costs of prioritizing extrinsic over intrinsic goals. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, Advance online publication. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000431  
*Bradshaw, E. L., Duineveld, J. J., Conigrave, J. H., Steward, B. A., Ferber, K. A., & Ryan, 
R. M. (2021). Child wellness links positively with parental autonomy support and 
negatively with parental control across geographical regions, age groups, and 
genders: A meta-analysis [Unpublished manuscript].  
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its role 
in psychological wellbeing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(4), 
822-848. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.4.822  
Brydges, C. R. (2019). Effect size guidelines, sample size calculations, and statistical power 
in gerontology. Innovation in Aging, 3(4), igz036. 
*Bureau, J. S., Howard, J. L., Chong, J. X. Y., & Guay, F. (2022). Pathways to student 
motivation: A meta-analysis of antecedents of autonomous and controlled 
motivations. Review of Educational Research, 92(1), 46-72. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543211042426 
*Burke, K. M., Raley, S. K., Shogren, K. A., Hagiwara, M., Mumbardó-Adam, C., Uyanik, 
H., & Behrens, S. (2020). A meta-analysis of interventions to promote self-
<<<PAGE=78>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
78 
determination for students with disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 41, 176-
188. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741932518802274  
*Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and intrinsic motivation: A 
meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 64(3), 363-423. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/1170677  
Catania, A. C. (2013). A natural science of behavior. Review of General Psychology, 17(2), 
133-139. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033026  
*Cerasoli, C. P., Nicklin, J. M., & Ford, M. T. (2014). Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic 
incentives jointly predict performance: A 40-year meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 140(4), 980-1008. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035661  
*Cerasoli, C. P., Nicklin, J. M., & Nassrelgrgawi, A. S. (2016). Performance, incentives, and 
needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness: A meta-analysis. Motivation and 
Emotion, 40(6), 781-813. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-016-9578-2  
*Chatzisarantis, N. L. D., Hagger, M. S., Biddle, S. J. H., Smith, B., & Wang, J. C. K. 
(2003). A meta-analysis of perceived locus of causality in exercise, sport, and 
physical education contexts. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 25(3), 284-306. 
https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.25.3.284  
Chirkov, V., Ryan, R. M., Kim, Y., & Kaplan, U. (2003). Differentiating autonomy from 
individualism and independence: A self-determination theory perspective on 
internalization of cultural orientations and well-being. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 84(1), 97-110. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.97 
Cochran, W. G. (1954). The combination of estimates from different experiments. 
Biometrics, 10, 101–129.  
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Academic 
Press.
<<<PAGE=79>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
79 
*Crandell, J. L., Sandelowski, M., Leeman, J., Havill, N. L., & Knafl, K. (2018). Parenting 
behaviors and the wellbeing of children with a chronic physical condition. Families 
Systems & Health, 36(1), 45-61. https://doi.org/10.1037/fsh0000305  
de Charms, R. (1968). Personal causation: The internal affective determinants of behavior. 
Academic Press.  
Deci, E. L. (1972). The effects of contingent and non-contingent rewards and controls on 
intrinsic motivation. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 8, 217–229. 
Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. Plenum Press.  
*Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments 
examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological 
Bulletin, 125(6), 627-668. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.125.6.627  
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1980). The empirical exploration of intrinsic motivaional 
processes. In Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 13, pp. 39-80). 
Academic Press.  
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985a). The general causality orientations scale: Self‐
determination in personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 19, 109–134. 
https://doi. org/10.1016/0092-6566(85)90023-6 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985b). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human 
behavior. Plenum Press. 
Deci, E. L., Schwartz, A. J., Sheinman, L., & Ryan, R. M. (1981). An instrument to assess 
adults' orientations toward control versus autonomy with children: Reflections on 
intrinsic motivation and perceived competence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
73(5), 642-650. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.73.5.642
<<<PAGE=80>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
80 
Di Domenico, S. I., & Fournier, M. A. (2014) Socioeconomic status, income inequality, and 
health complaints: A basic psychological needs perspective. Social Indicators 
Research, 119, 1679–1697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-013-0572-8 
*Dittmar, H., Bond, R., Hurst, M., & Kasser, T. (2014). The relationship between 
materialism and personal wellbeing: A meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 107(5), 879-924. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037409  
*Donald, J., Bradshaw, E. L., Conigrave, J. H., Parker, P., Byatt, L. L., Noetel, M., & Ryan, 
R. M. (2021). Paths to the light and dark sides of human nature: A meta-analysis of 
the prosocial benefits of autonomy and the antisocial costs of control. Psychological 
Bulletin, 147(9), 921-946. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000338 
*Donald, J. N., Bradshaw, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Basarkod, G., Ciarrochi, J., Duineveld, J. J., 
Guo, J., & Sahdra, B. K. (2020). Mindfulness and its association with varied types of 
motivation: A systematic review and meta-analysis using self-determination theory. 
Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 46(7), 1121-1138. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167219896136  
*Duineveld, J. J. (2018). A critical look at parenting research: An examination and 
contextualisation of autonomy supportive and psychologically controlling parenting. 
Australian Catholic University. 
Dover, M. A. (2016). Human needs Overview. Encyclopedia of Social Work (Online edition), 
Edited by Cynthia Franklin. Oxford University Press and National Association of 
Social Workers. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199975839.013.554 
Doyal, L., & Gough, I. (1991). A theory of human needs. Guilford. 
*Eisenberger, R., & Cameron, J. (1996). Detrimental effects of reward: Reality or myth? The 
American Psychologist, 51(11), 1153-1166. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-
066X.51.11.1153
<<<PAGE=81>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
81 
Eisenberger, R., Pierce, W. D., & Cameron, J. (1999). Effects of reward on intrinsic 
motivation—Negative, neutral, and positive: Comment on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan 
(1999). Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 677-691. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-
2909.125.6.677  
Eronen, M. I., & Bringmann, L. F. (2021). The theory crisis in psychology: How to move 
forward. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(4), 779-788. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620970586  
*Fong, C. J., Patall, E. A., Vasquez, A. C., & Stautberg, S. (2019). A meta-analysis of 
negative feedback on intrinsic motivation. Educational Psychology Review, 31(1), 
121-162. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-018-9446-6  
Funder, D. C., & Ozer, D. J. (2019). Evaluating effect size in psychological research: Sense 
and nonsense. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 2(2), 
156-168. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245919847202  
Gelfand, M. (2019). Rule makers, rule breakers: Tight and loose cultures and the secret 
signals that direct our lives. Scribner. 
Gignac, G. E., & Szodorai, E. T. (2016). Effect size guidelines for individual differences 
researchers. Personality and Individual Differences, 102, 74-78. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2016.06.069  
*Gillison, F. B., Rouse, P., Standage, M., Sebire, S. J., & Ryan, R. M. (2019). A meta-
analysis of techniques to promote motivation for health behaviour change from a self-
determination theory perspective. Health Psychology Review, 13(1), 110-130. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1534071 
*Good, V., Hughes, D. E., Kirca, A. H., & McGrath, S. (2022). A self-determination theory-
based meta-analysis on the differential effects of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation on
<<<PAGE=82>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
82 
salesperson performance. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 50(3), 586-
614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-021-00827-6 
Gough, I. (2019). Universal basic services: A theoretical and moral framework. The Political 
Quarterly, 90(3), 534-542. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-923X.12706 
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Parent styles associated with children's self-
regulation and competence in school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(2), 143-
154. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.81.2.143  
Grouzet, F. M., Vallerand, R. J., Thill, E., & Provencher, P. (2004). From environmental 
factors to outcomes: A test of an integrated motivational sequence. Motivation and 
Emotion, 28, 331-346. 
*Guérin, E., Bales, E., Sweet, S., & Fortier, M. (2012). A meta-analysis of the influence of 
gender on self-determination theory's motivational regulations for physical activity. 
Canadian Psychology, 53(4), 291-300. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030215  
*Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2009). Integrating the theory of planned 
behaviour and self-determination theory in health behaviour: A meta-analysis. British 
Journal of Health Psychology, 14(2), 275-302. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/135910708X373959  
*Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2016). The trans-contextual model of 
autonomous motivation in education: Conceptual and empirical issues and meta-
analysis. Review of Educational Research, 86(2), 360-407. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654315585005  
*Hagger, M. S., & Hamilton, K. (2021). General causality orientations in self-determination 
theory: Meta-analysis and test of a process model. European Journal of Personality, 
35(5), 710-735. https://doi.org/10.1177/0890207020962330
<<<PAGE=83>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
83 
Hagerty, M. R., & Veenhoven, R. (2003). Wealth and happiness revisited–growing national 
income does go with greater happiness. Social Indicators Research, 64(1), 1-27. 
Hayes, S. (2019). A Liberated Mind: The essential guide to ACT. Random House. 
Hemphill, J. F. (2003). Interpreting the magnitudes of correlation coefficients. American 
Psychologist, 58(1), 78-80. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.58.1.78 
Higgins, J. P. T., & Thompson, S. G. (2002). Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. 
Statistics in Medicine, 21, 1539– 1558.  
Holroyd, C. B., Hajcak, G., & Larsen, J. T. (2006). The good, the bad and the neutral: 
electrophysiological responses to feedback stimuli. Brain research, 1105, 93-101. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2005.12.015 
*Howard, J. L., Bureau, J., Guay, F., Chong, J. X. Y., & Ryan, R. M. (2021). Student 
motivation and associated outcomes: A meta-analysis from self-determination theory. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(6), 1300-1323. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620966789  
*Howard, J. L., Gagné, M., & Bureau, J. S. (2017). Testing a continuum structure of self-
determined motivation: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 143(12), 1346-1377. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000125  
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students' motivation, engagement, and learning during an 
uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(4), 798-811. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0012841  
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). A dark side of the American dream: Correlates of financial 
success as a central life aspiration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
65(2), 410-422. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.65.2.410
<<<PAGE=84>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
84 
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1996). Further examining the American dream: Differential 
correlates of intrinsic and extrinsic goals. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 
22(3), 280-287. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167296223006  
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (2001). Be careful what you wish for: Optimal functioning and the 
relative attainment of intrinsic and extrinsic goals. In P. Schmuck & K. Sheldon 
(Eds.), Life goals and wellbeing: Towards a positive psychology of human striving. 
(pp. 116-131). Ashland, OH: Hogrefe & Huber.  
*Kelso, A., Linder, S., Reimers, A. K., Klug, S. J., Alesi, M., Scifo, L., Borrego, C. C., 
Monteiro, D., & Demetriou, Y. (2020). Effects of school-based interventions on 
motivation towards physical activity in children and adolescents: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 51, 101770. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2020.101770  
*Koehn, A. J., & Kerns, K. A. (2018). Parent-child attachment: meta-analysis of associations 
with parenting behaviors in middle childhood and adolescence. Attachment & Human 
Development, 20(4), 378-405. https://doi.org/10.1080/14616734.2017.1408131  
Koestner, R., Ryan, R. M., Bernieri, F., & Holt, K. (1984). Setting limits on children's 
behavior: The differential effects of controlling vs. informational styles on intrinsic 
motivation and creativity. Journal of Personality, 52(3), 233-248. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1984.tb00879.x 
Koole, S. L., Schlinkert, C., Maldei, T., & Baumann, N. (2019). Becoming who you are: An 
integrative review of self‐determination theory and personality systems interactions 
theory. Journal of Personality, 87, 15-36. https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12380 
Kuhl, J., & Baumann, N. (2021). Personality systems interactions (PSI theory): Toward a 
dynamic integration of personality theories. In The handbook of personality dynamics
<<<PAGE=85>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
85 
and processes (pp. 709-730). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
813995-0.00027-3 
Kuhl, J., Quirin, M., & Koole, S. L. (2015). Being someone: The integrated self as a 
neuropsychological system. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 9, 115-132. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12162 
La Guardia, J. G., Ryan, R. M., Couchman, C. E., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Within-person 
variation in security of attachment: A self-determination theory perspective on 
attachment, need fulfillment, and wellbeing. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 79(3), 367-384. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.79.3.367 
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of self-esteem: 
Sociometer theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 1-62 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(00)80003-9 
Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children's intrinsic interest 
with extrinsic reward: A test of the "overjustification" hypothesis. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 28(1), 129-137. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0035519  
*Li, C., Wang, C. K. J., Pyun, D. Y., & Kee, Y. H. (2013). Burnout and its relations with 
basic psychological needs and motivation among athletes: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 14(5), 692-700. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2013.04.009  
*Lochbaum, M., & Jean-Noel, J. (2016). Perceived autonomy-support instruction and student 
outcomes in physical education and leisure-time: A meta-analytic review of 
correlates. [Percepción de la formación de apoyo a la autonomía y resultados en 
estudiantes en educación física y tiempo libre: Una revisión meta-analítica de 
correlaciones]. Revista Internacional de Ciencias del Deporte, 12(43), 29-47. 
https://doi.org/10.5232/ricyde2016.04302
<<<PAGE=86>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
86 
Maier, M., Bartoš, F., Stanley, T. D., Shanks, D. R., Harris, A. J., & Wagenmakers, E. J. 
(2022). No evidence for nudging after adjusting for publication bias. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 119(31), e2200300119. 
Markland, D., Ryan, R. M., Tobin, V. J., & Rollnick, S. (2005). Motivational interviewing 
and self–determination theory. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 24, 811-
831. http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/jscp.2005.24.6.811 
Markland, D. A., Markland, D., Vansteenkiste, M., Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. 
(2007). A self-determination theory approach to understanding motivational 
interviewing and promoting regular physical activity. In Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in exercise and sport (pp. 87-100). Human Kinetics Europe Ltd. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5040/9781718206632.ch-005 
Martela, F., Bradshaw, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2019). Expanding the map of intrinsic and 
extrinsic aspirations using network analysis and multidimensional scaling: Examining 
four new aspirations. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 2174-2174. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02174  
Martela, F., Lehmus-Sun, A., Parker, P. D., Pessi, A. B., & Ryan, R. M. (2022). Needs and 
well-being across Europe: Basic psychological needs are closely connected with well-
being, meaning, and symptoms of depression in 27 European countries. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science. Advance online publication. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/19485506221113678 
McPhetres J, Albayrak-Aydemir N, Barbosa Mendes A, Chow EC, Gonzalez-Marquez P, 
Loukras E, et al. (2021). A decade of theory as reflected in Psychological Science 
(2009–2019). PLoS ONE 16(3): e0247986. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0247986
<<<PAGE=87>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
87 
Mertens, S., Herberz, M., Hahnel, U. J., & Brosch, T. (2022). The effectiveness of nudging: 
A meta-analysis of choice architecture interventions across behavioral domains. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(1), e2107346118. 
*Mossman, L. H., Slemp, G. R., Lewis, K. J., Colla, R. H., & O’Halloran, P. (2022). 
Autonomy support in sport and exercise settings: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 1-24. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1750984X.2022.2031252 
Mouratidis, A., Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, W., & Sideridis, G. (2008). The motivating role of 
positive feedback in sport and physical education: Evidence for a motivational model. 
Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 30(2), 240-268. 
https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.30.2.240  
Mullan, E., Markland, D., & Ingledew, D. K. (1997). A graded conceptualisation of self-
determination in the regulation of exercise behaviour: Development of a measure 
using confirmatory factor analytic procedures. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 23(5), 745-752. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(97)00107-4  
*Murphy, S.L. & Steel, R.P. (2021). P-curve analysis of autonomy and controlled motivation 
priming effects supports their evidential value. Motivation and Emotion. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-021-09919-w  
Murphy, S. L., & Taylor, I. M. (2020). Priming autonomous and controlling motivation and 
effects on persistence. Current Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-020-
00921-y  
Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2019). A problem in theory. Nature Human Behaviour, 
3(3), 221-229. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0522-1  
*Ng, J. Y. Y., Ntoumanis, N., Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Duda, J. L., 
& Williams, G. C. (2012). Self-determination theory applied to health contexts: A
<<<PAGE=88>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
88 
meta-analysis. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(4), 325-340. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612447309  
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation: conceptions of ability, subjective 
experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91(3), 328-346. 
https://doi.org/10.1037//0033-295X.91.3.328  
Niemiec, C. P., Brown, K. W., Kashdan, T. B., Cozzolino, P. J., Breen, W. E., Levesque-
Bristol, C., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). Being present in the face of existential threat: The 
role of trait mindfulness in reducing defensive responses to mortality salience. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(2), 344-365. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019388  
Niemiec, C. P., & Ryan, R. M. (2009). Autonomy, competence, and relatedness in the 
classroom: Applying self-determination theory to educational practice. Theory and 
Research in Education, 7(2), 133-144. https://doi.org/10.1177/1477878509104318  
Niemiec, C. P., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2009). The path taken: Consequences of 
attaining intrinsic and extrinsic aspirations in post-college life. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 43(3), 291-306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2008.09.001  
*Ntoumanis, N., Ng, J. Y. Y., Prestwich, A., Quested, E., Hancox, J. E., Thøgersen-
Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Lonsdale, C., & Williams, G. C. (2021). A 
meta-analysis of self-determination theory-informed intervention studies in the health 
domain: Effects on motivation, health behavior, physical, and psychological health. 
Health Psychology Review, 15(2), 214-244. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1718529  
*Okada, R. (2021). Effects of perceived autonomy support on academic achievement and 
motivation among higher education students: A meta‐analysis. Japanese 
Psychological Research, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpr.12380
<<<PAGE=89>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
89 
*Osbaldiston, R. (2004). Meta-analysis of the responsible environmental behavior literature. 
University of Missouri-Columbia. 
*Owen, K., Smith, J., Lubans, D., Ng, J., & Lonsdale, C. (2014). Self-determined motivation 
and physical activity in children and adolescents: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Preventive Medicine, 67, 270-279. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.07.033  
*Patall, E. A., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. C. (2008). The effects of choice on intrinsic 
motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research findings. Psychological 
Bulletin, 134(2), 270-300. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.134.2.270  
Pelletier, L. G., Séguin-Lévesque, C., & Legault, L. (2002). Pressure from above and 
pressure from below as determinants of teachers' motivation and teaching behaviors. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(1), 186-196. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
0663.94.1.186  
Peng, W., Lin, J.-H., Pfeiffer, K. A., & Winn, B. (2012). Need satisfaction supportive game 
features as motivational determinants: An experimental study of a self-determination 
theory guided exergame. Media Psychology, 15(2), 175-196. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2012.673850  
Polanin, J. R., Hennessy, E. A., & Tsuji, S. (2020). Transparency and reproducibility of meta-
analyses in psychology: A meta-review. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
15(4), 1026-1041. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620906416  
Richard, F. D., Bond, C. F., & Stokes-Zoota, J. J. (2003). One hundred years of social 
psychology quantitatively described. Review of General Psychology, 7(4), 331-363. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.7.4.331
<<<PAGE=90>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
90 
*Rosenzweig, C. J. (2000). A meta-analysis of parenting and school success: The role of 
parents in promoting students' academic performance (Unpublished manuscript). 
Hofstra University, New York.  
*Rummel, A., & Feinberg, R. (1988). Cognitive Evaluation Theory: A meta-analytic review 
of the literature. Social Behavior and Personality, 16(2), 147-164. 
https://doi.org/10.2224/sbp.1988.16.2.147  
Ryan, R. M. (1982). Control and information in the intrapersonal sphere: An extension of 
cognitive evaluation theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43(3), 
450-461. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.43.3.450  
Ryan, R. M. (1995). Psychological needs and the facilitation of integrative processes. Journal 
of Personality, 63(3), 397-427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1995.tb00501.x  
Ryan, R. M., & Connell, J. P. (1989). Perceived locus of causality and internalization: 
Examining reasons for acting in two domains. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 57(5), 749-761. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.57.5.749  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (1996). When paradigms clash: Comments on Cameron and 
Pierce's claim that rewards do not undermine intrinsic motivation. Review of 
Educational Research, 66(1), 33-38. https://doi.org/10.2307/1170724  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2017). Self-determination theory: Basic psychological needs in 
motivation, development, and wellness. The Guilford Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1521/978.14625/28806 
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2019). Brick by brick: The origins, development, and future of 
self-determination theory. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Advances in motivation science, Vol. 6 
(pp. 111-156). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.adms.2019.01.001  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2020). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation from a self-
determination theory perspective: Definitions, theory, practices, and future directions.
<<<PAGE=91>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
91 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 61, 101860. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2020.101860  
Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., & Vansteenkiste, M. (2016). Autonomy and autonomy disturbances 
in self-development and psychopathology: Research on motivation, attachment, and 
clinical process. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.), Developmental psychopathology: Vol.1. Theory 
and method (3rd ed., pp 385-438). Wiley.  
Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., Vansteenkiste, M., Soenens, B. (2021). Building a science of 
motivated persons: Self-determination theory’s empirical approach to human 
experience and the regulation of behavior. Motivation Science, 7(2), 97–110. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/mot0000194   
Ryan, R. M., Donald, J. N., & Bradshaw, E. L. (2021). Mindfulness and motivation: A 
process view using self-determination theory. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 30(4), 300-306. https://doi.org/10.1177/09637214211009511 
Ryan, R. M., & Connell, J. P. (1989). Perceived locus of causality and internalization: 
Examining reasons for acting in two domains. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 57, 749–761. https:// doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.57.5.749 
Ryan, R. M., & Grolnick, W. S. (1986). Origins and pawns in the classroom: Self-report and 
projective assessments of individual differences in children's perceptions. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 50(3), 550-558. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.50.3.550  
Ryan, R. M., Mims, V., & Koestner, R. (1983). Relation of reward contingency and 
interpersonal context to intrinsic motivation: A review and test using cognitive 
evaluation theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(4), 736-750. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.45.4.736
<<<PAGE=92>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
92 
Ryan, R. M., Patrick, H., Deci, E. L., & Williams, G. C. (2008). Facilitating health behaviour 
change and its maintenance: Interventions based on self-determination theory. The 
European Health Psychologist, 10(1), 2-5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2008.08.015 
Ryan, R. M., Soenens, B., & Vansteenkiste, M. (2019). Reflections on self‐determination 
theory as an organizing framework for personality psychology: Interfaces, 
integrations, issues, and unfinished business. Journal of Personality, 87(1), 115-145. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12440 
*Serie, C. M. B., Van Damme, L., Pleysier, S., De Ruiter, C., & Put, J. (2021). The 
relationship between primary human needs of the Good Lives Model (GLM) and 
subjective well-being in adolescents: A multi-level meta-analysis. Aggression and 
Violent Behavior, 61, 101651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2021.101651 
*Sheeran, P., Wright, C. E., Avishai, A., Villegas, M. E., Lindemans, J. W., Klein, W. M. P., 
Rothman, A. J., Miles, E., & Ntoumanis, N. (2020). Self-determination theory 
interventions for health behavior change: Meta-analysis and meta-analytic structural 
equation modeling of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 88(8), 726-737. https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000501  
Sheldon, K. M., & Elliot, A. J. (1999). Goal striving, need satisfaction, and longitudinal well-
being: the self-concordance model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 
482-497. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.76.3.482 
Sheldon, K. M., & Prentice, M. (2019). Self‐determination theory as a foundation for 
personality researchers. Journal of Personality, 87(1), 5-14. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12360  
*Sierra-Díaz, M. J., González-Víllora, S., Pastor-Vicedo, J. C., & López-Sánchez, G. F. 
(2019). Can we motivate students to practice physical activities and sports through 
models-based practice? A systematic review and meta-analysis of psychosocial
<<<PAGE=93>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
93 
factors related to physical education. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 2115-2115. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02115 
Singelis, T. M., Triandis, H. C., Bhawuk, D. P., & Gelfand, M. J. (1995). Horizontal and 
vertical dimensions of individualism and collectivism: A theoretical and measurement 
refinement. Cross-cultural research, 29(3), 240-275. 
Skinner, B. F. (1971). Beyond freedom and dignity. Knopf 
Skinner, E., Johnson, S., & Snyder, T. (2005). Six dimensions of parenting: A motivational 
model. Parenting, Science and Practice, 5(2), 175-235. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327922par0502_3  
*Slemp, G. R., Field, J. G., & Cho, A. S. H. (2020). A meta-analysis of autonomous and 
controlled forms of teacher motivation. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 121, 103459. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2020.103459  
*Slemp, G. R., Kern, M. L., Patrick, K. J., & Ryan, R. M. (2018). Leader autonomy support 
in the workplace: A meta-analytic review. Motivation and Emotion, 42(5), 706-724. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-018-9698-y  
*Stanley, P. J., Schutte, N. S., & Phillips, W. J. (2021). A meta-analytic investigation of the 
relationship between basic psychological need satisfaction and affect. Journal of 
Positive School Psychology, 5(1), 1-16. https://doi.org/10.47602/jpsp.v5i1.210  
*Steingut, R. R., Patall, E. A., & Trimble, S. S. (2017). The effect of rationale provision on 
motivation and performance outcomes: A meta-analysis. Motivation Science, 3(1), 
19-50. https://doi.org/10.1037/mot0000039  
*Su, Y.-L., & Reeve, J. (2011). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of intervention programs 
designed to support autonomy. Educational Psychology Review, 23(1), 159-188. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-010-9142-7
<<<PAGE=94>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
94 
Tan, J. J., Kraus, M. W., Carpenter, N. C., & Adler, N. E. (2020). The association between 
objective and subjective socioeconomic status and subjective well-being: A meta-
analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 146(11), 970. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000258 
*Tang, S.-H., & Hall, V. C. (1995). The overjustification effect: A meta-analysis. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 9(5), 365-404. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.2350090502 
*Tang, M., Wang, D., & Guerrien, A. (2020). A systematic review and meta-analysis on 
basic psychological need satisfaction, motivation, and well-being in later life: 
Contributions of self-determination theory. PsyCh Journal, 9, 5-33. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pchj.293 
*Taylor, G., Jungert, T., Mageau, G. A., Schattke, K., Dedic, H., Rosenfield, S., & Koestner, 
R. (2014). A self-determination theory approach to predicting school achievement 
over time: the unique role of intrinsic motivation. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 39(4), 342-358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2014.08.002  
*Teixeira, D., Marques, M., & Palmeira, A. (2018). Associations between affect, basic 
psychological needs and motivation in physical activity contexts: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Revista Iberoamericana de Psicologia Del Ejercicio y el Deporte, 
13(2), 225-233. 
*Valcan, D. S., Davis, H., & Pino-Pasternak, D. (2018). Parental behaviours predicting early 
childhood executive functions: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review, 30, 
607-649. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-017-9411-9 
Vallerand, R. J. (2015). The psychology of passion: A dualistic model. Oxford. 
Vallerand, R. J., Pelletier, L. G., Blais, M. R., Briere, N. M., Senecal, C., & Vallieres, E. F. 
(1992). The academic motivation scale: A measure of intrinsic, extrinsic, and
<<<PAGE=95>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
95 
amotivation in education. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 52(4), 1003-
1017. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164492052004025  
*Van den Broeck, A., Ferris, D. L., Chang, C.-H., & Rosen, C. C. (2016). A review of self-
determination theory’s basic psychological needs at work. Journal of Management, 
42(5), 1195-1229. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316632058  
*Van den Broeck, A., Howard, J. L., Van Vaerenbergh, Y., Leroy, H., & Gagné, M. (2021). 
Beyond intrinsic and extrinsic motivation: A meta-analysis on self-determination 
theory’s multidimensional conceptualization of work motivation. Organizational 
Psychology Review, 11(3), 240-273. https://doi.org/10.1177/20413866211006173  
Vansteenkiste, M., Niemiec, C. P., & Soenens, B. (2010). The development of the five mini‐
theories of self‐determination theory: An historical overview, emerging trends, and 
future directions. In T. C. Urdan & S. A. Karabenick (Eds.), Advances in motivation 
and achievement, vol. 16A – The decade ahead: Theoretical perspectives on 
motivation and achievement (pp. 105–165). Emerald Group Publishing. 
Vansteenkiste, M., & Ryan, R. M. (2013). On psychological growth and vulnerability: Basic 
psychological need satisfaction and need frustration as a unifying principle. Journal 
of Psychotherapy Integration, 23(3), 263-280. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032359  
Vansteenkiste, M., Ryan, R. M., & Soenens, B. (2020). Basic psychological need theory: 
Advancements, critical themes, and future directions. Motivation and Emotion, 44(1), 
1–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-019-09818-1 
Vansteenkiste, M., Soenens, B., & Ryan, R. M. (2022). Basic psychological needs theory: A 
conceptual and empirical review of key criteria. In R. M. Ryan (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of self-determination theory. Oxford University Press. 
*Vasconcellos, D., Parker, P. D., Hilland, T., Cinelli, R., Owen, K. B., Kapsal, N., Lee, J., 
Antczak, D., Ntoumanis, N., Ryan, R. M., & Lonsdale, C. (2020). Self-determination
<<<PAGE=96>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
96 
theory applied to physical education: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 112(7), 1444-1469. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000420  
*Vasquez, A. C., Patall, E. A., Fong, C. J., Corrigan, A. S., & Pine, L. (2016). Parent 
autonomy support, academic achievement, and psychosocial functioning: A meta-
analysis of research. Educational Psychology Review, 28(3), 605-644. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-015-9329-z  
Wan, A. W., Hagger, M. S., Zhang, C. Q., Chung, J. S., Lee, K., Bautista, A., & Chan, D. K. 
(2022). Protecting children from COVID-19: Examining US parents motivation and 
behaviour using an integrated model of self-determination theory and the theory of 
planned behaviour. Psychology & Health, 1-21. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2022.2111681 
Ward, T., & Fortune, C.-A. (2013). The good lives model: Aligning risk reduction with 
promoting offenders' personal goals. European Journal of Probation, 5(2), 29–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/206622031300500203 
Weinstein, N., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). When Helping Helps: Autonomous motivation for 
prosocial behavior and its influence on wellbeing for the helper and recipient. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(2), 222-244. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016984  
White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. Psychological 
Review, 66(5), 297-333. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0040934  
*Wiersma, U. J. (1992). The effects of extrinsic rewards in intrinsic motivation: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65(2), 101-114. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1992.tb00488.x  
Williams, G. C., McGregor, H. A., Sharp, D., Levesque, C., Kouides, R. W., Ryan, R. M., & 
Deci, E. L. (2006). Testing a self-determination theory intervention for motivating
<<<PAGE=97>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
97 
tobacco cessation: Supporting autonomy and competence in a clinical trial. Health 
Psychology, 25(1), 91. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.25.1.91  
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2020). What can be learned from growth mindset 
controversies? American Psychologist, 75(9), 1269–1284. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000794  
*Yu, S., Levesque-Bristol, C., & Maeda, Y. (2018). General need for autonomy and 
subjective wellbeing: A meta-analysis of studies in the US and East Asia. Journal of 
Happiness Studies, 19(6), 1863-1882. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-017-9898-2 
*Zhang, M., Wang, X. C., & Shao, B. (2022). Predictors of persistent participation in youth 
sport: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 871936, 
1-10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.202
<<<PAGE=98>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
98 
Table 1 
Meta-analytic Studies Testing SDT Mini-theories and Their Propositions 
Cognitive 
Evaluation  
Theory 
CET 
Organismic 
Integration  
Theory 
OIT 
Causality 
Orientations 
Theory 
COT 
Basic 
Psychological 
Needs 
Theory 
BPNT 
Goal  
Contents  
Theory 
GCT 
Relationships 
Motivation  
Theory 
RMT 
Ceresoli et al., 
2014  
 
Deci et al., 
1999 
 
Eisenberger & 
Cameron, 1996 
 
Fong et al., 
2019 
 
Howard et al., 
2021 
 
Patall et al., 
2008 
 
Rummell & 
Feinberg, 1988 
 
Tang & Hall, 
1995 
 
Wiersma, 1992 
 
 
Bureau et al., 
2022 
 
Chatzisarantis 
et al., 2003 
 
Donald et al., 
2020 
 
Guerin et al., 
2012 
 
Howard et al., 
2017 
 
Howard et al., 
2021 
 
Lochbaum & 
Jean-Noel, 
2016 
 
Slemp et al., 
2018 
 
Steingut et al., 
2017 
Hagger & 
Hamilton, 
2021 
 
Murphy & 
Steel, 2021 
 
Cerasoli et al., 
2016  
 
Serie et al., 
2021 
 
Stanley et al., 
2021 
 
Tang et al., 
2020 
 
Vasquez, 
2016 
 
Yu et al., 
2018 
 
Bradshaw et 
al., 2022  
 
Dittmar et al., 
2014 
 
 
.
<<<PAGE=99>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
99 
Table 2 
Meta-analytic Studies Testing SDT Within Applied Domains 
Organizations Health PA/PE/Sport Education Parenting 
Bauer et al., 
2016 
 
Cerasoli et al., 
2014  
 
Cerasoli et al., 
2016  
 
Good et al., 
2022 
 
Slemp et al., 
2018 
 
Van den Broeck 
et al., 2016 
 
Van den Broeck 
et al., 2021 
 
 
Gillison et al., 
2018  
 
Hagger & 
Chatzisarantis, 
2009 
 
Ng et al., 2012 
 
Ntoumanis et al., 
2021 
 
Sheeran et al., 
2017 
 
Back et al., 2022 
 
Guerin et al., 
2012  
 
Hagger & 
Chatzisarantis, 
2016 
 
Li et al., 2013 
 
Lochbaum and 
Jean-Noel, 2016 
 
Mossman et al., 
2022 
 
Owen et al., 
2014 
 
Sierra-Díaz, 
2019 
 
Teixeira et al., 
2018 
 
Vasconcellos et 
al., 2020 
 
Zhang et al., 
2022 
Bureau et al., 
2022 
 
Burke et al., 
2020 
 
Howard & 
Howard, 2020 
 
Okada et al., 
2022 
 
Slemp et al., 
2020 
 
Su & Reeve, 
2011 
 
Taylor et al., 
2014 
 
 
 
 
 
Bradshaw et al., 
2021 
 
Crandell et al. 
2018 
 
Duineveld, 
2018 
 
Koehn and 
Kerns, 2018 
 
Rosenzweig, 
2000 
 
Valcan et al., 
2018 
 
Vasquez, 2016
<<<PAGE=100>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
100 
Figure 1 
Flow Diagram of Search Results and Article Screening  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Records identified through 
database searching 
(n = 227) 
Additional records identified 
through other sources 
(n = 42) 
Records after duplicates removed 
(n = 208) 
(Of which 9 non-peer reviewed) 
Full-text articles 
assessed for eligibility 
(n = 93) 
Records Title & 
Abstract screened 
(n = 175) 
Records excluded 
(n = 82) 
Full-text articles excluded, 
 for reasons below 
(n = 33) 
• Systematic review, not meta-
analysis  
• Study, not meta-analysis  
• Protocol of unfinished meta-
analysis  
• No relevant Self-Determination 
Theory variables  
• Did not test Self-Determination 
Theory hypothesis 
• Book chapter, not meta-analysis  
• No English language available  
Studies eligible and 
included in review 
(n = 60)
<<<PAGE=101>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
101 
Figure 2 
 
The Organismic Integration Theory (OIT) Taxonomy of Regulatory Styles
<<<PAGE=102>>>
META-ANALYTIC FINDINGS WITHIN SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY 
 
 
102 
Figure 3 
Leadership Autonomy Support Path Diagram  
Adapted material from: Slemp, Kern, Patrick, & Ryan, Leader autonomy support in the workplace: A meta-analytic review, Motivation & 
Emotion, 2018, Springer, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/