<<<PAGE=1>>>
1
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access  
Critical realist exploration of long- term 
outcomes, impacts and skill 
development from an Australian Rural 
Research Capacity Building Programme: 
a qualitative
 
study
David Schmidt    ,1,2 Kerith Duncanson,1 Emma Webster,3 Emily Saurman,4 
David Lyle4
To cite: Schmidt D, 
Duncanson K, Webster E, et al.  
Critical realist exploration of 
long-
 term outcomes,
 impacts 
and skill development from 
an Australian Rural Research 
Capacity Building Programme: 
a qualitative study. BMJ Open 
2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2022-065972
 ► Prepublication history and 
additional supplemental material 
for this paper are available 
online. To view these files, 
please visit the journal online 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
 
bmjopen-2022-065972).
Received 24 June 2022
Accepted 08 November 2022
1Rural and Remote Portfolio, 
NSW Health Education and 
Training Institute, Gladesville, 
New South Wales, Australia
2School of Public Health, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia
3School of Rural Health, The 
University of Sydney, Dubbo, 
New South Wales, Australia
4Department of Rural Health, 
The University of Sydney, Broken 
Hill, New South Wales, Australia
Correspondence to
David Schmidt;  
 
David.
 
Schmidt@
 
health.
 
nsw.
 
gov
.
 
au
Original research
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2022. Re-
 use 
permitted under CC BY
-
 NC.
 No 
commercial re-
 use.
 See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Objectives Research ca pacity building programmes 
usually only examine short-
 term outcomes,
 following up 
participants after 1 or 2
 years.
 Capacity building in health 
research requires a long-
 term view to understand the 
influence and impact of ca
pacity building endeavours. 
This study examined long-
 term outcomes for individuals 
regarding the maintenance and use of research skills and 
the conduct of real-
 world research in a rural area.
 We also 
explored the changes individuals had seen in their career, 
work team or organisation as a result of this training.
Design
 A qualita
tive study underpinned by critical realism 
and based on interviews and focus groups with graduates 
of the Rural Research Capacity Building Programme 
(RRCBP), a researcher development programme that has 
been delivered since 2006.
Setting
 Rural and remote areas of New South 
Wales, 
Australia.
Participants
 22 gradua
tes of the RRCBP from the 2006 
to 2015 cohorts (20 female, 2 male). All were experienced 
rural-
 based health workers a
t the time of training.
Results
 F
ocus groups and interviews yielded three 
themes about capacity building outcomes: (1) developed 
research capable individuals; (2) embedded research 
capability into teams and (3) real-
 world research tha
t 
makes a difference within an organisation.
Conclusions
 Research training improved gradua
tes’ 
skill, experience, confidence and employability. Research 
capable individuals enabled others, enhancing team 
research capacity and raising the profile of research within 
their organisation.
Training in research, alongside tangible organisational 
support for research activity, creates real-
 world impacts 
for polic
y and clinical practice. Providing ongoing 
opportunities for researchers to undertake research would 
enhance return on investment and assist with retention of 
experienced staff.
BACKGROUND
The health of rural people is character -
ised by poorer health outcomes, associated 
with limited access to health services.
1 Rural 
research capacity building is seen as one way 
for rural health organisations to understand 
and remediate this disparity.
2 Research in 
rural areas presents its own challenges and 
a need for specific rural research training 
has been identified.
3 4 Numerous workplace-  
based programmes have been introduced 
to 
address rural health research capacity 
including scholarships, training in place, 
fellowships, participatory approaches and 
other capacity building endeavours.
5–12
There is a call for researchers to be 
embedded within rural health organisa-
tions.
12 13 While this is consistent with known 
research capacity development principles, 14 
information on long-
 term outcomes of 
research 
capacity building endeavours is scant, 
with most programmes typically funded short 
term and with limited follow-
 up.15 Measuring 
research capacity building is complex 16 and 
success in health services research develop-
ment is often under-
 reported.17
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
 ⇒ This is the first study to examine long-  term out -
comes of a clinician researcher development pro-
gramme in a rural area.
 ⇒ A critical realist framework allowed explanation of 
the underlying mechanisms that led to change for 
the individual, their team or organisational.
 ⇒ Stratified sampling was used to ensure participants 
with a range of experiences were included, however, 
it is possible that those who have been less con-
nected with programme peers postgraduation were 
less likely to participate.
 ⇒ There is a potential lack of generalisability to other 
settings, but the rigour in analysis and theory along 
with existing literature indicate the findings may be 
applicable in other settings.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=2>>>
2
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access  
The Rural Research Capacity Building Programme 
(RRCBP) was established in 2006 to improve research 
capability and capacity in rural New South Wales, 
Australia. The programme was intended as a response 
to the low levels of research activity and research skill in 
rural areas,
11 and supports rural clinicians to undertake 
a self-
 selected research project with an accompanying 
education 
programme aimed at building research expe-
rience.18 Clinicians enrolled in the RRCBP are based 
in rural or remote areas of New South Wales, Australia, 
and receive project funding and mentoring in addi-
tion to education support.
11 18 Research is not routinely 
conducted by rural clinicians 19 and in some cases these 
clinician–researchers may be the only person in their 
facility with research experience.
20
The RRCBP, unlike similar programmes, 21 22  has 
received ongoing funding. The RRCBP and its adjunct 
educational strategies have demonstrated efficacy in 
increasing self-
 reported research experience,18 improving 
publication rates,23 retaining researchers to complete the 
programme20 and building research capacity. 11 Internal 
evaluation findings indicate that RRCBP candidature can 
be transformative, personally or professionally, beyond 
the field of research.
Since 2006, 245 rural health workers have received 
research methods education and training, with 137 
completing their research project and submitting a 
report detailing their findings (graduates) at the time of 
this study. While research experience and some capacity 
has been built,
11 18 23 long- term outcomes for programme 
candidates or the rural health organisations they work for 
has not yet been examined.
The aim of this study was to understand the impact of 
undertaking 
research training for graduates, their careers 
and their organisations.
METHODS
Study design
This qualitative study was underpinned by critical realism. 
Realist approaches uncover what works for whom, and in 
what circumstance.
14 24 25  Critical realism facilitated the 
exploration of the context of research skill development 
and the mechanisms underlying these changes.
Sampling and recruitment
One hundred and thirty-
 seven graduates from the 2006 
to 2015 RRCBP cohorts were eligible to participate. Of 
these, 113 had remained in contact and were stratified 
by training 
cohort as ‘early’ (2006–2010) or ‘recent’ 
(2011–2015), and then by known research activity since 
graduation; either research active, not research active, or 
those whose research activities were unknown. Research 
activity was determined by recent contact from graduates 
and confirmed by a search of Google Scholar for post-
graduation publications. Graduates who had not made 
recent contact with programme coordinators and who 
had not published in peer-
 reviewed publication were 
designated as research status unknown. From these six 
subgroups, individuals were randomly selected by an 
independent administration officer and invited via email. 
Individuals 
who were unavailable, uncontactable or who 
declined were replaced by another randomly selected 
person from that subgroup. Potential participants were 
sent a reminder email 2
 weeks after the initial invitation 
if no response was received. Recruitment continued until 
the subgroup was represented by five participants or the 
subgroup list contained no other eligible participants. A 
recruitment flow chart is seen in 
figure
 
1.
Data collection
Individuals were invited to an online focus group to 
stimulate discussion and allow ideas to develop among 
participants. Those who wished to participate via indi-
vidual interview were accommodated. Focus groups and 
interviews were conducted by an independent facilitator 
(ES) and were digitally recorded. All recordings were 
transcribed by a professional transcription company and 
deidentified by the facilitator.
After the first focus group, a debrief was undertaken, 
with the facilitator and lead researcher refining the focus 
group and interview strategy.
Figure 1 Recruitment flow chart. RRCBP , Rural Research Capacity Building Programme.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=3>>>
3
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access
Four focus groups were held, with 4 participants per 
group, and 6 individual interviews conducted; a total of 
22 participants sampled from the 6 subgroups.
Data analysis
Qualitative analysis was completed by DS using the cut-
 
and-
 paste method of coding and thematic development.26 
Three coresearchers (ES, KD and EW) independently 
analysed randomly selected transcripts (one focus group 
and two interviews each) to ensure veracity of themes and 
corresponding subthemes. Theme refinement occurred 
through an iterative process of discussion and rereading 
transcripts. This staged inductive process was then consid-
ered deductively against Cooke’s framework for capacity 
building, using the structural levels of the individual, their 
immediate work team and the hosting organisation.
27 
Factors described as ‘superorganisational’ or outside the 
individual’s organisation
24 were deemed unlikely to be 
affected by individual training and were therefore not 
included in the analysis.
The lead researcher (DS) read all transcripts with 
a view to assessing data saturation. After three focus 
groups and four interviews, no new ideas emerged and 
the remaining focus group and interviews ensured confi-
dence in concept identification. When all team members 
reached agreement on the final iteration, analysis was 
deemed complete.
Reflexivity and rigour
Two of the researchers (DS and KD) are coordinators 
of the RRCBP and a third (EW) is a former coordinator. 
The use of an arms-
 length 
recruitment and independent 
facilitator was accompanied by a process of bracketing 
preconceptions
28 and oversight of theme development by 
independent researchers (ES and DL).
Patient and public involvement
No patient involved.
The original protocol for the study has been uploaded 
as online supplemental file along with a copy of the inter-
view/focus group schedule.
RESULTS
The demographic characteristics of study participants 
are outlined in table
 1
. All graduates were rurally based 
at the time of their training. To maintain participant 
anonymity, professions were classified as nursing, allied 
health or other profession which may include Aboriginal 
health worker, doctor, health promotion officer, health 
manager, paramedic or project officer.
Three themes and their relationship to the struc-
tural levels of individual, team and organisational levels 
proposed by Cooke
27 emerged.
Developed research capable individuals
The programme successfully developed research capable 
individuals. Graduates identified (1) Growth in knowl-
edge, skills, authority and confidence, (2) Ongoing 
research activity and (3) Personal and professional 
transformation.
Growth in knowledge, skills, authority and confidence
Learning about and undertaking research was a means 
for graduates to extend themselves, both from a personal 
sense but also providing new career directions. Partic-
ipants reported their understanding of research had 
improved, building on existing skill sets and knowledge.
What the program allowed me to do was to understand a 
much broader range of research methodologies and approach-
es. Focus Group 2
Knowledge and expertise development was unsur -
prising, given the educational goals of the programme.
18 
However, undertaking a research project was pivotal to 
the development of a range of transferable or ‘soft’ skills 
including project management, communication tech-
niques and critical thinking; strengthening attributes that 
were useful in other roles or settings. Critical thinking in 
action is a known indicator of research capacity building 
at an individual level.
27
Maybe I can’t articulate it perfectly, but the ability to un-
comfortably question, to sort of reflect in that space and sit 
in a space of discomfort to evaluate something surrounding 
yourself… so those kind of critical thinking skills and evalu-
ation skills go with you in every aspect of your work. Focus 
Group 2
Ongoing research activity
One result of developing research capable individuals was 
ongoing research activity; this included using their exper-
tise to attract grant funding and extend their research 
activity.
Table 1 Demographic details of graduates participating in 
the study (n=22)
n (%)
Gender
 
 
Female 20
 
 
Male 2
Profession
 
 
Nursing 8
 
 
Allied Health 10
 
 
Other 4
Recency of training
 
 
Recent (2011–2015) 10
 
 
Early (2006–2010) 12
Research activity post-
 training
 
 
Research active 10
 
 
Research inactive 7
 
 Resear
ch status unknown* 5
*Research status unknown at time of recruitment.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=4>>>
4
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access  
There were opportunities to apply for sort of grant money to 
do other kinds of [research] projects and that then created 
new relationships and added to the body of evidence around 
that. Focus Group 1
Ongoing research activity did not always equate to inde-
pendence or leading their own research agenda. This 
highlights the foundational nature of the training.
The project that I did with [a non-
 gover
nment organisation] 
recently… I actually did it all by myself, which I found I 
could do and I knew how to do… I think the project that I 
did in 2006 really taught me those skills and I know those 
skills but I just didn’t feel confident to do that and the next 
one on, like totally on my own. Focus Group 1
Having research experience through the RRCBP 
enabled some graduates to take up new roles to pursue 
research opportunities.
I think everybody has moved onwards and upwards in roles, 
and I’m sure that, personally, the program helped me with a 
promotion upwards and, you know, it’s good in that sense. 
Focus Group 2
Other graduates progressed to further formal study 
via higher degree research, often an extension of their 
research project with the programme.
I was very fortunate I was able to springboard my research 
into a master’s degree. Focus Group 4
Not all graduates remained active in research, however 
the programme had value as a learning experience and 
their interest remained.
I’m not doing research, and I haven’t done any research, but 
what I am surprised about is how much interest I maintained 
in research, and other people’s research. Focus Group 2
A lack of research activity was not always due to indi-
vidual factors. Organisational factors also influenced 
their ability to undertake research, including fitting 
research into a busy caseload. A lack of research oppor -
tunity impeded ongoing research activity for some gradu-
ates and for others around them.
With opportunity, I believe I've got the skills that I could 
contribute to further research in related areas … but there’s 
so little research happening that there aren’t any people to 
supervise. Focus Group 4
Personal and professional transformation
Graduates described transformative aspects of learning 
including a sense of belonging in the world of research, 
with connections to others outside their immediate work-
space. Transformational learning can refer to a process 
that encourages the learner to question and potentially 
change their worldview.
29 The sense of becoming part 
of the world of research extended to having and owning 
specialist knowledge of research tools, language and busi-
ness processes. Similarly, transformation occurred when 
graduates were challenged in their ways of thinking and 
the assumptions underlying these thought processes.
It sort of taught me that you can reach out to a lot of differ-
ent people and that they’re more than willing to help you …
it made me more empowered to look beyond my own patch. 
Focus Group 3
The sense of becoming part of the world of research 
extended to having and owning specialist knowledge of 
research tools, language and business processes. Simi-
larly, transformation occurred when graduates were chal-
lenged on their ways of thinking and the assumptions 
underlying these thought processes.
I was mentored by an Aboriginal man from [the university] 
which was really helpful. He would challenge me on a regu-
lar basis about my way of thinking. Focus Group 4
Embedded research capability into teams
The graduates’ research experience led to changes within 
their immediate work teams. They became ‘resource 
people’ within the workplace for research or evaluation 
activities; a role that included providing feedback on 
research and evaluation proposals, providing guidance 
and adding rigour to existing activities.
I give feedback to peoples’ quality improvement projects and 
I actually really like doing that. I wouldn’t say it’s pure aca-
demic research, but it’s using the methodology of research, of 
a research project and applying that to smaller projects that 
are more practical. Focus Group 4
There’s a project that was happening …[and] I was able to 
sort of help them with [the ethics application], and they’re 
really happy that they’ve done it. So that’s as a direct result 
of my being in the program. Focus Group 2
This contribution to the skill development of others 
was a way to develop local research capability and embed 
local researchers into projects. The process of building 
research activity and capability were part of creating a 
local culture of research.
We can actually influence other people either informally 
by—with their work or encouraging them to do research or 
to encourage it within a discipline or a department, or other 
people to do the [RRCBP], or even just set a culture of re-
search around where we work. Focus Group 2
Moving beyond the role as resource person, graduates 
became active collaborators or facilitators of research. 
Those in leadership positions engaged with and facili-
tated research activity within their local teams. Others 
began collaborating with fellow RRCBP graduates or 
current RRCBP trainees.
I’ve had a couple of staff members that are that are currently 
enrolled in the same program and we’ve sort of been involved 
in a number of orthopaedic and other projects as well in the 
department. So I think it really fuelled my already existing 
interest and passion in research and maybe gave me a little 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=5>>>
5
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access
bit of confidence to continue to support people to do that. 
Focus Group 1
Graduates were able to use their interest in research to 
promote and facilitate research across departments and 
districts. They were now setting the agenda and making 
research part of it.
So the department didn’t have a strong research focus before, 
but we’re really developing that now. It’s on every agenda, 
we’ve got a team looking at it, we’re constantly looking for 
grants to field how we can build research around what we’re 
doing. Focus Group 2
Real world research that makes a difference within an 
organisation
Participants wanted their research to be of value to 
the organisation and to make a difference in care for 
consumers. Making a difference was seen through: (1) 
research that influenced policy, practice and culture, (2) 
organisational support for research education and activity, 
and (3) retaining skilled workers within the organisation.
Research that influences policy, practice and culture
Graduates wanted to lead and engage with research that 
had impact and importance for clinical practice and 
underlying policy. They made a clear distinction between 
real-
 world, clinician-
 led research and theoretical research 
led by university academics, which was seen to be discon
-
nected from clinical practice.
I think that’s probably what we as rural researchers, we’re 
going to research something that’s really practical, something 
that’s really doable, not something that’s sort of very theoret-
ical… We need stuff that we can actually put into action 
now. Focus Group 2
Using research to improve services justified the effort 
required to undertake clinical research, even when 
those changes were not what was expected or hoped 
for. The quality of the graduates’ research was impor -
tant for establishing credibility, which was necessary for 
practice change to be embraced. For some, the fact that 
the research was conducted by a clinician added to that 
perceived credibility.
I think once you can see that it can translate to service en-
hancements, and those sorts of things that everyone’s talking 
about then you realise that there’s such a huge benefit. Focus 
Group 3
I think that because [the research] had been done in quite 
a robust way and we were reporting it very clearly and 
very open with ‘this is exactly what happened and what we 
found’ and gave people kind of confidence to work with [the 
findings]. Focus Group 1
While changes that resulted from the graduates’ 
research included system level and local changes, not all 
projects had a demonstrable impact on policy or practice.
It really sort of started a little spark in my brain about being 
interested in how to drive sort of large system level change… 
really trying to better create evidence that helps us know 
whether what we’re doing is making a difference, and partic-
ularly models of care. Focus Group 1
I still have a clinical role and research—particularly 
the research that… led from my Rural Research Capacity 
Building Project has changed the way that I see my clients… 
there’s been a big difference in the way I treat clients. Focus 
Group 3
I think from my research project, it hasn’t, unfortunately, 
sort of been translated into practice much…. Interview 6
Some felt that their research contributed to change in 
clinical practice without change necessarily being the key 
driving factor.
I think that the practice for the cohort of patients that I wrote 
about has changed, but I don’t think it was as a result of 
my research paper, but I think it contributed to the body of 
knowledge around the area. Focus Group 2
Others felt that their research was controversial or 
unpopular. While these projects may not have led to a 
policy or process change, the research activity and distri-
bution of findings created discussion. There was also 
demonstrable resilience developed in response to these 
challenges.
I got attacked by people sometimes about my project. I thought, 
really, is it that polarising? But ….it started a conversation 
at least. So there’s still no resolution necessarily but people in 
[my profession] are talking about it. Interview 1
Graduates felt that research influenced the culture of 
the hosting organisation where recommendations were 
embraced and implemented. When recommendations 
were not implemented, the impact of the research was 
perceived to be minimal. In some workplaces research 
activity led to research becoming integrated into everyday 
work.
I worked with the [local] Aboriginal Medical Centre, but we 
had all the recommendations implemented that were in the 
report, and so that was a big change and there was a big 
cultural shift… it had a huge impact I think on our service. 
Focus Group 1
[The program] is bringing research into the workplace so 
influencing other people, encouraging other people, making 
research part of the language of the workplace. …I think 
you’ll find that every person that’s been on the program, the 
area that they work in has – research has a higher profile in 
some shape or form than if they hadn’t been on the program. 
Focus Group 2
Support for research education and activity
Support for research education and activity within the 
workplace was mixed. When support was lacking, high 
degrees of autonomy were required by the researcher.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=6>>>
6
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access  
I can't say I was totally surprised, but I didn’t get any sup-
port from the health service. I did it all in my own time, 
basically. Focus Group 4
Other participants were well supported locally but that 
wasn’t necessarily matched at higher organisational levels. 
Engaging leaders within the organisation was critical for 
obtaining dedicated time and resources for research 
learning and activity. Support for research activity was 
perceived as being linked to how closely the proposed 
topic aligned with organisational goals, or at least did not 
interfere with organisational functioning.
I don’t think there’s any particular encouragement. I hav-
en’t seen any managers who are resistant, but I wouldn’t 
say any of them see it as any sort of priority. If they can do it 
with only moderate inconvenience to them, they’ll support it. 
But, if not, it’s not something that’s on their radar. Focus 
Group 4
Graduates identified a gap between the rhetoric of 
research being valued and the reality when conducting 
research activities in the workplace. Engagement and 
endorsement from senior management was required 
to conduct the research and for research to enable 
change within the organisation. Graduates indicated the 
competing priorities faced by rural health organisations 
and the impact that this may have on support for research.
You can have all the structure in the world; if research is not 
a priority to senior management it ain’t going to happen. 
Focus Group 4
Retaining skilled workers in the organisation
For some participants, the programme reinvigorated an 
interest in their work and an associated sense of ownership 
and control, encouraging them to continue in their role. 
This retention is important given the typical profile of an 
RRCBP candidate is an experienced rural health worker 
with clinical, corporate and community knowledge.
20
I was bored to death at work. It kept me in that same job for a 
little bit longer, because it was something interesting… I was 
allowed this little bit of space where I could just find my own 
train of thought, and it was something where, yeah, it kept 
me there. Interview 1
For clinical roles, having research experience was not 
seen as a priority. With limited options for research-
 
specific or research-
 compatible roles within the health 
system. Organisations 
risk losing the graduates if they are 
unable to use their newfound skills. However, there are 
opportunities for organisational recognition of research 
expertise within clinical roles via promotion or ‘regrades’ 
within existing roles, which may in turn assist with staff 
retention.
It’s a bit of a dead end though in the sense that I've got these 
skills and there’s not really much infrastructure to actually 
use these skills. Focus Group 4
DISCUSSION
This study examined the long-
 term outcomes of a 
research training programme from the perspective of 
graduates with up to 16 years’ experience post-
 training. 
These outcomes and the proposed underlying generative 
mechanisms are summarised in 
table
 
2.
Graduates of the programme saw themselves and 
their research peers as possessing new and transfer -
able skills, improved work performance and enhanced 
employability prospects. Undertaking research educa-
tion through a supported research project developed 
knowledge in research and non-
 research related spheres, 
including critical thinking and project management. 
While this positive change was noted at the individual 
Table 2 Context, mechanisms and long-  term outcomes of rural r esearch training
Context Mechanism Outcomes
For rural health workers with 
an interest in research
Foundational research training and 
support
New skills in research
Transferable skills
Improved work performance
Enhanced employability
Ongoing research capability
For graduates of foundational 
research training
A lack of formal ongoing research 
supports
Limited ongoing research capacity
An overreliance on individual agency to create 
research opportunity
For research-
 
experienced 
individuals
Perceived mismatch between 
organisational support and individual 
desire for research opportunity
Feelings of discontent
Perception of limited organisational support
For rural health organisations Having a research-
 experienced team 
member
Raised r
esearch profile
Increased research activity that addresses local 
needs
Strengthened team evaluation activities
Retained experienced workers in the organisation
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=7>>>
7
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access
level, having a more competent, confident and skilled 
worker has obvious team and organisational benefits such 
as producing research which addresses local practice and 
policy needs, strengthening team evaluation activities and 
retaining a skilled workforce.
For individuals in this study there were improvements 
in the individual’s knowledge and skills to undertake 
research, which is consistent with real-
 world research 
capacity building.30 This individual capability was accom-
panied by changes in research capacity within the 
individual’s immediate work team and their broader 
organisation.
27 While the programme has previously 
been shown to build research expertise, contribute to the 
research evidence base in rural health, and produce early 
capacity building outcomes,
11 18 23 this study provides new 
insights into the long-
 term value of training in research 
for the individual and beyond.
Some 
graduates remained research active, either via 
higher degree research or through workplace-
 based 
projects. The level of research engagement for gradu
-
ates varied and included being a research participant, 
research advocate, researcher in a team, or independent 
researcher. Transitioning from a foundational experien-
tial research project to independent researcher depends 
on the individual agency of the worker, with some grad-
uates actively seeking or creating research opportunities. 
However, as figure
 
1 indicates, there does not appear 
to be a progressive decline in research active individ-
uals over time (early vs recent), raising the hypothesis 
that if individuals become research active as a result 
of the programme that this is a sustainable behaviour. 
A mismatch between the graduates’ desired level of 
research and limitations in their ability to reach that level 
led to feelings of discontent.
For novice clinician researchers who report limited 
growth in research agency, ongoing structural supports 
such as a second-
 stage 
research education stream or 
supported research mentorship could increase levels 
of research activity. Careful consideration of structural 
design in a research training programme has been shown 
to link with successful training outcomes.
21 Further 
exploration of university partnerships would be a logical 
progression, such as host health organisations supporting 
doctoral students or post-
 doctoral researchers to under -
take relevant research while embedded within the 
organisation.
31
In teams where a rural health worker has research 
experience, that individual enabled, encouraged or 
enhanced research activity in others. This role went 
beyond enabling or encouraging others to access formal 
training programmes to active engagement, adding 
rigour to existing research or quality improvement activ-
ities. Embedding researchers in a health team raised the 
profile of research across the team and more broadly 
within the organisation. Future qualitative ethnographic 
study would provide valuable insights into the develop-
ment of a research culture, with previous studies largely 
focusing on culture from a quantitative perspective.
17 32 33
The organisational return on investing in research 
training was enhanced by high organisational commit-
ment to research in practical terms such as funding or 
dedicated roles. It is a recognised challenge for organ-
isations to create structures in which these skills can be 
utilised, either within the person’s existing role or poten-
tially moving to roles such as an embedded researcher 
position.
13 Providing opportunities for research was seen 
as a tool for retaining experienced staff, and can maxi-
mise the return on investment for organisations that 
support novice researchers.
Close-
 to-
 practice research, such as that completed
 
in the programme, is a key element of capacity 
building.
11 27 34  While graduates saw their research 
making a difference to practice and policy, this was asso-
ciated with the graduates’ perceptions of their organisa-
tion’s support and willingness to embrace change. Clear 
strategic goals for research, matched with operational 
commitment, is necessary for close-
 to-
 practice research
 
in rural areas. 19 35
It is important to note that the RRCBP is conducted 
within rural health workplaces that have seen atti-
tudes and commitment to research fluctuate over time. 
Research capacity development strategies that target indi-
vidual skill development will continue to lead to limited 
levels of research capacity development within and across 
organisations. There is limited ability for educating insti-
tutions to influence these supraorganisational factors, 
however, this serves as a reminder of the importance of 
understanding the context in which training occurs.
19 35 
While attitudes towards and support for research may 
have changed in the time since graduates were trained, a 
coordinated approach to research investment and policy 
is needed to move research capacity development beyond 
the level of the individual.
These findings have been drawn from the experiences 
of programme graduates and further researcher on 
broader organisational perspective would be helpful in 
understanding organisation-
 level changes.
T
o our knowledge, this study is the first study to 
examine long-
 term 
outcomes of a clinician researcher 
development programme in a rural area. While a strat-
ified sampling frame was used to ensure participants 
with a range of RRCBP experiences were included, those 
who have been less connected to programme peers and 
programme coordinators may have been less likely to 
participate (figure
 
1).
As this is a single educational programme held in rural 
areas of one public health system in Australia, there 
is a potential lack of generalisability to other countries 
or health systems. However, the use of critical realism 
to provide practical recommendations, the procedural 
rigour of the study and alignment with existing research 
capacity development literature indicate the findings may 
be applicable in other settings.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=8>>>
8
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access  
CONCLUSIONS
This study demonstrates that investment in research 
training leads to long-
 term improvement in skills, confi
-
dence and employability of individual workers, enhances 
team research capacity, provides immediate answers to 
local clinical and policy priorities and raises the profile of 
research within rural health services.
Training individuals in research, in conjunction with 
organisational support for ongoing research activity, 
led to changes in policy and clinical practice. Creating 
ongoing opportunities for researchers to use and advance 
their newfound skills, along with continued research 
support, will maximise the individual and organisational 
benefits of research training.
Twitter David Schmidt @clin_researcher
Acknowledgements
 The authors wish to ackno
wledge Lynette Gillies for her 
assistance in the recruitment stage of the study.
Contributors
 DS designed the stud
y with contributions from KD, EW and DL. All 
authors contributed to interview/focus group question development. ES collected 
all data. DS undertook primary data analysis with verification from KD, ES and EW. 
DS wrote the manuscript with contributions from KD, EW, ES and DL. All authors 
reviewed the study findings and read and approved the final version before 
submission.DS is responsible for the overall content as guarantor and accepts full 
responsibility for the finished work and/or the conduct of the study, had access to 
the data, and controlled the decision to publish. The corresponding author attests 
that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others meeting the 
criteria have been omitted.
Funding
 This work was supported by New South 
Wales Health. Award/Grant 
numbers are not applicable.
Competing interests
 DS and KD are programme mana
gers for the Health 
Education and Training Institute (HETI), NSW Ministry of Health. HETI is the 
organisation that conducts and manages the program that was researched in this 
study. Emma Webster established the programme and is a former programme 
manager of the programme from 2006 to 2015.
Patient and public involvement
 P
atients and/or the public were not involved in 
the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
Patient consent for publication
 Not a
pplicable.
Ethics approval
 This stud
y involves human participants and was approved 
by Hunter New England Heath Research Ethics CommitteeRef 2020/ETH00835 
Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking part.
Provenance and peer review
 Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data av
ailability statement
 Da
ta are available on reasonable request. Data are 
available on reasonable request and with approval of authorising Human Research 
Ethics Committee.
Supplemental material
 This content has been supplied by the author(s).
 It 
has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have 
been peer-
 reviewed.
 Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely 
those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability 
and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the 
content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and 
reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical 
guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible 
for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or 
otherwise.
Open access
 This is an open access artic
le distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-
 NC 4.0) license,
 which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
 commercially
, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-
 commercial.
 See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
David Schmidt http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1515-2990
REFERENCES
 1  Australian Institute of Health and W elfare. Rural & remote health. 
Canberra: AIHW, 2019.
 2
 Dunbar JA. Building capacity for rural and r
emote research. Aust J 
Rural Health 2010;18:133.
 3
 T
aylor J, Hughes C, Petkov J, et al. Unique issues in research and 
evaluation in rural and remote locations: is there a place for specific 
research training? Rural Remote Health 2005;5:351–62.
 4
 Lionis C, Dumitra G, Kurpas D. Building r
esearch capacity in 
rural health settings: barriers, priorities and recommendations for 
practitioners. Aust J Rural Health 2018:301–2. doi:10.1111/ajr.12422
 5
 Bailey J, V
eitch C, Crossland L, et al. Developing research capacity 
building for Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander health workers in 
health service settings. Rural Remote Health 2006;6:556.
 6
 Bir
den HH. The researcher development program: how to extend the 
involvement of Australian general practitioners in research? Rural 
Remote Health 2007;7:39.3KB.
 7
 Fraser JD, Hawkins A, Alexander C, 
et al. The impact of the research 
methods support structure on research capacity in rural New South 
Wales. Aust Health Rev 2006;30:427–34.
 8
 Gausia K, Thompson SC, Lindeman MA, 
et al. Contribution of 
university departments of rural health to rural health research: an 
analysis of outputs. Aust J Rural Health 2015;23:101–6.
 9
 Grundy J, Johnston F
. Building research capacity in primary 
health care settings in the Northern Territory. Aust J Prim Health 
2003;9:9–17.
 10
 McIntyr
e E, Saltman D, Traynor V, et al. Building research capacity 
in Australian departments of general practice and rural health: a 
document review of annual reports. PHC 2007;8:3–11.
 11
 W
ebster E, Thomas M, Ong N, et al. Rural research capacity 
building program: capacity building outcomes. Aust J Prim Health 
2011;17:107–13.
 12
 W
olfenden L, Yoong SL, Williams CM, et al. Embedding researchers 
in health service organizations improves research translation and 
health service performance: the Australian Hunter New England 
population health example. J Clin Epidemiol 2017;85:3–11.
 13
 Moran A, Haines H, Raschke N, 
et al. Mind the gap: is it time to 
invest in embedded researchers in regional, rural and remote health 
services to address health outcome discrepancies for those living in 
rural, remote and regional areas? Aust J Prim Health 2019;25:104–7.
 14
 Cooke J, Gar
dois P , Booth A. Uncovering the mechanisms of 
research capacity development in health and social care: a realist 
synthesis. Health Res Policy Syst 2018;16:93.
 15
 Ramkalawan T
, Dieppe P . Research capacity development and 
training. J Health Serv Res Policy 2008;13 Suppl 3:6–11.
 16
 Bilar
di D, Rapa E, Bernays S, et al. Measuring research capacity 
development in healthcare workers: a systematic review. BMJ Open 
2021;11:e046796.
 17
 Fradgley EA, Kar
non J, Roach D, et al. Taking the pulse of the health 
services research community: a cross-
 sectional survey of r
esearch 
impact, barriers and support. Aust Health Rev 2020;44:160–7.
 18
 Schmidt DD, W
ebster E, Duncanson K. Building research experience: 
impact of a novice researcher development program for rural health 
workers. Aust J Rural Health 2019;27:392–7.
 19
 Schmidt D, Reyment J, Kirby S, 
et al. The place of research in the 
rural health workplace structure: a content analysis of a rural health 
organisation's strategic and operational documents. Rural Remote 
Health 2020;20:5493.
 20
 Schmidt D, Robinson K, W
ebster E. Factors influencing attrition from 
a researcher training program. International Journal for Researcher 
Development 2014;5:56–67.
 21
 Schmidt DD, Kirby S. A modular appr
oach to rural and remote 
research education: a project report. Rural Remote Health 
2016;16:3609.
 22
 Camer
on HE, Boreland FT, Morris JR, et al. New South Wales and 
Australian Capital Territory researcher development program 2005-
 
07: modest investment, considerable outcomes. 
Aust J Prim Health 
2013;19:59–67.
 23
 Duncanson K, W
ebster EL, Schmidt DD. Impact of a remotely 
delivered, writing for publication program on publication outcomes of 
novice researchers. Rural Remote Health 2018;18:4468.
 24
 Ajjawi R, Crampton PES, Rees CE. What r
eally matters for 
successful research environments? A realist synthesis. Med Educ 
2018;52:936–50.
 25
 Tikly L. What works, for whom, and in what cir
cumstances? Towards 
a critical realist understanding of learning in international and 
comparative education. Int J Educ Dev 2015;40:237–49.
 26
 Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Analysing qualitative data. 
British 
Medical Journal 2000;320:114–6.
 27
 Cooke J. A framework to evaluate r
esearch capacity building in 
health care. BMC Fam Pract 2005;6:44.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as
<<<PAGE=9>>>
9
Schmidt D, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e065972. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972
Open access
 28  Fischer CT . Bracketing in qualitative research: conceptual and 
practical matters. Psychother Res 2009;19:583–90.
 29
 Christie M, Car
ey M, Robertson A, et al. Putting transformative 
learning theory into practice. Australian journal of adult learning 
2015;55:9–30.
 30
 Matus J, W
alker A, Mickan S. Research capacity building frameworks 
for allied health professionals - a systematic review. BMC Health 
Serv Res 2018;18:716.
 31
 Paradis G, Hamelin A-
 M, Malowany M, 
et al. The University–Public 
health partnership for public health research training in Quebec, 
Canada. Am J Public Health 2017;107:100–4.
 32  Matus J, W enke R, Hughes I, et al. Evaluation of the research 
capacity and culture of allied health professionals in a large 
regional public health service. J Multidiscip Healthc 2019;12:83–96.
 33
 Raschke N. 
The perceived research capacity and culture within non-
 
metropolitan local health districts in NSW
. Sydney: Health Education 
and Training Institute, 2017.
 34
 Sarr
e G, Cooke J. Developing indicators for measuring research 
capacity development in primary care organizations: a consensus 
approach using a nominal group technique. Health Soc Care 
Community 2009;17:244–53.
 35
 Schmidt D, Reyment J, W
ebster E, et al. Workplace-
 Based health 
r
esearch training: a qualitative study of perceived needs in a rural 
setting. Health Res Policy Syst 2020;18:67.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 . by guest on May 27, 2025 http://bmjopen.bmj.com/Downloaded from 9 December 2022. 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-065972 on BMJ Open: first published as