<<<PAGE=1>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  v.14, n. 33, e15253  |  e-ISSN 2358-1425 
  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Human capital development: development of professional 
competencies through soft skills 
 
Desenvolvimento do capital humano: desenvolvimento de 
competências profissionais por meio de soft skills 
 
Desarrollo de capital humano: desarrollo de competencias profesionales 
a través de habilidades blandas 
 
Valeriia Valerevna Semenova1 , Alexander Nikolaevich Zelenyuk2 ,  
Yuri Anatolyevich Savinov3  
 
1 Moscow Polytechnic University, Moscow, Russian. 
2 Moscow State Institute (University) of International Relations of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia, Moscow, 
Russian Federation. 
3 Russian Foreign Trade Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. 
 
Corresponding author: 
Valeriia Valerevna Semenova 
Email: semenova.valeriia.v@yandex.ru  
 
How to cite: Semenova, V. S., Zelenyuk, A. N., & Savinov, Y. A. (2021). Human capital development: development of 
professional competencies through soft skills. Revista Tempos e Espaços em Educação, 14(33), e15253. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
ABSTRACT 
The goal of the article is to analyze the development of the professional competency of leadership 
through the development of soft skills in the students of Russian engineering universities on the 
example of the Moscow Polytechnic University. The most demanded and dynamic part of the labor 
market is currently represented by engineering specialists. However, successful professional and 
career growth, as well as the effective development of human capital as the main resource of the 
innovative development of modern society, requires a combination of engineering (hard skills) and 
humanitarian (soft skills) abilities in a specialist. The development of many socially significant 
processes in modern society demonstrates aggravated contradictions and the development of new 
realization trends many of which are associated with changes in the parameters of these processes 
which, in turn, is determined by the mass implementation of innovative digital technologies and 
globalization processes. Globalization as a process en suring the accessibility and openness of 
information has a significant impact on the transformation of national values within a country in 
favor of the emergence of global social, moral, and legal values and social behavior norms in the 
field of political and state power, as well as the economy. Leadership as a social phenomenon 
bearing the main load of managing all socially significant processes is also changing. Leadership as 
a social phenomenon is subject to constant scientific study and analysis. For this purpose, the GLOBE
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
2 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
(Global Leadership and Organization Behavior Effectiveness) International Research Program was 
created. The GLOBE program coordinates the study of leadership in more than 60 countries which 
also supports the relevance of researching t he phenomenon of leadership. In the professional 
activity, leadership manifests through the “leadership qualities” competency. 
Keywords: Innovations. Soft skills. Human capital. Professional competence. Skills. 
 
RESUMO 
O objetivo do artigo é analisar o desenvolvimento da competência profissional de liderança por 
meio do desenvolvimento de soft skills em estudantes de universidades russas de engenharia a 
exemplo da Universidade Politécnica de Moscou. A parte mais exigida e dinâmica do mercado de 
trabalho é atualmente representada por especialistas em engenharia. No entanto, o crescimento 
profissional e de carreira de sucesso, bem como o desenvolvimento eficaz do capital humano como 
principal recurso do desenvolvimento inovador da sociedade moderna, requer uma combinação de 
habilidades de engenharia (hard skills) e humanitárias (soft skills) em um especialista. O 
desenvolvimento de muitos processos socialmente significativos na sociedade moderna demonstra 
contradições agravadas e o desenvolvimento de novas tendências de realização, muitas das quais 
estão associadas a mudanças nos parâmetros desses processos que, por sua vez, são determinados 
pela implementação em massa de tecnologias digitais inovadoras e da globalização proc essos. A 
globalização como um processo que garante a acessibilidade e abertura da informação tem um 
impacto significativo na transformação dos valores nacionais dentro de um país em favor do 
surgimento de valores sociais, morais e legais globais e normas de comportamento social no campo 
do poder político e estatal , bem como a economia. A liderança como fenômeno social que carrega 
a principal carga de gerenciamento de todos os processos socialmente significativos também está 
mudando. A liderança como fenômeno social está sujeita a constantes estudos e análises científicas. 
Para tanto, foi criado o Programa Internacional de Pesquisa GLOBE (Liderança Global e Eficácia do 
Comportamento Organizacional). O programa GLOBE coordena o estudo da liderança em mais de 
60 países, o que também sustenta a relevância de pesquisar o fenômeno da liderança. Na atividade 
profissional, a liderança se manifesta por meio da competência “qualidades de liderança”. 
Palavras-chave: Inovações. Habilidades interpessoais. Capital humano.  Competência profissional. 
Habilidades. 
 
RESUMEN 
El objetivo del artículo es analizar el desarrollo de la competencia profesional de liderazgo a través 
del desarrollo de habilidades blandas en los estudiantes de las universidades de ingeniería rusas en 
el ejemplo de la Universidad Politécnica de Moscú. La parte más demandada y dinámica del 
mercado laboral está representada actualmente por ingenieros especialistas. Sin embargo, el 
crecimiento profesional y profesional exitoso, así como el desarrollo efectivo  del capital humano 
como principal recurso del desarrollo innovador de la sociedad moderna, requiere una combinación 
de habilidades de ingeniería (habilidades duras) y humanitarias (habilidades blandas) en un 
especialista. El desarrollo de muchos procesos socialmente significativos en la sociedad moderna 
demuestra contradicciones agravadas y el desarrollo de nuevas tendencias de realización, muchas 
de las cuales están asociadas con cambios en los parámetros de estos procesos que, a su vez, están 
determinados por la implementación masiva de tecnologías digitales innovadoras y la globalización. 
procesos. La globalización como proceso que asegura la accesibilidad y apertura de la información 
tiene un impacto significativo en la transformación de los valores nac ionales dentro de un país a 
favor del surgimiento de valores sociales, morales y legales globales y normas de comportamiento 
social en el campo del poder político y estatal. , así como la economía. El liderazgo como fenómeno 
social que soporta la carga pri ncipal de gestionar todos los procesos socialmente significativos 
también está cambiando. El liderazgo como fenómeno social está sujeto a constantes estudios y
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
3 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
análisis científicos. Para ello, se creó el Programa Internacional de Investigación GLOBE (Globa l 
Leadership and Organization Behavior Effectiveness). El programa GLOBE coordina el estudio del 
liderazgo en más de 60 países, lo que también respalda la relevancia de investigar el fenómeno del 
liderazgo. En la actividad profesional, el liderazgo se mani fiesta a través de la competencia 
"cualidades de liderazgo". 
Palabras clave:  Innovaciones. Habilidades blandas. Capital humano. Competencia profesional. 
Habilidades. 
  
INTRODUCTION 
The importance of human capital for the development of socio -economic processes in 
modern society is growing rapidly since said development is associated with the possibilities of 
innovative strategic solutions to global problems facing humanity, such as the depletion and uneven 
distribution of resources, competitio n wars, the development of substitutional and green 
technologies, climate change, etc. Innovations and digital technologies require special professional 
competencies from highly demanded workers who occupy a key position in the labor market. Such 
workers d etermine the level of innovative development of an organization and ultimately the 
competitiveness of the country as a whole (Sekerin et al., 2018; Gorokhova et al., 2018). 
The concept “human capital” was introduced into science in 1961 by Theodore Schultz  
(1961). Schultz defined human capital as the complex of workers’ knowledge and skills presenting 
economic value and contributing to labor productivity growth. An undoubted contribution to the 
development of the theory of human capital and the study of its role in the economy was made by 
Gary Becker who proved the importance of education and training as the main components 
contributing to the growth and development of human capital. Becker was one of the first to 
propose a model for the economic assessment of investment in human capital. According to Becker, 
investment in human capital involves education, accumulation of professional experience, etc. 
(Becker, 1994). The modern model for the assessment of the impact of education quality on the 
formation and development of human capital is presented in the WEF Global Human Capital Index 
(WEF: The Global Human Capital Report, 2017). In WEF, however, only the skills that develop over 
time and are not an innate given are classified as human capital. The overall in dex comprises four 
groups of sub -indexes characterizing the level of human capital development, mastery over the 
following competencies: 1 – Capacity; 2 – Deployment; 3 – Development; 4 – Know-How (WEF: The 
Future of Jobs Report, 2018). J.W. Pellegrino and  M.L. Hilton proposed to divide the demanded 
competencies of the 21st century into three clusters: 
1. cognitive – this group of competencies includes digital and research skills, as well as critical 
thinking; 
2. interpersonal – this group involves competencies necessary for interpersonal interaction, 
specifically teamwork and leadership skills; 
3. personal – this group presents competencies ensuring self -organization and self -
development such as self -control, self-evaluation, and intellectual openness (Pell egrino & Hilton, 
2012). 
The opinion of many Russian experts on the 2025 competency model also converges on 
identifying three main clusters: cognitive, socio -behavioral, and digital. Thus, it can be concluded 
that both Russian and global experts in the sphere of competencies and human capital development 
identify leadership as one of the key competencies of the future. Leadership also presents a 
resource since the development of leadership qualities conditions the development of 
competencies of the cognitive and digital clusters. 
Modern Russian higher education pays great attention to the problem of the development 
of human capital through the competency approach for the improvement of young specialists’ 
competitiveness in the labor market on which the develo pment of innovative digital technologies
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
4 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
and the economy depends (Semenova et al ., 2019; Pershina et al. , 2019; Sikyr et al., 2018). The 
Moscow Polytechnic University was one of the first to introduce project activity in the education 
process to form a bal ance of competencies of all major clusters, as well as to compensate for the 
“imbalances” of classical engineering education towards the development of digital and cognitive 
competencies and to lay the foundations for the development of social and behavior al 
competencies, the key one of them being leadership. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
The present study was conducted on students of the Moscow Polytechnic University as a 
part of them mastering the “Project activity” discipline. The study deploys classical scientific 
methods used in psychology, economics, and sociology – the observation method and the method 
of analyzing the results of observation to identify specific behavioral and individual characteristics. 
The object of observation and analysis is presen ted by social behavior and the elements (patterns) 
of social interpersonal interaction in the process of team building, nominating a team leader, 
entering the leadership role, and the leader’s interaction with the team. The process of team 
building comprised three consecutive stages: 
Stage 1: Initial acquaintance, self-nomination as a team leader, and the formation of teams; 
Stage 2: Entering the role of a team leader, the formation of the main principles of social 
interaction within the team, and teamwork organization and control; 
Stage 3: Completion of the work of the team, work results presentation. 
The study aimed to identify the behavioral patterns necessary for the development of 
various leadership qualities in first-year students at the start of their education, as well as to analyze 
the formation of behavioral patterns characteristic for the development of leadership qualities after 
training in teamwork and group interaction within the framework of mastering the “Project activity” 
discipline. The evaluation of behavior patterns was conducted following the assessment technology; 
the scale of assessment and development of the “leadership skills” competency used in the study is 
presented in Table 1. The assessment was carried out by the curators of the project activities. 
Leadership skills include a high degree of influence on others, the ability to lead a team, to 
gain authority (competency 1 – influence); the ability to change people's behavior and motivate 
them to achieve a result (competency 2 – motivation); the ability to make managerial decisions and 
take responsibility for them (competency 3 – organization and decision making). 
 
Table 1. The “leadership skills” competency. 
3 
High (advanced) level of 
COMPETENCY DEVELOPMENT 
in addition to level 2: 
Takes initiative and speaks on behalf of the team. Has influence over the 
team. Often is the author of project solutions and ideas during the project 
realization. Actively takes responsibility for managerial decisions. Works on 
team building. Skillfully argues and defends their viewpoint. 
2 
Baseline level of COMPETENCY 
DEVELOPMENT 
Can influence others, can unite and lead a team, and gain authority. Can 
change people’s behavior and motivate them to achieve a result. Is ready to 
make managerial decisions and  take responsibility for them. Provides new 
ideas during problem-solving. Can argue their viewpoint when facing critical 
remarks from colleagues. Skillfully uses the signs of formal status to create 
psychological distance when necessary.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
5 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
1 
INSUFFICIENT DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
COMPETENCY 
Can head the team to solve a specific task. Communicates with the 
subordinates formally, or on the contrary, too familiarly, without any 
distance, but can show initiative (occasionally). Tends to avoid responsibility 
when making  difficult managerial decisions. Retreats from their position 
once faced with objections from colleagues. 
0 
THE COMPETENCY IS NOT 
DEVELOPED 
Experiences difficulties leading the team or taking initiative. Does not attract 
attention and is not respected by team members (colleagues). Often 
presents a cover for an informal leader who actually leads the team. Keeps 
themself apart in the team or tries to not stand out too much and be “like 
everyone else”. Does not take initiative and responsibility for the decisions 
made. 
 
Stage 1. Students were asked to voluntarily nominate themselves as a leader of a potential 
team. To do so, the potential leader had to prepare a self -presentation speech. Requirements and 
limitations for the self-presentation were identical for all potential leaders. The self -presentation 
had to reflect the main principles of teamwork and interpersonal interaction the potential leader 
was going to use for the formation and preservation of team spirit and unity; the nominee also had 
to describe their strong personal qualities and attractiveness as a leader. Out of 68 study 
participants, eight people volunteered to test their abilities as a leader and three of them did not 
succeed in assembling a team. At the fir st stage, the “leadership skills” competency was assessed 
through the observation and analysis of the speech and the initial interaction with team members. 
The results of the analysis are presented in figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 illustrates that leader 2 and leader 3 are more predisposed to the development of 
leadership qualities compared to leaders 1, 4, and 5. Since the “leadership qualities” competency 
can be divided into sub-competencies of “influence” (competency 1), “motivation” (competency 2), 
and “organization and decision making” (competency 3), we conducted additional analysis of these 
competencies in the leaders’ behavior. The results of the said analysis are presented in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
0
0,5
1
1,5
leader 1 leader 2 leader 3 leader 4 leader 5
0
0,5
1
1,5
leader 1 leader 2 leader 3 leader 4 leader 5
competency 3
organization
competency 2
motivation
competency 1
influence
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
6 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
Stage 2. At the second stage, the leaders had to c reate the basis of team culture, distribute 
team roles, determine the goals and objectives of teamwork, and determine the foundations of 
motivation for teamwork to be aimed at achieving these goals and results. The teams were provided 
with the same creative task (project) and each team had to develop and present a creative solution 
at the third stage. Leader 5 did not cope with the tasks of the second stage and their team elected 
a new leader. It should be noted here that when the competencies of leader 5 were assessed at the 
first stage, the development of the “influence” competency was at a zero level (Figure 2). The results 
of the development of the “leadership skills” competency after the second stage of the study are 
presented in figure 2. 
 
 
 
The analysis of the assessment of the leadership competency after the second stage of the 
study demonstrates that the studied competency developed in leader 1 and leader 4. Comparative 
analysis of the “influence”, “motivation”, and “organization and decision m aking” competencies 
after the second stage also shows some changes. For instance, leader 4 started to develop the 
“influence” competence which they lacked at the first stage. The ratio of the “influence”, 
“motivation”, and “organization” competencies in th e structure of the leadership competency 
changed in leader 3: a reduction in the “influence” competency led to the development of the 
“organization and decision making” competency. 
Stage 3. At the third stage, the teams had to present the result of their teamwork the quality 
of which was then evaluated by a group of experts (curators, teachers) along with the creativity of 
the solution. The leadership competency was also assessed after the teamwork was finished and 
the conclusions were drawn. The results of this round of assessment are presented in figure 3. 
 
 
 
The analysis shows that the “leadership qualities” competency improved in all leaders as a 
result of its practical use in teamwork. The best result of teamwork was achieved by the team of 
leader 3 who initially demonstrated high development of the “leadership qualities” competency and 
its components and improved both the “leadership qualities” competency and its components in 
the course of the experiment. Leader 1 and leader 4 who had a lower level of  development of the 
leadership competency at the first stage also demonstrate the development of leadership skills, as 
well as a changed ratio of sub-competencies within the “leadership skills” competency. 
0
0,5
1
1,5
leader 1 leader 2 leader 3 leader 4
competency 3
organization and
decision making
competency 2
motivation
competency 1
influence
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
leader 1 leader 2 leader 3 leader 4
competency 3
organization and
decision making
competency 2
motivation
competency 1
influence
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
7 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
RESULTS 
According to studies and surveys of employers, a young specialist has to have a wide range 
of interdisciplinary knowledge and competencies which determines the implementation of the 
interdisciplinary approach in the educational process at the Moscow Polytechnic University where 
the “Project activity” discipline is taught. Moreover, the development of labor market globalization 
processes and the opportunities for professional and labor mobility which are now becoming a 
reality implies the demand for soft skills which include leadership. Leader ship skills determine the 
development of many professional competencies which contribute to a more targeted development 
of competencies of other clusters, as well as to obtaining interdisciplinary knowledge and skills 
highly demanded in the 21st century (G oleman, 2016; Maxwell, 2006; Charysheva, 2014). 
Leadership is a natural social and psychological process based on the effect of the influence of a 
leader’s authority on group members. The study results support the idea that the “influence” 
competency presents one of the key competencies of a leader and can serve as a basis for further 
development. The development of leadership skills is accompanied by the development of soft skills 
in all team members since a collective result needs to be achieved (Pellegri no & Hilton, 2012). The 
WEF Global Human Capital Index includes a sub -index of Capacity determining the value of formal 
education (WEF: The Global Human Capital Report, 2017). A high level of formal education 
guarantees quick adaptation to new technologies  and innovations as a basis of competitiveness. 
This fact allows us to speak about not only the development of human capital but also about the 
development of social intellect as a quality demanded by employers and affecting the 
competitiveness of a young specialist (Butenko et al., 2017). Social intellect presenting the skills of 
effective social interaction, creating, developing, and maintaining productive social contacts, and 
maintaining trusting relationships with colleagues is highly important for a sp ecialist’s 
competitiveness. The term “social intellect” was introduced into science by Edward Thorndike who 
defined it as an ability to understand other people regardless of their sex and gender, as well as to 
manage relationships with them. A skill viewed  as a major component of social effectiveness by 
employers is behavioral effectiveness. Behavioral effectiveness implies the ability to build 
relationships with counterparties in specific situations and “inspire others to be effective” and can 
serve as a basis for leadership (Butenko et al., 2017; Semenova & Koshel, 2017). 
 
DISCUSSION 
Leadership as a social phenomenon and a demanded professional competency included in 
soft skills and affecting the development of human capital draws increased interest of researchers 
and employers alike (Harvard Business Review, 2011; Abuziarova et al., 2019; Dyakonov et al., 2019). 
The development of competencies that are demanded in all spheres of activity and are, therefore, 
universal is a key to innovative d evelopment and competitiveness since they ensure and increase 
openness to new experiences which determines the potential for professional and personal 
development. The relevant issues that remain unanswered or ambiguous include the following: 
- although the WEF only classifies the skills that develop over time and are not an innate 
given as human capital (WEF: The Future of Jobs Report, 2018), such an approach raises some 
doubts since the development of some competencies is associated with the development of innate 
inclinations; 
- the development of digital technologies makes classical education insufficient for 
competitiveness in the labor market and unable to guarantee the demand for a young specialist; 
- one of the main requirements posed to skills and co mpetencies is flexibility. Flexibility 
implies the ability to transform (adapt) a skill from one sphere for a different sphere which can be 
ensured by interdisciplinary knowledge which promotes the development of the ability to combine
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
8 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
the elements of know ledge from different areas which results in innovation (Willison & O’Regan, 
2007; 2015); 
- the development of human capital is contingent on education and training determining the 
development of competencies and skills and forming the basis for innovation and competitiveness; 
- the development of soft skills (including leadership) as a result of interdisciplinary 
knowledge and the ability to adapt to the conditions of the global labor market presents a factor in 
the improvement of human capital competitiveness; 
- the development of leadership as one of the most demanded soft skills, a component of 
social intellect, and a social and psychological phenomenon presents a crucial element in the set of 
competencies of a young specialist from the employer’s viewpoint. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Dynamic digitalization processes rapidly change the labor market and, therefore, the 
requirements of employers for the professional competencies of a specialist towards their greater 
universality and flexibility. These characteristics are demonstrated by soft skills which, in turn, leads 
to changes in the requirements for education. In engineering education, the development of soft 
skills in general and the leadership competency, in particular, improves the demand for specialists 
due to their more effective adaptation to the changing conditions of the labor market and mobility 
of the acquired professional competencies. 
Since some of the key competencies included in the soft skills group can be divided into 
components as was illustrated in the  example of the “leadership skills” competency, the effective 
development of the leading competency determines a positive dynamic in the development of other 
components and the development of component competencies not only affects the dynamic of the 
key c ompetency development but also changes the ratio of components depending on how 
demanded they are in the present situation. The present study confirms this statement. Moreover, 
the component competencies can belong not only to competencies of the same clus ter but also to 
competencies from different clusters which improves the development of professional competence 
as a whole and positively affect the development of human capital. 
 
Authors' Contributions: Paste the contributions of each author. Each author must have made at least one of the 
following contributions to the completion of the manuscript: 1) conception and design, 2) acquisition of data, 3) analysis 
and interpretation of data, 4) drafting the article, 5) critical review of important intell ectual content. In addition, all 
authors must have made the following contribution: 6) final approval of the version to be published (at the end of this 
topic, keep the following: "All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript") . 
 
Ethics Approval: Approved by Human Research Ethics Committee of Federal University of Sergipe. CAAE: 
00000000.0.0000.0000. If there are no ethics approval, keep the following: “Not applicable”.  
 
Acknowledgments: Paste the acknowledgments. If there are no acknowledgments, keep the following: “Not 
applicable”. 
 
REFERENCES 
Abuziarova, D., Belousova, V., Kraiushkina, Zh., Lonshchikova, Iu., Nikiforova, E., Chichkanov, N. (2019). Rol 
chelovecheskogo kapitala v sfere nauki, tekhnologii i innovatsii. [The role of  human capital in the sphere of science, 
technology, and innovation]. FORSAIT,  13(2). 
Araujo, A., & Silva, I. P. (2020). Maker culture and educational robotics in physics teaching: developing an automated 
traffic light in high school. Journal of Research and Knowledge Spreading, 1(1), e11654.  
Becker, G.S. (1994). Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to education. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press. 
Butenko, V., Polunin, K., Kotov, I., Sycheva, E., Stepanenko, A., Zanina, E., Lomp, S., Rudenko, V. (2017). Rossiia 2025 — 
ot znanii k talantam. [Russia 2025 – from knowledge to talents]. Moscow: The Boston Consulting Group.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Rev. Tempos Espaços Educ.  |  2021  |  http://dx.doi.org/10.20952/revtee.v14i33.15253 
 
 
9 
Human capital development: development of professional competencies through soft skills 
Charysheva, S.R. (2014). Liderstvo i mentalnost [Leadership and mentality]. Molodoi u chenyi, 20 (79), 667-671. 
Dyakonov, M.Y., Novikov, A.V., Slabkaya, D.N., Balova, S.L., Sekerin, V.D., Gorokhova, A.E. (2019). Customer service 
quality management system. International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering, 8(10), 2474 – 
2478.  
Goleman, D. (2016). Liderstvo (Luchshie stati ot Harward Business Review) [Leadership (Best articles from Harward 
Business Review)]. Moscow: Alpina Pablisher. 
Gorokhova, A.E., Gaisina, L.M., Gareev, E.S., Shutov, N.V., Shakirova, E.V. (2018). Appl ication of Coaching Methods at 
Agricultural and Industrial Enterprises to improve the Quality of Young Specialists' Adaptation. Quality -Access to 
Success, 19(164), 103-108.  
Harvard Business Review. (2011). Kreativnoe myshlenie v biznese [Creative thinking  in business]. Washington: United 
Press. 
Maxwell, J. (2006). Lider na 360 gradusov [The 360 Degree Leader.]. Minsk: Poppuri. 
Oliveira, A. M., Gerevini, A. M., & Strohschoen, A. A. G. (2017). Diário de bordo: uma ferramenta metodológica para o 
desenvolvimento da alfabetização científica. Revista Tempos e Espaços em Educação, 10(22), 119-132.  
Pellegrino, J.W., Hilton, M.L. (2012). Education for life and work: Developing transferable knowledge and skills in the 
21st Century. Washington: National Academy of Sciences. 
Pershina, K.V., Gorokhova, A.E., Popovskii, Iu.N., Sekerin, V.D., Tarabrin, Ph.M. (2109). Development of manufacturing 
systems based on integration with controlling as a competitive advantage of industrial companies. International 
Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering (IJITEE), 8 (6), 610-612  
Rodrigues, B. M., Santos, J. E. B., & Vasconcelos, C. A. (2020). Conceptions of undergraduate students in Chemistry on 
the use of interactive interfaces in and for the activities developed in the distance course. Journal of Research and 
Knowledge Spreading, 1(1), e11649.  
Santos, J. E. B. (2020). Cartographic narratives: the teaching of mathematics and ICT. Journal of Research and 
Knowledge Spreading, 1(1), e11645.  
Schultz, T.W. (1961). Investment in human capital. The American Economic Review, 51(1), 1 –17. 
Sekerin, V.D., Gaisina, L.M., Shutov, N.V., Abdrakhmanov, N.Kh., Valitova, N.E. (2018). Improving the quality of 
competence-oriented training of personnel at industrial enterprises. Quality - Access to Success, 19(165), 68-73. 
Semenova, V.V, Sekerin, V.D. , Efremov. A.A. (2019). Aktualnost strategii formirovaniia innovatsionnogo znaniia dlia 
razvitiia vysshei shkoly v usloviiakh globalizatsii. [Relevance of the innovative knowledge formation strategy for the 
development of higher education in the context of globalization] In book: Rossiia – Belarus: 20 let Soiuznomu 
gosudarstvu (obrazovatelnye, nauchno-issledovatelskie i sotsiogumanitarnye aspekty razvitiia rossiisko-belorusskikh 
otnoshenii). Materialy Mezhdunarodnoi nauchno-prakticheskoi konferentsii.  
Semenova, V.V., Koshel, I.S. (2017). Upravlenie znaniiami: formirovanie professionalnykh kompetentsii. [Managing 
knowledge: the formation of professional competencies]. Ekonomika i predprinimatelstvo, 9, 3.  
Sikyr, M., Abrashkin, M.S., Sekerin, V.D., Gorokhova, A.E. (2018). The impact of R&D of high-tech engineering on GDP 
growth in Russia. International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Technology, 9, 248 -263.  
WEF: The Future of Jobs Report. (2018). Cologni: World Economic Forum.  
WEF: The Global Human Capital Report. Preparing People for the Future of Work. (2017). Cologni: World Economic 
Forum.  
Willison, J., O’Regan, K. (2007). Commonly known, commonly not known, totally unknown: A framework for students 
becoming researchers. Higher Education Research & Development, 26(4), 393–409.  
Willison, J., O’Regan, K. (2015). Researcher skill development framework. Adelaide: University of Adelaide. Retrieved 
from: https://www.adelaide.edu.au/rsd/framework/rsd7/ 
 
 
Received: 11 January 2021 | Accepted: 3 February 2021 | Published: 16 February 2021 
 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.