<<<PAGE=1>>>
COPY
RIGHT AND CITATION CONSIDERATIONS FOR THIS THESIS/ DISSERTATION 
o Attri
bution — You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if
changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that
suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
o NonCom
mercial — You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
o ShareA
like — If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute your
contributions under the same license as the original.
How
 to cite this thesis 
Surname, Initial(s). (2012). Title of the thesis or dissertation (Doctoral Thesis / Master’s 
Dissertation). Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg. Available from: 
http://hdl.handle.net/102000/0002 (Accessed: 22 August 2017).
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Skills development for improved employee performance  
in South African municipalities  
 
 
by 
 
SARAH RODAH SIBIYA 
 
Minor dissertation  
in completion of the requirements for the degree  
MASTER OF ARTS 
 
 
in  
PUBLIC MANAGEMENT AND GOVERNANCE  
 
 
at the  
College of Business and Economics 
UNIVERSITY OF JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
Supervisor: Prof. S. Vyas-Doorgapersad 
 
 
2023
<<<PAGE=3>>>
i 
DECLARATION 
I certify that the dissertation submitted by me for the degree Master of Arts (Public 
Management and Governance) at the University of Johannesburg is my independent 
work and has not been submitted by me for a degree at another university. 
(Sarah Rodah Sibiya)
<<<PAGE=4>>>
ii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
If you want to go fast, go alone, if you want to go far, go together. 
African Proverb 
I would like to deeply thank various individuals who have made this mini -dissertation 
a success. Without their help, this journey would have been difficult to finish. They are 
as follows: 
Prof. Shikha Vyas -Doorgapersad, my research supervisor, for the  meticulous 
guidance and supervision of this project. Indeed, I have learnt and gained a lot of 
wisdom both academically and personally through her qui te engaging mentorship 
throughout the research. 
My friends and family. For being pillars of strengths and motivation each and every 
time this research felt like stalling. Indeed, one cannot do without family and friends. 
May you be richly blessed for the kindness that you have shown me. A special mention 
to my husband, Mr Sibiya, for always being there for me. 
I also want to recognise the contribution of my son for always assisting me where 
needed. 
Lastly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to eve rybody else not mentioned 
above who assisted me in this research. Your contribution has had an innumerable 
impact on attaining my academic goals and dreams and does not go unnoticed. Thank 
you.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
iii 
ABSTRACT 
This study centres on the phenomenon of skills dev elopment for improved employee 
performance in South African local government. Such is hinged on the need to train 
and develop human capital capable of improving public service delivery by 
municipalities. Municipalities are the local sphere of government nearest to the people 
and tasked with developing local communities and delivering goods and services for 
improved living standards. This study explores skills development for improved 
employee performance in South African municipalities. This study was motivated by 
the need to expedite local government service delivery, which has been hampered by 
municipal employees' poor capacity and skill s over the yea rs. A qualitative desktop 
study was adopted, and various secondary documents were analysed to gather 
information. The human capital theory was used as a framework for the study. The 
findings show that most local government employees’ skills are not in tandem with the 
dictates of the current era. The study recommends interventions, among other things, 
improving local government skills development funding , adequately implementing 
monitoring and evaluation practices , developing soft skills for the current four th 
industrial revolution era, and performing regular municipal skills audits. 
Key Words: Employee performance, fourth industrial revolution, local government, 
service delivery, skills development, South Africa.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DECLARATION ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... i 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................ ................................ ......................  ii 
ABSTRACT ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  iii 
LIST OF ACRONYMS ................................ ................................ ..........................  vii 
 
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL ORIENTATION 
1.1 INTRODUCTION................................ ................................ ..........................  1 
1.2 BACKGROUND, RATIONALE AND PROBLEM STATEMENT ......................  1 
1.3 RESEARCH QUESTIONS ................................ ................................ ............  3 
1.4 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES................................ ................................ ...........  4 
1.5 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
1.6 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS................................ ................................ ...... 9 
1.7 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY ................................ ................................ . 9 
1.8 LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY ................................ ................................ .. 10 
1.9 CHAPTER LAYOUT ................................ ................................ ...................  10 
 
CHAPTER TWO 
OVERVIEW OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
2.1 INTRODUCTION................................ ................................ ........................  12 
2.2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT ......................  12 
2.2.1 Skills ................................ ................................ ................................  12 
2.2.2 Competency ................................ ................................ ....................  14 
2.2.3 Skills development ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
2.3 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE ...........  17
<<<PAGE=7>>>
v 
2.3.1 Performance as a concept ................................ ................................  17 
2.3.2 Employee performance ................................ ................................ .... 19 
2.4 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR IMPROVED EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 20 
2.5 MERITS OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 27 
2.6 SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................  28 
 
CHAPTER THREE 
THEORETICAL, LEGISLATIVE, AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS OF 
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH AFRICAN MUNICIPALITIES 
3.1 INTRODUCTION................................ ................................ ........................  30 
3.2 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT.... 30 
3.3 LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORKS REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT ... 34 
3.4 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 38 
3.5 SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................  40 
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AFFECTING EMPLOYEE 
PERFORMANCE IN SOUTH AFRICAN MUNICIPALITIES 
4.1 INTRODUCTION................................ ................................ ........................  42 
4.2 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES IN SOUTH AFRICAN 
MUNICIPALITIES................................ ................................ .......................  42 
4.2.1 Influences of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) ...........................  43 
4.2.2 Status of local government employee performance ...........................  45 
4.3 EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES IN MUNICIPALITIES ...........  48 
4.3.1 Top and middle-level management-related challenges ......................  49 
4.3.2 Operational management-level employee performance challenges ... 51 
4.3.3 Technology-related employee performance challenges .....................  52
<<<PAGE=8>>>
vi 
4.3.4 Finance-related employee performance challenges...........................  53 
4.3.5 Planning premised employee performance challenges ......................  54 
4.4 MUNICIPALITIES’ SKILLS DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS ..................  56 
4.5 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IMPLEMENTATION GAPS IN MUNICIPALITIES . 58 
4.6 SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................  60 
 
CHAPTER FIVE 
SYNTHESIS, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.1 INTRODUCTION................................ ................................ ........................  61 
5.2 SYNTHESIS AND REALISATION OF RESEARCH OBJECTIVES...............  61 
5.3 RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STUDY ................................ ....................  65 
5.4 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE STUDY ................................ ...... 69 
5.5 LESSONS LEARNT FROM BEST PRACTICES ................................ ..........  70 
5.5.1 Skills development for improved employee performance in 
municipalities in the city of Whittlesea (Australia): An international  
case study ................................ ................................ .......................  70 
5.5.2 Skills development for improved employee performance in 
municipalities in the city of Kigali, Rwanda: An African case study ..... 72 
5.6 SCOPE FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ................................ ...........................  73 
 
REFERENCES................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 74
<<<PAGE=9>>>
vii 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
4IR  Fourth Industrial Revolution 
ADB   Asian Development Bank 
ADM   Amathole District Municipality 
AGSA  Auditor-General South Africa 
ALGA   Australian Local Government Association 
GTZ   Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit 
HCT   Human Capital Theory 
HRD   Human Resources Development 
ICT  Information and Communication Technology 
IDP   Integrated Development Plan 
KIC   Kigali Innovation City 
KPI   Key Performance Indicator 
LGSETA  Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority 
MA   Master of Arts 
NDP  National Development Plan 
NPC   National Planning Commission 
NPM  New Public Management 
NQF   National Qualifications Framework 
RSA   Republic of South Africa 
SALGA  South African Local Government Association 
SAQA  South African Qualifications Authority 
SETA   Sector Education and Training Authority 
STEM  Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics 
TVET  Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
WEF  World Economic Forum  
WSP   Workplace Skills Plan
<<<PAGE=10>>>
1 
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL ORIENTATION 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
The study’s context and rationale are presented in this chapter, along with the problem 
statement, the guiding research question, secondary research questions, and study 
objectives. Also considered are the methodological approach's implications for the 
research design, research methodology, data collection and analysis techniques. In 
the chapter’s final sections, the study’s ethical issues, contribution and limitations are 
presented, along with the study's chapter layout to guide the proceeding chapters. 
1.2 BACKGROUND, RATIONALE AND PROBLEM STATEMENT 
This study centres on the phenomenon of skills development for improved employee 
performance in South African local government. Such is hinged  on the need to train 
and develop human capital capable of improving public service delivery by 
municipalities. Municipalities are the local sphere of government nearest to the people 
and tasked with developing local communities and delivering goods and services for 
improved living standards. The local sphere of government is established in Section 
152(1), Chapter 7 of th e Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996) . It has 
various aims, which include: providing a democratic and accountable government for 
local communities; ensuring the provision of services to communities in a sustainable 
manner; promoting social and economic development; promot ing a safe and healthy 
environment; and encourag ing the involvement of communities and community 
organisations in local government matters (Republic of South Africa (RSA) 1996:77). 
Furthermore, Section 152(2) of the RSA (199 6) Constitution obligates municipalities 
to strive, within their financial and administrative capacity, to achieve the preceding 
objectives.  
This study notes that for the above aims of local government to be achieved, 
municipality employees require a specific set of skills. Therefore, this study discusses 
skills development's meaning and implications for  employee performance. Also, 
Munzhedzi (2021:213) notes that attaining the various goals of local government 
requires competent human capital with the requisite skills to undertake the various
<<<PAGE=11>>>
2 
tasks and duties. Furthermore, there is a solid link between the availability of skilled 
human capital and the timely delivery of quality public goods and services in local 
governments (Maphumulo & Bhengu 2019:7). Therefore, for the government to deliver 
on its constitutional mandate, there is an urgent need to sustainably strengthen human 
resources regarding the quantity and quality of capable municipal employees. 
The study explores the skills development of municipal employees (focus) in South 
African municipalities (locus). It does not focus on one chosen municipality but  looks 
at the situation holistically from a broader perspective. Th e nature of this study is 
possible as some MA minor dissertations are completed following the holistic 
approach. Some of these studies include factors influencing the implementation of the 
strategic framework for gender equality within the South African Public Service 
(Bangani 2020) and food security interventions to achieve Sustainable Development 
Goal Two in many countries if the world (Gil, Reidsma, Giller, Todman, Whitmore and 
Van Ittersum 2019:691), to state a few to make a case that th is study could also be 
conducted using a macro-level approach.  
The challenge of skills scarcity in the South African public service and the local sphere 
of government has reached endemic levels. Ndevu and Muller (2017:15) have pointed 
out how this lack of ample human ca pacity has affected the abilities of local 
government entities to deliver services effectively. Further, hordes of challenges have 
resulted from this scarcity of skills, including inter alia financial misconduct, poor 
performance, inability to deliver qual ity (basic) public services, unethical behaviour, 
corruption, nepotism, and political interference, all of which have dented the mandate 
and the reputation of municipalities in South Africa (Ndevu & Muller 2017:15). Local 
government entities, according to Munzhedzi (2017:7) are the custodians of service 
delivery and community development in South Africa, and this is made possible by the 
278 municipalities spread across the entire republic. Since the dawn of democracy in 
1994, efforts to fast-track the transformation of communities in South Africa have been 
hampered by challenges, including the lack of skills in the local sphere of government.  
Municipalities are among the  critical public entities for delivering public services in 
South Africa. The lack of sk ills in municipalities has also been compounded by post -
apartheid practices of cadre deployment as used by the African National Congress 
(ANC) government, which primarily considers political affiliation and allegiance over
<<<PAGE=12>>>
3 
the competencies or skills of its appointees (Shava & Chamisa 2018:6; Masuku & Jili 
2019:1935). Furthermore, the absence of a culture of meritocracy in the employment 
and deployment of human capital in local government has affected effective service 
delivery (Reddy 2016:5). As discussed i n the previous section, skills training and 
development programmes and interventions in modern -day South Africa have been 
considered less effective.  
The South African local government system has been plagued with various challenges 
related to the conduct of its officials. These challenges are blatant, rampant unethical 
behaviour, bad governance, corruption and nepotism, lack of transparency and 
maladministration (Madumo 2015:163). According to Munzhedzi (2016:198), local 
government corruption and procureme nt are the major challenges municipalities in 
South Africa face. Most “municipalities audited in 2012/2013 were not awarded clean 
audit outcomes due to findings around their set goals due to their failure to meet the 
public financial management requirement s” (Matlala & Uwizeyimana 2020:2). In the 
“2014/2015 financial y ear, the financial health of 92 percent  of the country’s 278 
municipalities remains a source of concern or requires intervention” (Matlala & 
Uwizeyimana 2020:2). Training and skills development, if implemented effectively, can 
decisively resolve challenges that affect the department. The study’s central problem 
focused on scarcity and lack  of skills among municipal employees , as seen in the 
various challenges highlighted in this section. Theref ore, the study question the 
researcher sought to examine is as follows: What are the challenges hampering the 
effective implementation of skills development programmes to improve 
employee performance in South African municipalities? 
1.3 RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
A “research question is a question that a study or research project aims to answer . 
This question often addresses an issue or a problem, which, through analysis and 
interpretation of data, is answered in the study's conclusion” (Bouchrika 2022a:1). The 
study gathered literature, theoretical and empirical evidence to answer the following 
research questions fully: 
• What are the conceptual frameworks of skills development and employee 
performance?
<<<PAGE=13>>>
4 
• Which are the theoretical, legislative, and institutio nal frameworks regulating 
skills development in South African municipalities? 
• What are the causes of skills shortage s in employee performance in South 
African municipalities? 
• Which are the challenges hampering the effective implementation of skills 
development programmes in South African municipalities? 
• Which strategies can be adopted and implemented for effective skills 
development practice in South African municipalities to improve employee 
performance? 
• What recommendations can be offered to effectively a ddress skills 
development for improved employee performance in South African 
municipalities? 
1.4 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
It is important to consider that research objectives divide the research aim into several 
parts and address each part separately. The research aim specifies ‘what’ needs to 
be studied and the research objectives comprise a number of steps that address ‘how’ 
the research aim will be achieved (Business Research Methodology 2022:1). The 
study objectives are to: 
• Explain the conceptual frameworks of skills development and employee 
performance. 
• Discuss the theoretical, legislative, and institutional frameworks regulating skills 
development in South African municipalities. 
• Explore the causes of skills shortage on employee performance in South 
African municipalities. 
• Describe challenges hampering the effective implementation of skills 
development programmes in South African municipalities. 
• Discuss strategies that can be adopted and implemented towards effective 
skills development practice in South African municipalities to improve employee 
performance. 
• Offer recommendations to effectively address skills development for improved 
employee performance in South African municipalities.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
5 
1.5 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A, “research paradigm is a method, model, or pattern for conducting research. It is a 
set of ideas, beliefs, or understandings within which theories and practices can 
function. The majority of paradigms derive from one of two research methodologies: 
positivism or interpretivism” (Abbadia 2022:1). It is also important to note that “every 
research project employs one of the research paradigms as a guideline for creating 
research methods and carrying out the research project most legitimately and 
reasonably” (Abbadia 2022:1). The study uses the interpretivism approach. The 
rationale is that “interpretivism has its roots in hermeneutics, the study of the theory 
and practice of interpretation. In hermeneutics , the text is the expression of the 
thoughts of its author, and interpreters  must attempt to put themselves within the 
perception or thinking pattern of the author in order to reconstruct the intended 
meaning of the text” (Olsen WordPress 2022:1; also refer to internet source: 
https://www.intgrty.co.za). The interpretivism paradig m is used in qualitative studies 
because “precise, systematic and theoretical answers to complex human problems 
are not possible. They assert that every cultural and historical situation is different and 
unique and requires analyses of the uniquely defined, particular contexts in which it is 
embedded. Because of the specific social, political, economic and cultural experiences 
underpinning each study, the findings cannot be generalised; they do, however, 
provide greater clarity on how people make meaning of  phenomena in a specific 
context, thus aiding greater understanding of the human condition” (Olsen WordPress, 
2022:2). The qualitative and interpretivist approach to this study has been chosen 
since the research seeks to understand issues surrounding skill s development and 
employee performance in municipalities in South Africa. For Wincup (2017:54), one 
main advantage of using qualitative methods is that they generate rich, detailed data 
and provide context for understanding behaviour, perceptions, attitude s, feelings, 
processes and the ‘reasons why’. 
In any research study, “it is important when designing a research project to select 
those methods and techniques that are appropriate to the specific research goal and 
study objectives” (Mouton 1996:40). In oth er words, “different studies use different 
methods, and the selected method that is appropriate for the particular task at hand 
should be used. The researcher selects the methods and techniques and the 
methodological paradigm: whether it will be a quantitative design, a qualitative design,
<<<PAGE=15>>>
6 
or a combination of both” (Mouton 1996:40). In addition, Schurink (2009, cited in 
Auriacombe 2016; Bangani 2019:15; Nhlapo 2020:2619) also states that , “designing 
your study within a specific research paradigm means that you situate it within a 
specific framework with interrelated assumptions, concepts, theories, values and 
practices that comprise the way you think reality should be viewed (ontology) and 
studied (epistemology).” Schurink (2009, cited in Auriacombe 2016; Bangani 2019:15; 
Nhlapo 2020:2619) further states that when designing the research project, the focus 
should be on the research question. Moreover, there is a focus on the research 
methodology, design, techniques, and theoretical, conceptual, as well as the analytical 
framework that could best clarify the research purpose and perspective and, therefore, 
the study objectives formulated for the research project.  
Research is a systematic inquiry process to obtain evidence to accurately represent 
or explain social phenomena under study (Mouton 1996:7). Therefore, the research 
design is a roadmap of how the researcher intends to carry-out their research (Punch 
2009:114). Methodology in research is defined as, “the systematic method to resolve 
a research problem through data gathering using various techniques, providing a n 
interpretation of data gathered and drawing conclusions about the research data. 
Essentially, a research methodology is the blueprint of a research or study” (Murthy & 
Bhojanna 2009:32; Bouchrika 2022b:2 ). In the same vein, Schwandt (2007:193) 
asserts that methodology includes the assumptions and values that serve as a 
rationale for the research and the researcher's standards or criteria for in terpreting 
data and reaching conclusions.  
A wide range of alternate research methodologies can be utilised to research and 
conclude social phenomena. These include both the qualitative and quantitative 
methodologies. Commitment to a particular methodologi cal frame of reference will 
influence and inform the study in very specific ways (Schram 2006:9). Therefore, 
“there should be a synthesis between a researcher’s conceptual framework and the 
methodology they choose to gather and analyse data” (Auriacombe 20 08:21). 
Research designs, according to Webb and Auriacombe (2006:589) , “look at different 
kinds of questions. Therefore, research designs are categorised according to different 
kinds of studies according to the types of questions the researcher expects the  
research project to answer”. A research design , “consists of a clear statement of the
<<<PAGE=16>>>
7 
research problem and p lans for collecting, processing  and interpreting the 
observations intended to answer the research question” (Webb & Auriacombe 
2006:589).  
This study uses a qualitative research approach. Auriacombe (2008:12) postulate s 
that, “a qualitative research paradigm provides the researcher with the perspectives 
of target audience members through immersion in a culture or situation and direct 
interaction with  the people under study (an ‘insider’ view)”. Qualitative research 
methods include observations, in -depth interviews, focus groups and the analysis of 
personal and other documents and literature, gaining insight into the meaning of the 
subject or object under study. These, “methods are also designed to help researchers 
understand people's meanings to their innermost experiences” (Bryman & Bell 
2003:480). In the “qualitative paradigm, the researcher becomes the data collection 
instrument, and results may vary greatly depending upon who conducts the research” 
(Bryman & Bell 2003:480). The researcher used literature and official documents to 
gather and analyse qualitative data. Fletcher (2017:184) argues that , “qualitative 
researchers mostly use inductive reaso ning, arguing from the particular to the 
general”. 
According to Denzin and Lincoln (2005:7) , “qualitative research is interdisciplinary, 
transdisciplinary, and spreads across humanities, the social sciences, and the physical 
sciences”. Therefore, “qualitative research could be seen as an umbrella term for 
different approaches, with each having its own theoretical background, methodological 
principles and aims” (Auriacombe 2009:97). The ‘insider’s perspective’ that emerges 
from qualitative researchers allows them to find the best way to interact with their 
research environments, thus allowing for f lexibility and pushing research findings 
towards validity and believability (Patton, Hong, Patel & Kral 2017:8).  
This study, being qualitative, focuses on exploratory and descriptive approaches. 
When “a researcher has limited experience with or knowledge about a research issue, 
exploratory research is useful. It ensures that a more rigorous, more conclusive future 
study will begin with an inadequate understanding of the nature of the problem at 
hand” (Manerikar & Manerikar 2014:1,  cited in Mutenga 2021:16). Usually, 
“exploratory research provides a greater understanding of a concept or crystallises a 
problem. Exploratory study is initial research conducted to clarify and define the nature
<<<PAGE=17>>>
8 
of a problem” (Manerikar & Manerikar 2014:1, cited in Mutenga 2021:16). Descriptive 
research, as highlighted by Moffat (2015:55, cited in Chiware 2021:20), “is concerned 
with conditions or relationships that exist; practices that prevail; beliefs, viewpoints, or 
attitudes that are held; ongoing processes; effects that are being felt; or trends that 
are developing.”  
The data is collected through literature and document reviews. A liter ature review 
“surveys books, scholarly articles, and other sources relevant to a particular issue, 
area of research, or theory. It provides a description, summary, and critical evaluation 
of these works concerning the research problem investigated” (Labaree 2009:1, cited 
in Ncamphalala 2019:16-17). Literature reviews “are designed to provide an overview 
of sources explored while researching a particular topic and to demonstrate to readers 
how research fits within a larger field of study” (Labaree 2009:1, cited in Ncamphalala 
2019:16–17). According to Mogalakwe (2006, cited in Makhubu 2020:10 –11), a 
document review refers to “the analysis of documents that contain information about 
the phenomenon one wishes to study”.  
The study's data analysis was executed through conceptual and documentary analysis 
methods. According to Furner (2004:233), “conceptual analysis is a technique that 
treats concepts as classes of objects, events, properties, or relationships. The method 
involves precisely defining the meaning of a given concept by identifying and 
specifying the conditions under which any entity or phenomenon is (or could be) 
classified under the concept in question”. The “goal of using conceptual analysis as a 
method of inquiry into a given field of interest is to  improve our understanding of how 
particular concepts are (or could be) used for communicating ideas about that field” 
(Furner 2004:233). The study employs conceptual analysis to draw the meaning of 
concepts related to skills development to see how they in fluence the performance of 
municipalities. According to Bowen (2009:27), “document analysis is a systematic 
technique for assessing or evaluating documents, both printed and electronic 
(computer-based and Internet -transmitted) material. Like other qualitat ive research 
methodologies, document analysis necessitates the examination and interpretation of 
data to extract meaning, gain insight, and develop empirical knowledge .” Documents 
“contain text (words) and images that were recorded without the participation of a 
researcher. Other mute or trace evidence, such as cultural relics, is not included in this
<<<PAGE=18>>>
9 
debate” (Bowen 2009:27). This study employs documentary analysis to analyse official 
government documents and peer-reviewed and other expansive literature sources that 
inform skills development in local municipalities in South Africa. 
Validity “is the extent to which a concept, conclusion, or measurement is well-founded 
and corresponds accurately to the real world. The validity of a measurement tool is 
considered the degree to which the tool measures what it claims to measure; in this 
case, the validity is equal to accuracy” (Auriacombe 2007:32, cited in Bangani 
2019:13). Reliability, as explained by Golafshani (2003:52, cited in Bangani, 2019:14), 
“does not imply validity. That is, a reliable measure measuring something consistently 
is not necessarily measuring what needs to be measured .” Lincoln and Guba (1985, 
cited in Univ ersity of Miami 2020:2) used the, “trustworthiness’ of a study as the 
naturalist’s equivalent for internal validation, external validation, reliability, and 
objectivity. Trustworthiness is achieved by credibility, authenticity, transferability, 
dependability, and confirmability in qualitative research .” In qualitative research, 
“researchers look for dependability that the results will be subject to change and 
instability rather than looking for reliability in qualitative research” (Lincoln & Guba 
1985, cited in University of Miami 2020:2). 
1.6 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Scientific research studies are required and expected to be carried out in morally 
acceptable and justifiable ways (Sugiura, Wiles & Pope 2017:192). This research 
abides by all the applicable pri nciples of social research. It is a qualitative desktop 
study, and all documents consulted for the study are in the public domain. 
1.7 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY 
The study expand s on the existing body of academic knowledge by bringing fresh 
perspectives to the challenge of poor performance and lack of skills in local 
government. This study contribute s to ensuring that skills development becomes an 
integral part of local government transformation, highlighting the significance of skills 
development for employee performance to positively transform municipal service 
delivery. Secondly, the study explore s skills development practice s for local 
government by identifying skills gaps so municipalities can ensure that the persistent 
challenge of skill scarcity in local government can effectively be addressed. The study
<<<PAGE=19>>>
10 
links skills development and employee performance, motivating that trained human 
capital could contribute to improved municipal services. Overall, this s tudy 
underscores the need for new strategies incorporating updating training programmes 
(such as ICT/4IR) to address this skills shortage challenge and improve how 
municipalities deliver services toward sustainable community development. 
1.8 LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
The study offers a holistic approach to skills development for improved municipality 
employee performance. Hence interviews do not form part of the study and can be 
considered a limitation. Future studies may explore the topic in a chosen municipality 
and include interviews and observations to expand the literature and knowledge on 
the area under exploration. 
1.9 CHAPTER LAYOUT 
This study is divided into the following chapters: 
Chapter One: Introduction and General Orientation: This chapter discusses the 
rationale and problem statement that is expanded to formulate research questions and 
objectives. Appropriate research methods, techniques, data collection and analysis 
methods are discussed. The study’s limitations, significance, ethical considera tions 
and chapter layout are provided to guide the research. 
Chapter Two: Overview of Skills Development and Employee Performance: This 
chapter explores an overview of skills development and employee performance in the 
context of municipalities. The chapte r links skills development to employee 
performance, explaining various challenges and the advantages of skills development 
to the efficacy of employees in South African municipalities. 
Chapter Three: Theoretical, Legislative and Institutional Frameworks of  Skills 
Development in South African Municipalities:  This chapter discusses theoretical, 
institutional, policy and legal frameworks guiding skills development in the context of 
employee performance in South African local government.
<<<PAGE=20>>>
11 
Chapter Four: Skills Development Challenges Affecting Employee Performance 
in South African Municipalities:  This chapter explores various skills development 
interventions to improve employee performance, especially at the municipal level. 
Chapter Five: Conclusions and Recommendations: This chapter summarises the 
preceding chapters and offers recommendations for improvement.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
12 
CHAPTER TWO 
OVERVIEW OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The study assess es the effect of skills development on employee performance in 
South African municipalities. The opening chapter provided the study's foundation by 
setting the research scene. This chapter focuses on skills development and employee 
performance in the context of the local sphere of government. Specifically, the chapter 
conceptualises key terms and phrases such as skills, competency, performance, and 
employee performance. Furthermore, it discusses the potential that skills development 
has to improve the performance of local government employees. In the end, this 
chapter provides a comprehensive look at these two equally critical concepts and 
practices in the context of the need for improved employee perfo rmance in South 
African municipalities. The chapter concludes by discussing various challenges 
affecting the efficacy of local government employees a nd the advantages of skills 
development to the efficacy of South African municipalit y employees. The chapte r 
answers the research question: What are the conceptual frameworks of skills 
development and employee performance? (see Chapter 1, Section 1.3). 
2.2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
This section defines, describes, and discuss es various concepts  related to skills 
development in the context of the current study, starting with skills. These are then 
discussed as central terms and concepts that South African municipalities can 
consider in their quest to improve performance for effective service delivery.  
2.2.1 Skills 
The study is based on the development of skills for effective service delivery in South 
African municipalities. Skills refer to abilities for improved job performance as seen in 
the undertaking of an organised sequence of activities that are critical to the 
achievement of th e predetermined goals of an organisation (Baaartman & Bruijn 
2011:127). The said organisation includes public entities such as the municipalities in 
South Africa, which comprise the local sphere of government. For this study, skills are 
critical to the eff ective functioning of municipalities because these are the centres of
<<<PAGE=22>>>
13 
community development and public service delivery. From another angle, skills denote 
the knowledge about how to do something, ‘know-how’ (Bolisani & Bratianu 2018:11). 
Therefore, skills effectively equip employees with the expertise and knowledge to 
undertake various organisational tasks. In the context of this study, skills can include 
knowledge of people-centred public or municipal service delivery.  
Since 1994, South Africa has been co nfronted by a skills crisis . Skills development 
has been acknowledged as a key component for its transformation 
(Tshilongamulenzhe 2012:30), leaving the state requiring a government -led skills  
revolution that can bring socio -economic transformation (Plant & Padotan 2017:35). 
Further to this, the scarcity and shortage of critical skills in South Africa 
correspondingly imply that there is the absence of competent public servants and key 
officials in all sectors of the economy (Plant & Padotan 2017:44). Kroukamp 
(2002:455) observes that the skills scarcity dilemma in South Africa is worsened by 
the half-hearted commitment by public officials and policy implementers to address 
the problem  effectively, leading to its persistence. According to Matlala and 
Uwizeyimana (2020:2), the local sphere of government is not immune to this skills 
deficit, which has left municipalities in a quandary, with audit opinions from the Auditor 
General indicating that skil ls such as financial management are in short supply. 
Therefore, there is a need to use skills training and development interventions to equip 
local government with all the skills  lacking. This is because municipalities are the 
centre of critical processes leading to community development and the post -1994 
transformation agenda. 
There are three central aspects to the skills debate in South Africa, as established by 
labour economists. First, skills shortages denote the acute absence of qualified labour 
to fill vacant positions (Hakansson & Bejakovic 2020:8). Second, skills mismatches 
occur when individuals seeking employment do not have the skills required for the 
vacant positions (Hakansson & Bejakovic 2020:8). Third, Taylor (2018:34) notes that 
there is information asymmetry that happens when potential employees or employers 
do not have information that could improve the matching of skills and available 
vacancies. The ability of employees to function and execute duties and responsibilities 
is related to their  competencies and capacity to carry out those tasks. This capacity 
includes both individual and organisational aspects , which means that organisations
<<<PAGE=23>>>
14 
have to create an enabling environment for employees’ productivity and performance. 
The study discusse s the issues related to the competencies of employees in the 
context of skills development and the need for effective service delivery in South 
African municipalities. 
2.2.2 Competency 
For Mansfield (1999:25) , “competency refers to an underlying characteristi c of a 
person that results in effective or superior performance. Such an effective performance 
relates to the ability to deliver both quantitatively and qualitatively on the key result 
areas that employees have been given at the beginning of the performance period.” It 
is important to note that a competent employee meets expected job demands through 
deliberate performance behaviour that synchronises with the organisation's goals . 
Masuku and Jili (2019:1947) argue that the skills scarcity in South Africa, as  argued 
previously in this chapter has been a blow to the abilities and aptitudes of local 
government officials. In the end, this affects how economic, effective and efficient 
municipal service delivery is done, and how poverty and underdevelopment are 
addressed.  
Competency has been historically conceptualised by scholars such as McClelland 
(1973:47), who first referred to competency as a critical differentiator of performance. 
From his argument, competency is the determinant factor that judges an employee as 
a low, moderate or high performer. As a result, for an organisation to carry out crucial 
procedures like training and development , it must evaluate and establish its 
competency requirements. Therefore, in the context of this study, municipalities must 
be aware of the levels of competency and employment status of their various 
employees to decide on training and development initiatives based on the best 
available evidence. From a different standpoint, competences can reveal if a company 
or municipality is under or over -utilising its human resources, which are both vital 
components of employees’ motivation and productivity.  
This section discusses the critical aspect of competency, which has been fully 
emphasised as a vital cog in the employees’ skills and performance matrix. For South 
African municipalities to ensure that their employees function optimally, they must 
always be knowledgeable regarding their employees’ various competencies. If these
<<<PAGE=24>>>
15 
fall short, there is a need to upskill  municipal employees through various skills 
development interventions. It can be argued that competencies are a critical aspect of 
both employee and team capacity and thus must be treated seriously , especially in 
South African local government. The following section discusses skills development in 
the context of the current study. 
2.2.3 Skills development 
According to Jonck, De Coning and Matseke (2020:30) , skills development is 
“expected to encourage socio-economic transformation by compelling public servants 
to participate in the knowledge economy .” Furthermore, such kinds of development 
are fostered by capacitating public office bearers with the skills to become knowledge 
workers (Jonck et al.  2020:30). According to Mchunu (2019:32), skills development 
within the public sector of South Africa is critical because public sector employees 
require the expertise to execute and implement programmes introduced to improve 
service delivery and the quality of lives.  
The skills development process is linked to the up skilling of individuals  to improve 
them and ensure that the job -to-individual match is enhanced. Attaining such a 
balance is dependent on human capital skill sets being updated regularly using both 
informal and formal processes or interventions. In the case of municipalities, there is 
need to ensure that the skills deficits that the post-1994 local government sphere faces 
are addressed through skills development and other related interventions. One such 
intervention is training and development of local government employees through the 
Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority (LGSETA)  (Turner, 
Halabi, Sartorius & Arendse 2013:2). In the process of skills development , there is a 
marked improvement required in the area o f education and knowledge of those that 
will be on the receiving end of such training, as discussed below. 
Knowledge acquisition is a vital aspect of skills development. According to Bolisani 
and Bratianu (2018:19) , the concept of knowledge is viewed as th e condition of 
knowing created by the human brain (through cognition) , which is then amplified and 
integrated into organisational knowledge by social interaction. Thus, in the context of 
this study, knowledge refers to the acquisition of skills by municipal employees and 
officials to execute their service delivery mandates in their respective communities
<<<PAGE=25>>>
16 
more proficiently. In the study's context, characteristics such as behaviour, empathy, 
personality, and leadership qualities, are used to enhance service delivery in the South 
African local government sector. Knowledge and education are closely related, which 
furthers the upskilling of workers-particularly municipal workers. According to Barrow 
and Woods (2008:6), ‘education’ refers to the deliberate acquisition of knowledge.  
According to Rieckmann (2018:42), the process of education involves acqui ring 
attitudes, aptitudes, and beliefs through the influence of the environment, leading one 
to develop a certain level of understanding related to certain phenome na. Therefore, 
“an educated person must be equipped with some body of knowledge and some kind 
of conceptual scheme to raise the abilities of knowledge above the level of a collection 
of disjointed facts” (Brottman, Char, Hattori, Heeb & Taff 2020:805). In the context of 
the current study, education is used as a focused intervention intended to educate  
municipal workers in South Africa. Education is essential for providing workers with 
the fundamental skills to do activities more efficiently and effectively, which is essential 
for attaining organisational goals. The failure of the South African educational system 
to provide municipal workers and other public servants with the necessary skills to 
perform their jobs effectively has been cited. As a result, town s need to implement 
education initiatives.  Education must be seen to be working in collaboration with 
training, discussed as follows. 
Training refers to the instructions that one receives towards their mastering of a certain 
profession or given discipline (Hall 2016:59). From the above definition, it is deduced 
that training seeks to make those being trained more proficient at their work to ensure 
they function more effectively . For Ongori and Nzonzo (2011:187), training is th e 
process of upgrad ing employees’ knowledge and skills to improve performance 
markedly. From the preceding discussion, the study deduces that the implication of 
training is to upskill employees to make them more productive. Elnaga and Imran 
(2013:140) note that the activity of training is further an intervention that normally 
comes when there are indications that employees are not optimally performing, hence 
the need to impart certain skills on them. It is clear that training seeks to augment 
basic-level skills with more astute abilities that are usually job specific and related. 
Overall, the objective of training in a job context is to enable an individual to acquire 
abilities to perform adequately in a given task towards realising their full potential and
<<<PAGE=26>>>
17 
achieving set goals (Daily, Bishop & Massoud 2012:635). Thus, the purpose of training 
is to ensure that each employee meets the ir employer's necessary proficiency 
requirements. According to Diamantidis and  Chatzoglou (2014:152), training is th e 
process of u pgrading knowledge and skills, leading to attitude and behavioural 
changes, thereby improving performance. Furthermore, training seeks to transform 
individual behaviours related to job performance, carrying out tasks needed and , 
above all, achieving the en tity's objectives. For South African municipalities, training 
is skills development and improvement interventions that seek to make employees 
more productive and motivated in executing allocated tasks.  
This section presents essential concepts related to skills and employee productivity in 
organisations and public entities. From the comprehensive discussions, the research 
observes that skills development, training, education and knowledge acquisition are 
all equally critical activities, processes and interv entions that seek to make municipal 
employees more productive. From the discussions, it is clear that in most instances, 
the absence of skills requires that organisations intervene to ensure employees are 
capable of carrying out activities. In the end, skills development is an important aspect 
of organisational success for entities. The following section discusses the concept of 
employee performance in the context of the need for improved performance in South 
African municipalities. 
2.3 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
This section unpacks the conceptual meanings and implications (to municipalities) of 
employee performance. 
2.3.1 Performance as a concept 
In this study, skills development is linked to employee performance as it is central to 
the success of local government entities. Furthermore, the study notes that optimal 
public service delivery depends entirely on the ability of those tasked with service  
delivery to conduct their community development tasks. The researcher argues that 
the transformative agenda of local government is directly credited to the ability of 
employers and employees to perform optimally. The study discusses the definition and 
implications of this concept hereafter. Iskamto (2021:143) defines performance as the 
“result of the work of an employee in carrying out the tasks assigned to him in
<<<PAGE=27>>>
18 
accordance with his responsibilities and roles based on skills, experience, and 
sincerity as well as time accompanied by quality and quantity according to the rules 
laid down” (Iskamto 2021:143). Armstrong and Taylor (2020:136) note that as a 
concept performance “covers both what has been achieved and how it has been 
achieved”. Performance “has to  rely extensively on data -informed qualitative 
assessments of organisational capability or effectiveness in the pursuance of its set 
objectives” (Armstrong 2009:136). Vroom (1964) , cited in Armstrong and Taylor 
(2020:142), notes that “the effects of motivation on performance are dependent on the 
level of ability of the employee, and the relationship of ability to performance is 
dependent on the motivation of the employee.” It is noted that “Vroom also pioneered 
expectancy theory that, as developed by Porter  and Lawler in 1968, proposes that 
high individual performance depends on high motivation plus possession of the 
necessary skills and abilities and an appropriate role and understanding of that role” 
(Armstrong 2009:143). In the same vein, enhancing perfor mance refers to the 
deliberate act of increasing and augmenting the rate at which one delivers on their 
targets, that is, improving their output, quality, timeliness or quantity (Dobre 2013:55). 
Sandhya and Kumar (2011:1779) argue that the enhancement of performance can be 
through the upgrading of skills, improved rewards, training and development and 
human capital interventions related to improving employee loyalty. Thus, South African 
municipalities have to consistently and constantly strive to keep enhan cing their 
employees' performance by intervening towards improving their skill set. That kind of 
culture of performance enhancements can ensure that no resources and time are lost 
to low productivity and poor competencies amongst municipal employees and officials. 
Such a practice and virtue can improve the productivity of individuals, teams and the 
organisation.  
Warner (2016:4) defines productivity as “the ratio of output to input (units of output per 
units of input)”. In addition, “the goal of public entities is to ensure inputs do not exceed 
outputs, and there is quality assurance in production processes of public commodities” 
(Warner 2016:5). As a result, municipalities must generate more goods and services 
using fewer resources to be considered producti ve. This is an extremely important 
criterion because public resources are always finite. Bouckaert, Peters and Verhoest 
(2016:88) observe that “the delivery of goods and services by public entities is 
dependent mainly on government revenues that are ordinarily limited and must cater
<<<PAGE=28>>>
19 
for a whole load of demands for resources in the public sector.” The researcher argues 
that performance is a good nexus between employees' motivation and skill levels, to 
which municipalities must pay attention . This brings the study to describe employee 
performance, defined as follows. 
2.3.2 Employee performance 
Employee performance is central to using skills development as a municipal service 
delivery intervention. This section discusse s the meaning and implication s of 
employee performance. On the other hand, Hermina and Yosepha (2019:71) note that 
employee performance refers to, “the work quality and quantity achieved by an 
employee in carrying out his function in accordance with the responsibilities given to 
him.” Al Mehrzi and Singh (2016:835) posit that this definitional perspective brings 
aspects of work standards that are vital to successfully undertaking  work duties and 
responsibilities. In the municipal setting, these standards encompass the need to 
ensure public participation, people-centeredness and the selfless promotion of public 
interest. According to Brhane and Zewdie (2018:72) , the issue of employee 
performance is the total or aggregate output of individual employee s’ activities and 
actions in an organisation. Moreover, employee performance levels can be described 
as low, moderate and high. Low employee performance ratings in municipal settings 
can be equivalent to wasting resources and taxpayer money, in addition to being 
harmful to the delivery of public services. Employee performance in an organisation is 
often evaluated in light of an employee’s  contributions to accomplishing the 
organisation's goals.  
This section discusses the crucial aspect of employee performance, which  has been 
argued to be the ability of employees to perform and attain set or allocated tasks. 
Furthermore, the issues of capacity and competency are essential in employee 
performance. If these are deficient or absent, the intervention of skills training and 
development could be used to improve the performance of employees. The researcher 
argues that the aggregate individual performance is vital to the overall group, team, 
and organisational performance.
<<<PAGE=29>>>
20 
2.4 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR IMPROVED EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
This section discusses the nexus between skills development and improved employee 
performance in South African municipalities. In the 21st century, it is imperative to note 
that employee training and development in the public sector enhance job performance 
as guidance is provided i n the training session (Sun & Van Ryzin 2014:328). In their 
empirical study, Kanyane, Houston and Sausi (2013:136) write about the shortage of 
qualified staff to ensure services are delivered effectively. Therefore, upskilling, 
training, and development are corrective responses to transform the functioning of the 
modern public sector.  
Van der Walt, Thasi, Chipunza and Jonck (2016:176) note that, “the Republic of South 
Africa’s public service has been branded as having skills scarcity and deficiencies that 
can be traced to historical practices of racial segregation in human capital 
development practices.” The scarcity of critical skills in South African is a major socio-
economic challenge to the state and the various public entities (Bruwer  & Smith 
2018:50). In addressing these skills disparities, the post -1994 government enacted 
corresponding statutes. It  implemented policies promoting skills development as an 
intervention to promote the abilities and proficiencies of public servants. As confirmed 
in a study by Boadu, Dwomo-Fokuo, Boakye and Kwaning (2014:515), skills training 
is a critical step towards improving management training in organisations whilst 
concurrently departing from the subject -based training and focusing on developing 
critical skills. 
Skills development is not new in the South African public sector as it has been used 
over the years to provide demand-driven knowledge on sustainably enhancing public 
sector performance (Ramulumisi , Schultz & Jordaan 2015:531). As Curtis and 
McKenzie (2001:20) notes, training and development practices are regarded as an old 
concept that organisations have always used to improve the productivity capacity of 
their employees. Various legislative frameworks are in place to promote and maintain 
good human capital development practices as one of the basic values and principles 
guiding the South African public administration. In the local context, municipalities in 
South African must appreciate that “capacity development can assist to equip all local 
government officials with relevant and upgraded skills, knowledge and competencies 
required to perform their duties effectively in pursuit of a new vision and mission for
<<<PAGE=30>>>
21 
the public service” (Luthuli, Nyawo & Mashau 2019:122). Morethe, Swarts and Schultz 
(2020:2) note that upskilling and developing employees can help build a competitive 
advantage for the organisation while concurrently empowering and engaging 
employees in ways that can build good and consistent p erformances within the 
organisation. Ultimately, this research deduces that skills investment primarily benefits 
the organisation over the employees. The study also considers that there is a need for 
the skills development agenda to be emphasised in South African municipalities , 
especially to ensure that the leaders appreciate the need to improve employee 
competencies, capacity, ability and performance sustainably, as discussed below.  
• Lack of skills hampering employee performance:  
Principally, skills development shortfalls are a huge hindrance to achieving the 
developmental state economic growth rates. A World Economic Forum (WEF) Global 
Competitiveness Report (2019) , which ranks 141 c ountries on competitiveness, 
ranked South Africa number 72 regarding the quality of the workforce, 119 for quality 
of vocational skills and training, 102 for graduates’ skill sets, 126 for digital skills among 
the economically active population, and 98 for the ease of finding skilled people. In 
terms of the skills of the future workforce, South Africa is ranked 95 for critical thinking 
and 109 for the teacher-to-pupil ratio in primary education (WEF 2019). It is difficult to 
measure unemployment since there is disagreement over what constitutes skills. This 
dismal scenario represents the skills gap and how it affects local communities' 
provision of public goods and services. Therefore, it makes sense for local government 
agencies to aid in South Africa's skills transformation revolution. This bleak situation 
led Motala and Dieltiens (2010:104) to contend that “the conventional explanation of 
skills shortage in South Africa is biased and insufficient.”  
Several factors affect the conceptualisation and implementation of skills development 
policies. The major political factors include a lack of state capacity  and political will, 
poor administration, corruption, vested interests, and poor institutions (Saltman 
2016:13). Furthermore, cognate critical components include governance, funding, 
organisation, quality assurance and human resources to sustain the skills 
development. The researcher deduces that the negative impact of skills shortages, 
scarcity, and the associated issues impede the effective delivery of public goods and 
services in South Africa. Such happens through dwindling competencies of municipal
<<<PAGE=31>>>
22 
employees, poor abilities and attitudes to grasp emerging job demands , especially 
during the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) era, where globalisation has changed how 
public entities operate, and poor perceptions by organisations towards training. The 
study further regards this culture as detrimental to the transformation of post -1994 
communities and societies. 
• Skills development improving employee performance:  
This section discusses how skills development improves the execution of employees' 
duties and responsibilities in  South African municipalities. Maduka, Edwards 
Greenwood, Osborne and Babatunde (2018:698) state that employees are more likely 
to be productive and perform optimally when their competencies have been improved, 
hence enabling the attainment of set goals of any particular organisation or public 
entity. Mabe , Makamu and Juta (2018:718) strongly ar gue that skills training and 
development is a cardinally important tool used to enhance employees’ performance 
in every organisation , whether public or private. In addition, according to Sokoh 
(2019:9), a vital cog in employee skills development and traini ng is that of career 
development orientations that ensure that employees see themselves as valued and, 
hence, become more productive.  
Some leading examples of the policy thrust are discussed hereafter. According to 
Gleason’s (2018:113) study of Singapore’s developmental state polity, a key success 
factor for the state was a push towards establishing a knowledge -based society 
through skills development. Moreover, a study by Chenoy, Ghosh and Shukla 
(2019:113) on India’s push towards becoming a manufacturing  hub is anchored on 
deliberate ‘skill India’ and ‘ digital India’ policies. Essentially the skills component is 
focused on developing the right skills to address the growing demand skill s gap in 
various manufacturing sectors. South African municipalities ca n learn from these 
examples to solve their own skills predicaments.  
A solid link between community underdevelopment and skills has not been 
established. However, a study by Wallenborn (2009:553) in Tajikistan suggests that 
vocational education and training play a crucial role in poverty alleviation by producing 
more productive graduates, increasing incomes and improving products and services. 
This can be said to creat e a repository of skills for that country’s public service.
<<<PAGE=32>>>
23 
According to a study by Fleckenstein and Lee (2019:169) , South Korea’s success in 
reducing unemployment and delivering a developmental state was made possible by 
using robust industrial and skills development policies. However, their study notes that 
the successful model has shown ‘cracks’, resulting in labour market dualisation, over-
education and rising inequality. In support of this, a study by Ashton, Sung and Turbin 
(2010:24) on Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea indicates that government 
structures and institutions in education and training were entirely able to provide the 
industry with an endless  supply of skilled personnel that spurred economic 
development. Therefore, skills development positively impacts employee performance 
and hence must be sustained in the context of South African municipalities. 
• Strong institutions and structures supporting skills development:  
There are institutional arrangements that can lead to the effective use of skills 
development in public entities. Clayton, Jonas, Harding, Harris and Toze (2013:35) 
note that “these include the skills development facilitators who are well knowledgeable 
experts that organisations engage in the process of upskilling their employees”. Skills 
development facilitators have positively impacted South African public sector 
organisations by scanning the market for relevant skills and ensuring that 
organisations concentrate on adding skill sets to their human capital (Jonck & De 
Coning 2020:5). This comprises municipally based local governmental entities. Senior 
managers are the knowledgeable representatives inside a public entity, such as a 
municipality, who must establish and uphold an organisation -wide culture of skill 
development and excellent employee performance. T herefore, the primary priority of 
skills development in public organisations should be ensuring senior managers 
understand the importance of skills. This is because any subpar or unsuccessful 
employee performance inside the  organisation may be immediately attributed to the 
ineffectiveness of top managers' leadership and training efforts.  
Jonck and De Coning (2020:6) advise that organisations must have skills and abilities 
targets determined by the training committees tasked  with mapping out the training 
needs and advise management on the best strategies to ensure employee 
performance is continually augmented through on-the-job training. Training 
committees are critical to municipalities since they are institutionally and tec hnically 
mandated to address skills deficiencies and ensure that a skilled and competen t
<<<PAGE=33>>>
24 
human capital base is always present. Such a situation allows for the effective delivery 
of public goods and services (Jonck & De Coning 2020:6).  
The role of the officer sitting at the top echelons of the organograms in public entities 
must not be neglected in the arguments of this study. Executives and top management 
are the leaders responsible for the overall functioning of the entire organisation. These 
are top exec utives who must formulate skills development plans that meet all the 
departmental goals, visions and missions, moreover, they are tasked with making sure 
that skills development plans are carried out accordingly and that that the workplace 
skills plan is well implemented (Machika 2014:34). Hence, their strategies, resourcing, 
policymaking, and advisory roles are critical to the effective functioning of the entity. 
The entity's ability to function effectively depends on its tactics, res erves, and 
consultative functions. When acquiring skills for raising employee performance, 
institutional and other arrangements must speak with one voice. Municipalities in 
South Africa, which have had issues with performance, competencies, and overall 
service delivery, will benefit from such a mandate. 
• Compliance with legislation regarding employee performance:  
The skills development and employee performance agenda of post-1994 South Africa 
is rich with various robust statutes, policies and regulations that drive skills 
development. These include the White Paper on Human Resource Management in 
the Public Service (1997), the Skills Development Act (No. 97 of 1998), the Skills 
Development Levies Act (No. 9 of 1999) and the national skills development strategy 
(2001–2010). There is also the White Paper on Reconstruction and Development 
(1994), the Growth, Employment and Redistribution (1996) blueprint, the South African 
Qualifications Authority Act (No. 58 of 1995), White Paper on Public Service Training 
and Education (1998), and National Qualifications Framework Act (No. 67 of 2008). 
The list demonstrates how dedicated the South African government and policymakers 
are to putting education, skills, and competency at the centr e of the post -apartheid 
state's reform strategy. Nearly t hree decades after the beginning of democracy, the 
skills shortage is still a common tendency in public institutions, despite the robust legal 
and policy frameworks.  Thus, the study  asserts that it is necessary to investigate if 
municipalities comply with these standards. Education, skills development, and sound
<<<PAGE=34>>>
25 
career management practices are mentioned as part of the essential labour rights for 
all South Africans in the supreme legislation of the Republic. 
Foremost, there is a common trend of the absence of due compliance with the skills 
development and employees’ performance policy frameworks. According to Mokhethi 
and Oladele (2013:98), “public entities such as municipalities have been culpable in 
the lack of compliance with skills development frameworks.” This is sometimes blamed 
on the same scarcity of skills that affects the basic understanding of stipulations and 
how corresponding laws , policies and compliance measures can be adopted and 
implemented (Mphahlele & Zandamela 2021:159). Therefore, a less skilled officer will 
be tasked with building a reliable and capable skills and competency repository for a 
public entity. Thus, such a setup is a recipe for failure regarding skills development-
led consistent employee performance improvement . Furth ermore, “the political 
intersections of management and administration in public entities have seen the use 
of political deployment in the local government of officials based on affiliation rather 
than abilities and capabilities of skills” (Ndevu & Muller 2 017:16). These appointees 
are politicians who are sometimes elected representatives who at times suffer from a 
lack of expertise regarding employee and organisational performance.  
Matlala and Uwizeyimana (2020:2)  argue that t he regular audit reports of th e South 
African Auditor-General have laid  bare the issues of ever -recurring poor reports on 
municipalities with no skills development interventions to make sure that municipal 
financial management is improved. Therefore, despite its detrimental effects on 
employee performance and the provision of local government services, the abnormal 
skills shortage has become the standard in local government entities. According to this 
researcher, public organisations must carefully implement the legislative requirements 
for skills investment and the need to improve employee performance . Those caught 
falling behind must bear the consequences. 
• Weak understanding of human resources development plans:  
Lussier (2017:32) argues that, at times, the success or failure of skills  development 
interventions is hugely dependent on employees' abilities to comprehend what their 
entity's skills development plans seek to achieve and how they are part and parcel of 
that agenda. Therefore, “it is critical for an organisation to ensure that the employees
<<<PAGE=35>>>
26 
for the key stakeholders in their attainment of objectives is key and has a grasp of the 
human resources development (HRD) plans” (Lussier 2017:36). In this regard, this 
study considers that the success of any organisation or public entity's human resource 
development (HRD) strategies depends on the buy -in of its workforce. T raining 
committees, senior management, and executives of public organisations such as 
municipalities must constantly be aware of this crucial need for employee knowledge 
to build skills for increasing employee and organisational performance. For Wood and 
Wall (2007:1336), HRD is concerned with fully unleashing (individual) human capacity 
for individual and organisational success . Therefore, i t is considered that the 
improvement of employees’ performance must be viewed within the wider context of 
HRD, which is broader than conventional human resource management. One merit is 
that it values employee elements in the organisation's plans as a necessary tool for 
improving performance. Nonetheless, in the context of this study, municipal 
employees must be immersed in the HRD plans to be intimately involved in the 
continuous improvement agenda of learning public sector organisations. 
• Lack of departmental skills plans as a deterrent for employee 
performance:  
Malesa and Maleka (2021:801) state that for skills development for improved 
employee performance to bring the needed improvement, there are certain issues that 
public entities must always get right. These include having a skills development 
committee to develop training policies  aligned with legislation. Moreover, this 
committee should comprise external experts such as academics, labour and 
employees exposed to skills development (Malesa & Maleka 2021:801).  
• Limited stakeholder support on employee performance:  
The study further value s the perspective on the need for stakeholder support to 
develop employee skills for improved performance. These include the various 
hierarchical levels and officers within a public entity , such as senior management. 
Anand, Kothari and Kumar (2016:16) posit that , “there is also the fact of labour 
representatives such as trade unions and their roles in making sure that the skills 
development trajectories are improving the employee career progressi on.” This is 
firmly linked to the need for the motivation and meeting of individual career goals as a 
way of effectively building appropriate employee engagement and empowerment for
<<<PAGE=36>>>
27 
organisational success (Osborne & Hammoud 2017:61). This study argues that  the 
half-hearted dedication by various stakeholders has affected how employees can 
improve their performance. One can argue that the muted voices of trade unions on 
the skilling of employees in organisations, as a conduit to them earning more rewards 
and remuneration, is a cause of great concern (Anand et al. 2016:29).  
Furthermore, the South African Local Government Association (SALGA) has not done 
enough to  ensure that local government entities' skill s are sustainably improved 
(Kroukamp & Cloete 2018:75). The SALGA must ensure that its mandate and agenda 
also include the skill capacities and competencies of employees. Another stakeholder 
neglecting the active improvement of employees’ performance is the Sector Education 
and Training Authorities (SETAs). South Africa’s ability to tackle social challenges is 
contingent upon the extent to which SETAs and the government play a pivotal role in 
that process (Kidd 1980:3). SETAs “are responsible for the disbursement of training 
levies payable by all employers and  are required to develop and implement an 
appropriate skills development plan for their sector” (Turner et al.  2013:2). SETAs 
“were established by section 9(1) of the Skills Development Act (No. 97 of 1998) and 
came into operation from 1 April 2000” (Turne r et al. 2013:2). Additionally, “the Local 
Government Sector Education Training Authority (LGSETA) was created with the goal 
of promoting and coordinating skills development initiatives and strategic sectoral 
training interventions” (Yes Media 2021, cited in Vyas-Doorgapersad & Mothabi 
2022:365). 
2.5 MERITS OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
Various merits are linked to skills development for improved employee performance 
intervention or phenomenon. Firstly, as argued in various sections of this chapter, 
skills development  leads to more employee (in this case , municipal officials) 
motivation, empowerment and en gagement. By this, Osborne and Hammoud 
(2017:60) mean employees will feel more valued as major stakeholder s of their 
particular entity and therefore feel inherently motivated to be more productive. 
Secondly, “skilled employees will be more competent , and thus this can reduce the 
wastage of resources” (McKinnon, Flothmann, Hoberg & Busch 2017:74) since these 
employees will be well -acquainted with the need for economic effectiveness and 
efficiency in the delivery of services. Since resources drive public serv ice delivery,
<<<PAGE=37>>>
28 
reducing waste leads to quality production of public commodities and thus more value 
for money for the residents and citizens (McKinnon et al.  2017:77). Thirdly, skills 
development and skilled and highly performing employee contingents enable  the 
municipality to enjoy a good reputation amongst its valuable stakeholders (Bashir & 
Gani 2020:11). Fourthly, Butler (2017:49) notes that skills development helps the 
South African government, and state in general, by accelerating the post-1994 agenda 
that skills deficiencies have hampered . This implies that the challenges of poverty, 
inequality and poor living standards can be effectively resolved , and everyone , 
regardless of race or creed, can enjoy the fruits of independence. Fifthly, according to 
Eldor (2016:323), skilled and developed employees function optimally and, above all, 
achieve their own career goals while concurrently attaining the set goals of their public 
entity. Such an achievement is good because it attains the goals of the Constitution of 
the Republic of South Africa (1996) , which calls for promoting good career 
management practices. Overall , skills development for improved performance is a 
motivator, productivity enhancer and a goal -getting strategy that South African 
municipalities must always use. 
2.6 SUMMARY 
This chapter discussed th is study's conceptual framework, including  conceptualising 
terms and phrases such as skills, competency, skills development, education, 
knowledge and training. In these discussions, the researcher observe d that skills 
development is critical to an organisation such as the South African municipalities 
because it improves their abilities and attitudes towards pursuing employees’ personal 
career goals and the overall organisational objectives. With South Africa facing an 
acute shortage of critical skills needed for the effective delivery of services and the 
transformation of society post -apartheid, education, training , and skills development 
must be used fully to achieve the intended goals. The chapter further discussed some 
pertinent issues in the skills development for improved employee performance matrix, 
including skills shortage, the need for workplace skills plans and training committees. 
The merits of skills development were discussed in this chapter. The researcher thus 
underscored the need for South African municipalities to have the right attitudes, 
leadership, and institutional and resource arrangements that are adequate for effective 
employee skills development for good service delivery. The chapter realise d the
<<<PAGE=38>>>
29 
following research objective: To explain the conceptual frameworks of skills 
development and employee performance (see Chapter 1, Section 1.4).  
The next chapter covers theoretical, legal and policy frameworks.
<<<PAGE=39>>>
30 
CHAPTER THREE 
THEORETICAL, LEGISLATIVE, AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS OF 
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH AFRICAN MUNICIPALITIES 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Employee performance in local government is critical for eff ective service delivery. 
This is because employee productivity translates directly into public goods, services 
and processes, on which local government service delivery and community 
development are anchored. The purpose of this study is to assess the impact of skills 
development o n employee performance in South African municipalities. The first 
chapter of this dissertation provides the introduction and background as a synopsis of 
this study. Chapter 2 discusses the conceptual framework of skills development and 
employee performance. From these preceding chapters, it is understood that there is 
a need for skills development to be the core of employee -focused local government 
service delivery. In addition, the study establishe s the need for the various 
municipalities to entrench cultures of skills development in their governments as a way 
of transform ing public service delivery. This chapter  discusses the theoretical, 
institutional, policy and legal frameworks guiding skills development in the context of 
South African local government employee performance . This chapter is vital to this 
minor dissertation because it provides an equally important discussion of the policies 
and theoretical statements that inform skills development for improved local 
government service delivery. This chapter answers the research question: Which are 
the theoretical, legislative, and institutional frameworks regulating skills development 
in South African municipalities? (see Chapter 1, Section 1.3). 
3.2 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT  
Burkholder and Burbank (2019:15) describe a theory as an abstract idea on certain 
social phenomena used to prove or disprove a hypothesis or guide a deeper 
understanding of the phenomenon. Theories use assumptions to presume certain 
kinds of conditions that are considered to be operating within a certain realm and are 
commonly assumed to be true or false in those circumstances (Burkholder & Burbank 
2019:16). In the case of the current study, the theoretical framework aids in the 
understanding of skills development, and employees’ performance and service
<<<PAGE=40>>>
31 
delivery. Therefore, this study uses the human capital theory as the central theoretical 
framework to assess skills development for improved employee performance in South 
Africa’s local government.  
This chapter of the dissertation discusses human capital and looks at the human 
capital theory and its applicabil ity to th is study. This is because understanding the 
theory used in this study depends on the initial and overall understanding of the phrase 
‘human capital’. Drucker (1999), cited in Annett (2019:16) , states that human capital 
is increasingly considered the company’s most valuable asset. This implies that public 
and private organisations  must give special attention to this resource since it 
significantly affects attaining their predetermined goals. By conceptu alisation, Boon, 
Eckardt, Lepak and Boselie (2018:35) regard human capital as a phrase that refers to 
a blend of individual aptitudes such as knowledge, skills and capabilities of individuals 
that have economic value to an organisation. Kucharcikova (2011:65) argues that the 
scope of human capital incl udes the natural ability, innate and acquired skills, 
knowledge, attitudes, experience, talent, and inventiveness. These can further lead to 
an entity creating a good rapport with its stakeholders, creating a good reputation in 
the short, medium and long term.  
From a historical perspective, the theory of human capital was proposed by Schultz 
(1961) and developed by the Nobel Prize-winning economist Gary Becker in his 
seminal work on the economics of employer-provided training (published in 1962 and 
1964) (Becker 1964:15). The theory advocates for the use of education or training to 
effectively impart useful knowledge and skills to workers that in turn, increase their 
productivity and incomes (Becker 1964:15). Further to this, Gary Becker distinguishes 
between specific human capital and general human capital. Specific human capital 
includes expertise acquired through education and training which is specific to a 
particular firm (organisation -specific or context -specific skills) (Yarrow 2022:229). 
Context-specific skills include abilities that are job-specific and technical. Furthermore, 
Yarrow (2022:230) adds that general human capital (general skills), on the other hand, 
is knowledge gained through education and training which is valuable across the board 
(for instance reading and writing proficiencies). These are skills that municipalities and 
other public entities will need to ensure that their employees are productive. Their 
absence is detrimental to employee productivity. Therefore, Flabbi and Gatii (2018:8)
<<<PAGE=41>>>
32 
advise that organisations invest in capable human capital through processes such as 
education, training, and development. Hence, human capital must be viewed as an 
asset rather than a procedure, thus giving human resources an equally critical 
weighting in ranking organisational assets that drive the pursuance of goals. In the 
same vein, human capital includes both natural traits and those imparted through 
interventions such as organisational training and development to improve 
performance and productivit y (Boon et al. 2018:36). The researcher argues that 
natural traits have little impact compared to skills imparted through training and 
development. Furthermore, that human capital is an ever -critical resource for 
organisations, including municipalities in South African local government.  
Moreover, factors such as globalisation, technological change, market complexity and 
stiff market competition in all sectors of any economy have apportioned a relatively 
high premium on human capital development because it is a critical part of 
organisation’s efficacy in deliver ing on its mandate (Fugar , Ashiboe-Mensah and 
Adinyira, 2013:465). This implies that the value of human capital has increased, and 
its impact on entities’ successes or failures has been magnified compared to  
previously. With reference to the public sector, the emergence of new public 
management (NPM) practices , such as internal competition amongst public entities 
(Lapuente & Van de Walle 2020:468) , underscores this need for capa ble human 
capital to drive this competitive urge -seeking motive of entities such as local 
government entities. Further to the above, this internal competition focus has the 
potential to significantly improve the quality of goods and services that entities , such 
as municipalities, render to their communities (Lapuente & Van de Walle 2020:468). 
From the preceding , human capital is seen to anchor municipal or organisational 
success because it is the key factor that gives organisations  competitive advantages 
and an impetus to deliver services and transform lives within communities sustainably. 
The following section delves into the details of the human capital theory used in this 
study. 
According to Hartog and van den Brink (2007:23), the human capital theory succinctly 
argues, “how education enhances a person’s skill level and thereby his or her human 
capital, with a higher skill level in the workforce , increasing the production capacity.” 
Such production capacity is initially linked to the particular individual and refers to
<<<PAGE=42>>>
33 
organisational settings when seen as a collective. Hence organisations must improve 
their human capital capacity to reap the benefits of skills and abilities in the form of 
productive employees (Hartog & van den Brink 2007:25). A productive e mployee 
refers to an employee who can perform well in their job capacit y to produce quality 
public goods and services that satisfy the consumers, citizens or residents in the 
context of local government.  
It is also important to note that the focus on soft 4IR skills and the science, technology, 
engineering and maths (STEM) is a testament to the re -configuration of the human 
capital theory to erase the now obsolete argument of general education , leading to 
more productivity and earnings, as highlighted by Makgato (2019:1). A study by Mok 
and Qian (2018:346) show s how many higher education graduates in China find 
themselves unemployed, earning less and are less productive, referring to it as  the 
broken dream of the human capital theory. In the context of South Africa ’s local 
government, this researcher argues that the skilling, training and development agenda 
has also been confronted with the need to upgrade the skill sets timeously to ensure 
that employees acquire 4IR and 21 st century compliant skills. Th is study adopts and 
applies the human capital theory due to its strong assumption and success stories , 
where it has been used to explain motives behind education, training and skills 
development across the wor ld for almost a century. Therefore, the theory highlights 
the need to educate, train, and develop human capital that can be key to expanding 
the various local government policies and programmes towards sustainable 
community and social development. The crit icisms levelled across the theory are 
discussed hereafter. 
Despite its success stories and trajectory, the human capital theory has not been 
immune to criticism. Above all, the key assumption that the monetary return and 
productivity improvement will incre ase with the length of education has been 
challenged by empirical research over the past decades (Mok & Qian 2018:345). The 
research avers that the theory fails to consider the influence of the political or economic 
environment on these earnings , and other motives that are not monetary , as drivers 
of skills development. Similarly, Becker (1976:19) propound s that human capital 
theory is based on “the rational choice theory that suggests that individuals seek to 
maximise their own interests by making optimal decisions in the entire domains of their
<<<PAGE=43>>>
34 
lives”. However, “not all individuals will seek education to maximise their earnings or 
make it in a rational manner” (Tan 2014:425). Not all entities, practitioners and 
scholars who will bring emerging and current trends into the theorisation of human 
decisions, skills development, earning and organisational success will always rely on 
the human capital theory. The current study exemplifies a setting where the theory has 
been used to fruition. 
Discussed in this sect ion of the dissertation is the theoretical framework that the 
research used to theorise the study. From the deliberations in this section, the human 
capital theory was best suited to the current study of the relationship between 
individual skills acquisiti on and organisational success. The researcher thus 
understands that municipalities can use this theory to understand why human capital 
investments must always drive their service delivery models and practices. Over and 
above, employee performance is directly and intimately related to their human capital 
as denoted by abilities, knowledge, skills, aptitudes, proficiencie s and education. 
Therefore, skills development must be built from a human capital theory premise for 
the South African local sphere of government.  
3.3 LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORKS REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
The section discuss es the legal and regulatory fram eworks that inform skills 
development in the South African context. 
• Section 195(1)(h) of the Constitution of South Africa 1996:  
In Section 195(1)(h), the Constitution of South Africa stipulates that good human -
resource management and career -development pr actices, to maximise human 
potential, must be cultivated (Republic of South Africa (RSA) , 1996:101). In line with 
this, the study notes the impact and influence th is particular section has on the skills 
development practices within the Republic. Such include the skilling and development 
of municipal employees whose capacity is essential to public service delivery. 
Therefore, the fundamental values and principles governing public administration are 
vital to this study because good human resources and career development practices 
signal a collective and concerted effort to ensure employees are skilled and competent 
at all times to maximise their potential.
<<<PAGE=44>>>
35 
• South African Qualifications Authority Act, No. 58 of 1995:  
This is another key legal framework inform ing skills development and employee 
performance. According to Nel, Kirsten, Swanepoel, Erasmus and Poisat (2008:434), 
this Act was enacted because “there were numerous qualifications and training courses 
that were introduced in the market, and this makes it difficult for learners to evaluate 
which courses are relevant and which ones are irrelevant .” Furthermore, there was a 
great difficulty before the South African Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for all entities, 
private or public, to rate and determine the weighting of the qualification of existing and 
new employees (Parker & Walter 2008:73). In order to deal with this problem of 
evaluating the credibility of training courses, the SAQA was established (Parker & 
Walters, 2008:73). Principall y, the SAQA serves to control the quality of all 
qualifications that are introduced in the South African labour marketplace as well as 
promoting the quality of the qualifications and to ensure relevance and recognition of 
all qualifications that are offered by different institutions in South Africa (Kowo 2013:45). 
This study thus regards the SAQA Act as being at the core of ensuring quality skills 
and employee training and development initiatives and interventions for career 
progression and performance enhancement. This includes public entities such as the 
municipalities that comprise the local government in South Africa. 
• Skills Development Act, No. 97 of 1998:  
One piece of legislation intimately linked to skilled development and performance 
enhancement is the Skills Development Act (No. 97 of 1998). Naong (2009:115) cites 
that the aims of this Act (which are all skills development related) include inter alia, 
developing the skills of the South African workforce through the improvement of the 
quality of life  of workers and their productivity in the workplace for improved public 
service delivery. From another angle, the Skills Development Act ( No. 97 of 1998) 
provides for “an institutional framework to devise and implement strategies to develop 
and improve the skills of the South African workforce” (Davids & Esau 2012:89). Davids 
and Esau (2012:89) state that “this statute provides for the establishment of inter alia, 
a National Skills Authority (which serves to advise the Minister on policy and strategy); 
and Sector Education and Training Authorities (responsible for the development of 
sector skills plans within the national skills development strategy context) .” Lastly, the 
“Act comes into play through its creation of the National Skills Fund (to finance
<<<PAGE=45>>>
36 
meaningful skills and occupational competence), and the Skills Development Planning 
Unit and Labour Centres” (Kitching 2003, cited in Naong 2009:117). From the above , 
the researcher notes the Skills Development Act being the pillar onto which local 
government's skills development to enhance employee performance agenda rests . 
Moreover, this legal framework must be used as a starting point to design 
corresponding interventions by individual municipalities. 
• Skills Development Levies Act, No. 9 of 1999:  
The purpose of the Skills Development Levies Act (No. 9 of 1999) is to provide for the 
imposition of a skills development levy (RSA 1999). Hobo (2016:94) notes that “the Act 
was introduced to fully encourage employers to increase training expenditure that 
directly contribute to the skilling and development of the skills of their workforces .” 
Furthermore, “the Skills Development Levies Act aims to eradicate the problem of 
organisations which do not provide adequate training for its employees in general” 
(Swanepoel, Erasmus & Schenk 2008:39). This study, thus, commends arrangements 
by the South African government through this Act, because the developing of skills 
needs funds that are readily available for use by public entities like municipalities.  
• Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, No. 32 of 2000:  
According to the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act (2000), a municipality must 
develop its human resource capacity to a level that enables it to perform its functions 
and exercise its powers in an economical,  effective, efficient and accountable way 
(RSA 2000:16). For this purpose, municipalities must comply with the Skills 
Development Act (No. 97 of 1998) as well as the Skills Development Levies Act (No. 9 
of 1999). Therefore, a municipality which does not have the financial means to provide 
funds for training programmes in addition to the levy payable in terms of the Skills 
Development Levies Act ( No. 97 of 1999), may apply for such funding from the 
LGSETA established in terms of the Skills Development Act (1 998) (RSA 2000). This 
study notes that the South African local government must be in control of its own destiny 
regarding employee skills, capacity, training, and development. In this regard, this Act 
and its provisions for human resource development practices are crucial.
<<<PAGE=46>>>
37 
• National Qualifications Framework Act, No. 67 of 2008:  
Training and skills development that is devoid of standardised measures of skills is 
destined to cause confusion and problems, hence the necessity of the National 
Qualifications Framework (NQF) (RSA 2008). Overall, the motive of NQF Act ( No. 67 
of 2008) is to provide for the further development, organisation, and governance of the 
NQF, which are level of skills proficiencies in exit qualification offered in the local and 
foreign education systems (RSA 2008). The NQF Act covers qualifications offered by 
education institutions , skills development providers , and professional designations 
(RSA 2008:3). The Act further aims to smoothly facilitate access to, and mobility and 
progression within, education, training, and career paths; enhance the quality of 
education and training; and accelerate the redress of past unfair discrimination in 
education, training and employment opportunities (RSA 2008:6). The researcher 
argues that the  NQF Act brings harmony in the skills and training fraternity by 
categorising qualification into levels where certain proficiencies are certified to be 
bestowed on the holder of such certificates. For example, a PhD qualification is NQF 
Level 10. The NQF a lso aids if a skill is sourced from a foreign accredited authority , 
and the bearer of such skills wants to work in South Africa (Singh & Duvekot 2013:66). 
This can help municipalities to objectively design job positions, organograms , job 
advertisements, personnel specifications and other related hiring processes to attract 
the right skills sets for improved public service delivery. 
• White Paper on Human Resource Management in the Public Service 
(1997):  
This is one of the ground -breaking policy documents tha t emphasis ed training and 
development in the new South Africa. This policy document was meant to reinforce and 
operationalise the provisions of the Public Service Act, No. 103 of 1994, which was the 
key transformative statute that the government had enacte d in 1994 (RSA 1997:6). 
Another of its key agendas was to drastically change the way human capital was 
managed to catalyse the transformation of the public service itself (RSA 1997:6). Lastly, 
the policy was also anchored on the need to facilitate the deve lopment of human 
resource management practices that support an effective and efficient public service, 
geared for economic and social transformation (RSA 1997:6). According to Swanepoel 
et al. (2008:45), this one policy identified the skills shortage in th e majority of South 
African entities, making their skilling part of the transformative agenda of the post -
<<<PAGE=47>>>
38 
apartheid government. Municipalities were not spared the legacy of apartheid, some of 
which found themselves reeling from the acute skills scarcity, t hus the need to 
transform the public service from a human capital perspective.  
• White Paper on Public Service Training and Education 1998:  
The transformation agenda of the South African public would not be complete before 
the government put into motion a policy aligned with the training and education focal 
agenda (Ensor 2003:330). The goal of this White Paper was to give provision to public 
sector skills development that me ets the time and resource demands of the sector 
(Swanepoel et al. 2008:49). The goal  of this strategy was to establish a system of 
training and skill development for the public sector that was strategically linked to larger 
transformational, institutional, and human resource development processes. 
Furthermore, Ensor (2003:333) posits that the policy seeks to seamlessly link training 
and education to the NQF and SAQA frameworks and to the Department of Labour’s 
proposals for a new skills development strategy as well as promoting access by all 
individuals to meaningful training and education opportunities, including those from the 
previously disadvantaged groups. The legislative frameworks discussed above touch 
on the key and equally vital regulations of skills development in municipalities. The 
emphasis here is to ensure a learning culture of skills training and development. For 
South African municipalities, the challenge is not understanding the stipulations of 
these laws, but implement ing them, which is further affected by the scarcity of skills. 
Senior management services in the m unicipalities are short on the skills needed to 
operationalise the skills development agenda. This can lead to a continuous cycle of 
failure to address local government skills shortages. 
3.4 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS REGULATING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
This secti on presents  the institutional framework regulating skills development 
practices in South African local government. 
• National Skills Authority:  
The need for a holistic intervention regarding skills development in the public sector 
has seen the establishment of various institutional frameworks, such as the National 
Skills Authority. The National Skills Authority was created through Section 4 of the 
Skills Development Act of No. (97 of 1998), and it is critical to the skills development
<<<PAGE=48>>>
39 
agenda in public entities. For Van Dyk, Nel, Van Loedolff and Haasbroek  (2002:38), 
“the functions of the National Skills Authority are to always provide advice to the 
Minister of Labour on various issues relating to skills development in the Republic.” In 
addition, “the National Skills Authority further liaises with SETAs on the national skills 
development policy, national skills development strategy and report to the Minister of 
Labour on progress made in the implementation of the national skills development 
strategy as well as conducting cognate investigations arising out of the Skills 
Development Act ( No. 97 of 1998)” (Machika 2014:24). Therefore, this research 
regards this institutional body as being cardinally crucial to the skills development of 
municipalities because of its various important roles, as argued above. 
• Sector Education and Training Authorities:  
SETAs are responsible for the disbursement of training levies payable by all employers 
and are required to develop and implement an appropriate skills development plan for 
their sector (Turner et al. 2013:2). SETAs were established by section 9(1) of the Skills 
Development Act (No. 97 of 1998) and came into operation from 1 April 2000 (Turner 
et al. 2013:2). Municipalities are under the jurisdiction of the Local Government Sector 
Education and Training Authority (LGSETA) , which has not done enough to ensure 
that municipalities develop the ir employees’  skills and abilities. The LGSETA’s 
objectives include the creation of an entity that is central to the success of enhanced 
skills development strategies and the development of local government and the overall 
social and economic upliftment of local communities through the delivery of basic 
services ( Vyas-Doorgapersad & Mothabi 2022:366). The continued absence of 
competent human capital in South African municipalities is a sign that the 
effectiveness of the LGSETA has been affected by the broader human capacity 
challenges that affect the country at a national level (Peter s & Van Niewuwenhuyzen 
2012:291). Therefore, this researcher infers that because of the poor service delivery 
across local government in South Africa, less productive employees and poor -
performing municipal employees , the LGSETA has not effectively ensured  that 
competent employees serve in municipalities.  
• South African Local Government Association:  
Another institutional body in the skills development matrix is the South African Local 
Government Association (SALGA). Rogerson and Rogerson (2012:51) state th at the
<<<PAGE=49>>>
40 
SALGA is tasked with implementing “capacity building programmes to make municipal 
councillors and officials competent as well as reviewing and implementation of capacity 
building programmes in collaboration with inter alia  the LGSETA and the Nationa l 
Treasury”. This includes “skills development and training on local economic 
development, financial management, lobbying and advocacy all of which are vital for 
effective human capital for improved service delivery in local government” (Rogerson 
& Rogerson 2012:52). Despite these aims and mandates, the SALGA has not been 
effective in delivering on these. Therefore, the SALGA has not done enough to ensure 
that local government entities' skill s are sustainably improved (Kroukamp  & Cloete 
2018:75). The researcher argues that the SALGA must ensure its mandate and agenda 
also include the skill capacities and competencies of employees. From the look of 
things, this is one of the most significant and potentially game-changing bodies, which, 
if used well, can transform local government skills training and development in tandem 
with municipal service delivery across the entire Republic. 
This section discusses  the institutional arrangements for skills development in local 
government. From these discussions, the researcher notes that these are significant 
and vital arrangements that seek to equip local government with the relevant 
competent skills for effective service delivery. From the National Skills Authority, the 
SALGA to the LGSETA, the study notes the anomalies between mandates and actual 
practice that is far from pleasing in the context of the South African local sphere of 
government. These gaps in implementing these institutional bodies' objectives are 
cause for concern because muni cipalities are the ‘grassroots government’ and must 
always be  equipped with competent human capital. In the end, the individual 
municipalities must use these institutional arrangements to improve the skills 
development interventions they currently use to upskill their employees. 
3.5 SUMMARY 
The theoretical, institutional and policy frameworks for skills development in the 
context of employee performance in local government were discussed in detail in this 
chapter. The human capital theory was presented as the theory of this study due to its 
many arguments that skills development has individual and entity-based motivations. 
Furthermore, the chapter argue d that the theory has been criticised but remains 
applicable to this study because human capital skills ate at  the centre of improved
<<<PAGE=50>>>
41 
productivity that benefits both the employees and their municipalities (in the case of 
the current study). This chapter a lso presented the statutory and policy framework s 
for skills development . I t was ascertained that the legal framework for skills 
development in South Africa n local government is comprehensive. It is only their 
compliance and implementation that are deficient. Also discussed was the institutional 
framework for local government skills development, including  the National Skills 
Authority. The chapter  realised the research objective: To discuss the theoretical, 
legislative, and institutional frameworks regulating skills development in South African 
municipalities (see Chapter 1, Section 1.4).  
The next chapter explores the various skills development challenges affecting 
employee performance in South African municipalities.
<<<PAGE=51>>>
42 
CHAPTER FOUR 
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AFFECTING EMPLOYEE 
PERFORMANCE IN SOUTH AFRICAN MUNICIPALITIES 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
This study explores skills development as an intervention for employee performance 
in the South African local sphere of government. This is because many municipalities 
struggle to fulfil their service delivery obligations because of the scarcity, absence, and 
dearth of the requisite skills. This chapter discusses, among other things, the various 
municipal employees’ skills development interventions and initiatives used by South 
African municipalities and the skills development implementation gaps found in local 
government. The essence of th is chapter is to expose the gravity of the skills 
development and various employee performance challenges of South African  
municipalities. This chapter answers the research questions: What are the causes and 
implications of skills shortage on employee performance in South African 
municipalities? Which are the challenges affecting the efficacy of existing skills 
development initiatives and programmes in South African municipalities? Which 
strategies can be adopted and implemented towards an effective skills developm ent 
practice in South African municipalities to improve employee performance? (see 
Chapter 1, Section 1.3). 
4.2 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES IN SOUTH AFRICAN 
MUNICIPALITIES 
South Africa has struggled with critical skills for its local government transform ation 
agenda (Madzivhandila & Musara 2020:262). This scarcity of critical skills in 
municipalities can be traced back to the state -sanctioned discrimination under 
apartheid, where different standards of education and service delivery were provided 
to black people in South Africa (Davis & Esau 2012:83). In the same vein, Mohlala, 
Phago and Mpehle (2014:217) expand on the preceding by arguing that, transforming 
municipal management training and development is an important aspect in 
government, as municipal ma nagement is statutorily mandated to ensure 
improvement of basic service delivery in the local tier of the South African government. 
Nonetheless, municipalities are failing to achieve this clear mandate because of 
various factors. Chief to these inhibitors is what Nengwekhulu (2009), cited in Mohlala
<<<PAGE=52>>>
43 
et al. (2014:218), notes as a shortage of quality skills that direct ly and detrimentally 
impact, among other things, the managerial capacity in municipalities.  
Davids and Esau (2012:86) advise that, in South Africa, local government entities are 
not only anticipated to establish and transform institutions, but they must 
simultaneously invest in human capital in the wake of the various obstacles confronting 
municipalities and service delivery today. Thakhathi and Kanyane (2019:53) bemoan 
the enormous investment that municipalities put into skills development for limited 
returns on that investment, which leaves municipalities and other public entities facing 
the same chal lenges of poor employee performance or productivity as before. The 
researcher argues that such a lack of transformation frustrat es local government 
service delivery, which is the site of grassroots development in South Africa.  
It is important to note that a municipality must always thrive to ensure that there is the 
attainment of universal minimum living standards through putting in place all needed 
apparatus for effective local community development (Nkhabu 2021:17). These 
apparatuses include capable and competent human capital. Therefore, it can be 
claimed that the incapacity of South African towns to increase personnel development 
and training as a means of improving resident outcomes is an indication of poor local 
government. Shah (2005:49) further argues that the public service orientation of local 
government must be visible, and municipalities must ensure that the y promote public 
interest over individual interests. Further to the above, “municipalities must promote 
public value, which refers to measura ble improvements in social outcomes or quality 
of life” (Moore 1996:25). 
4.2.1 Influences of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) 
Chu, Reynolds, Tavares, Notari and Lee (2021:8) note that the 4IR era requires skills 
development interventions that , unlike any other period that preceded the 
contemporary one, are characterised by the ever -growing influence of technologies. 
According to Tschang and Almirall (2021:647), in the current environment of entities 
both private and public, automation has increasingly taken over the place of the human 
workforce in tasks that involve routine cognitive and manual input . Therefore, 
municipalities that fail to acknowledge that the need for soft skills is critical for this 
dynamic world are more likely to fail in delivering  on their local government service
<<<PAGE=53>>>
44 
delivery mandates. Additionally, So nmez (2015:56) construes that, due to these 
demands and changes for municipalities, the labour force is now hiring people for jobs 
that require more analytical thinking, digital skills, and sophisticated communication 
skills, something that is very different from the times before the emergence of the 4IR. 
According to the Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2007:15), in the 21 st century 4IR 
local government system, entities must impart skills l inking to the broader world 
challenges that communities face together with the capacity to negotiate the 
complexities inherent in the contemporary knowledge-driven-economy. South African 
municipalities must move with the times and ensure that they appreciate current trends 
in skills development and focal areas for employee training for improved municipal 
performance. According to Trilling and Fadel (2009:74), the 4IR skills that local 
government entities must consider are three key knowledge domains: innovative and 
critical thinking, information and digital literacies, and life and career skills. Hence, the 
South African municipalities falling behind by not taking advantage of the many soft 
skills that can improve their service delivery need to embrac e these and improve the 
efficacy of their training and development intervention s for improved community 
development. 
Heymans (2006:83) note s that South Africa ’s ambitious local government reform 
programme (which includes employee performance improvement through training and 
development) requires ambitious management, but more than that, it demands skills.  
Unfortunately, South Africa’s local government transformation agenda has been 
affected by the absence of dedicated management capacity to sequence , plan, 
introduce and drive employee training and capacity building, thereby exposing 
municipalities to the problem of public or municipal service delivery failure (Heymans 
2006:82). According to Mbandlwa, Dorasamy and Fagbadebo (2020:1647) , the 
Msunduzi Municipal ity is one of the local government entities affected by the 
challenges of poor skills in the leadership, i.e. the top management. This is a local 
municipality where funds are being misspent, the skills development of municipal 
employees is not prioritised, and the service delivery is generally  poor (Mbandlwa et 
al. 2020:1647). Therefore, this points to the patterns of local entities who deliberately 
flout procedures and get away with poor employee performance and overall slow 
community development. This cha llenge is also rampant in other local government 
entities, a sign that skills development is not embraced and robustly implemented.
<<<PAGE=54>>>
45 
In the end, the transformation agenda of the post -1994 government becomes stifled 
by the absence of good leadership and man agement skills to promote and intensify 
the service delivery agenda  effectively (Masuku & Jili 2019:1936). Arguably, this 
agenda requires a n ‘all hands -on deck’ approach through synchronised short -, 
medium- and long -term approach es to local government and public service skills 
development (Masuku & Jili 2019:1940). The researcher argues that the issue of ready 
and capacitated leadership for employee skills development in the local government 
tier is a major issue hugely determinant on municipalities' abilities to equip the requisite 
skills for service delivery within living standards . These services include water, 
sanitation, infrastructure, safety and other community amenities. 
4.2.2 Status of local government employee performance 
This section discusses t he sad reality of South Africa n municipal performance. 
According to damning assessments from the Auditor General of South Africa (AGSA), 
a financial watchdog monitoring public entity compliance and performance, local 
government entities lack the  necessary capabilities . This section mentions several 
studies and their damning findings regarding the municipality's performance. For 
example, in the case of the Msunduzi Municipality in the KwaZulu-Natal Province, the 
AGSA established that during the 20 16/2017 financial year, the entity incurred 
irregular expenditure, cumulatively R150 million and R11 million in unproductive and 
wasteful expenditure (Mbandlwa et al.  2020:1650). These humongous figures show 
losses to the public in South African local gove rnment. This study finds this to be 
absurd and a consequence of poor skill sets in those who make key decisions , and 
their commitment to skills training is also questionable. This poor decision poorly 
impacts the municipality’s financial condition. Still , within the poor leadership and 
decision-making, the Msunduzi Municipality had fraudulently awarded tenders to 
service providers  (amongst them, directors and shareholders) who were in the 
municipality's service, something that the AGSA indicated to be a flagrant disregard of 
local government laws and guidelines. 
Moreover, the 2019/2020 Consolidated Local Government Audit Report by the AGSA 
laid bare the challenges caused by the absence of a skills development  culture in 
municipalities, such as the Amathole District Municipality (ADM) in the Eastern Cape 
Province of South Africa. These have mainly been manifested in the financial
<<<PAGE=55>>>
46 
management practices deemed poor by the AGSA (AGSA 2019/2020). Poor municipal 
financial management affect s effective public service delivery. Regarding the ADM, 
outstanding creditors represented one-third of the next year’s budget of R1.6 billion, 
which will now be used to pay creditors instead of funding new service delivery 
priorities (AGSA 2019/2020). In addition, the financial health of the ADM came into the 
spotlight in the AGSA report for the 2019/20 financial year, which states that the ADM 
was unable to recover money from consumers for services rendered , which  
compounded these financial difficulties and resulted in delays in paying their creditors 
(AGSA 2019/2020:70). The AGSA report (2019/2020:115) indicates that the absence 
of robust employee skills development practices in South African municipalities leads 
to them incurring fruitless expenditure and failing to curtail lavish expenditure that left 
their financial books in the red. Moreover, the Amathole District Municipality is one of 
the municipalities that the AGSA has caught wanting in many of the performa nce 
shortcomings in the audit report . It is a sign that good governance, effectiveness, 
efficacy and economy are not being exercised with the due diligence they deserve. A 
superficial perusal of the AGSA’s municipal audit outcomes and recommendations for 
the 2017/2018 and 2019/2020 financial years, one may perceive that the majority of 
municipalities in South Africa are operating without established workplace skills plans. 
A study by Matlala and Uwizeyimana (2020:2) shows that slightly above 299 of the 
338 municipalities audited in the 2012/2013 financial year were not awarded clean 
audit outcomes due to findings around their predetermined objectives by the ASGA. 
Matlala (2018:66) further observes that these outcomes were chiefly because of the 
anomalies related to non-compliance with the Public Financial Management Act (No. 
1 of 1999) requirements, whereas, for the 2014/2015 local government report by the 
ASGA, a major finding was that the financial health of 92% of South Africa’s 278 
municipalities remained troubling and needed to be rectified. Such a large percentage 
is worrisome for South African local government, which is the core of community 
development and post-1994 transformation. A study by Mamokhere (2019:376) shows 
that in 2014 the Greater Tzaneen Local Municipality awarded a company an R38 
million road-surfacing tender without following due process for the tender as stipulated 
in municipal statutes, procedures and policies. This further proves that employee skills, 
especially in financial management , are deficient in South African local government. 
Matlala and Uwizeyimana (2020:8) further note that the AGSA (2017/2018:25) showed
<<<PAGE=56>>>
47 
that “local government regular expenditure rose to R28.4 billion in the 2016/2017 
financial year in contrast to R16.2 billion the previous year, showing an enormous 75% 
rise.”  
In addition to the preceding, the same AGSA report states that out of the 257 
municipalities audited for the 2017/2018 financial year, a paltry 18 received clean 
audits, showing a deterioration from the 33 municipalities that had received a clean 
audit in the preceding financial year (Matlala & Uwizeyimana 2 020:8). Geldenhuys 
(2019:19) notes that another shocking example of poor municipal performance and  
decision refers to the wasteful and fraudulent R208 million payment by the eThekwini 
Municipality mayor to service providers for services that were never del ivered. This 
study argues that these instances show gross negligence and a disregard for local 
government regulations, a sign of the lack of skills for municipalities to make good 
decisions. It should be  further stresse d that the outgoing synopsis of the v arious 
auditors general  reveals that local government malpractice is indicative of a tier of 
government that is in ‘dire straits’ when it comes to championing community 
development and transformation. This raises the need for robust adoption and 
implementation of comprehensive employee training and skills development 
programmes or initiatives as helpful interventions for effective local government 
service delivery.  
Additionally, the recorded wastage of public funds is worrisome since these are 
resources that could have been used to deliver essential and critical public goods and 
services to the people of South Africa. As discussed above, the 2017/2018 financial 
year saw the overall performance of municipalities rapidly decline. In the 2020/2021 
and 2021/2022 financial years, this researcher argues that audit outcomes might be 
worse, especially considering how the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted 
service delivery and the administration of municipal entities in South Africa. This 
situation gives birth to another exponentially rising challenge in local government, that 
of public service delivery protests. 
According to Mpehle  (2012), service delivery protests are the only avenue citizens 
have to register their displeasure with their government entities. This is due to the fact 
that millions of residents in post-apartheid South Africa live under appalling conditions 
and do not enjoy the fruits of democracy . T he chosen few alone enjoy it through
<<<PAGE=57>>>
48 
corruption, nepotism and fraud , among others. Therefore, the constitutional right to 
protect must be exercised to ring the alarm on the municipal governments (Mphele 
2012:224). These prot ests sometime s turn violent and lead to the loss of public 
infrastructure or even  lives. According to  Singh (2019:2) , the gross damage to 
municipal infrastructure during a 2019 public service delivery protest  in eThekwini 
Municipality cost the municipality R3.5 million. In addition, “the death of Andries Tatane 
in Ficksburg in the Free State Province during a service delivery protects is one of the 
extreme and possible results of violent service delivery protests in South African local 
government” (Matebesi 2018:249). Th is ugly side of the public service delivery 
protests could be curtailed through the capacitation of municipal employees and the 
effective, efficient and economic rendering of municipal services. 
The ongoing bad administration demonstrates these interventions' failure , which 
makes the connection between public service demonstrations and the municipality's 
training and development of the failed employees' skills inescapably visible. Most 
importantly, the local level of government is the best place to lead the way toward 
addressing the backlogs in public service d elivery that have caused broad areas to 
wallow in poverty, misery, unemployment, and inequality nearly three decades after 
the end of apartheid. The reasons and discussion on the lack of alignment between 
municipal employees’ skill sets and the demands of the 4IR demonstrate the necessity 
for efficient solutions to these anomalies. A ccording to this researcher, all 
municipalities in South Africa  need to make sure they devote all available resources 
to activities that promote efficient local governance throu gh skill development. The 
audit opinions from the AGSA and other local government overseers can be 
strengthened significantly through rigorous skill development and local government 
employee capacity and competency growth. South African towns are currently wasting 
billions in public funding due to ineffective leadership a nd inadequate personnel 
management methods. Skills development can assist in stopping  this waste  of 
resources. 
4.3 EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES IN MUNICIPALITIES 
Zannazi (2017:218) notes that a highly skilled human capital base is mostly considered 
a fundamental pillar for competitiveness and a critical catalyst for both short-term and 
long-term national development. Since 1994, one of the most prominent concerns for
<<<PAGE=58>>>
49 
South Africa has been reducing unemployment, increasing employee productivity, and 
building a robust human capital base. Persistent poverty and inequality, combined with 
unemployment, provide significant obstacles to social development in South Africa and 
pose a risk to achieving the goals of the National Development Plan (NDP) Vision 
2030. These issues are closely related. Primarily, insufficient skill development is a 
significant barrier to obtaining progressive state economic growth rates. The World 
Economic Forum (WEF) Glob al Competitiveness Report (2019) , which ranks 141 
countries in terms of skills competitiveness , ranked South Africa at number 72 
regarding the quality of its workforce, 119 for quality of vocational skills and training, 
102 for skill sets of graduates, 126  for digital skills among the economically active 
population, and 98 for the ease of finding skilled people. South Africa’s skills scarcity 
is a major impediment to attaining the NDP’s targets : 6 per  cent annual national 
economic growth and ending poverty, unemployment, and inequality (Erasmus & 
Breier 2009:10).  
The NDP is fixed on resolving the three ills that have long bewildered the government 
and society: unemployment, poverty, and inequality. Acc ording to Naidoo and Mare 
(2015:410), implementing the NDP requires well -coordinated multi -sectoral 
cooperation to transform South Africa and avoid falling into the same traps of its 
predecessors, such as the reconstruction and development programme. The N DP, 
therefore, stands a better chance of addressing the existing challenge of 
unemployment, which confronted the post -apartheid government (Naidoo & Mare 
2015:419). Hence, employees’ skills development for local government is quite 
pertinent to the current  socio-economic development agenda of South Africa as a 
democratic developmental state. 
4.3.1 Top and middle-level management-related challenges 
This section unpacks various top (leadership) management, legal, human resources 
and organising challenges in detail. Mbandlwa et al. (2020:1650) argue that, in South 
African local government, especially at the top echelons of municipalities, there is an 
additional obstacle of managers and those tasked with managing budgets, committing 
fraud and corruption, where funds (and resources) meant for employee training and 
development are lost to personal aggrandisement. This challenge of embezzlement is 
one indicator of the unethical and unprofessional leadership rampant in municipalities,
<<<PAGE=59>>>
50 
which requires robust interventi ons and willingness from all local government 
stakeholders to abate (Mbandlwa et al. 2020:1651).  
This study further underscores the rampant nature of this inadequacy, such that the 
municipality's scarcity of ethical, financial management and professional skills have 
stifled the effectiveness of training and development,  thus affecting community 
development. Moreover, there is also a challenge at the top and middle level of 
organisations in the local government sector of South Africa that manifests itself in the 
absence of monitoring and evaluation of the whole process of Workplace Skills Plans 
and Annual Training Reports (Davids , Houston , Steyn -Kotze, Sausi, Betancourt, 
Pienaar, Kanyane, Viljoen, Ngqwala,  Mchunu and Fokou 2022:40). This implies that 
the absence of monitoring and evaluation of these critical tools for employees’ skills 
development in municipalities leads to poor management and the inability of the 
entities to intervene and implement remedial actions in cases where plans deviate 
from the original plan. According to Osei -Tutu (2007:35) , the municipal and 
employees’ performance challenges that are related to productivity include inter alia, 
human resource training consultants and line managers who are not always aligned 
on the apprec iation of the challenges municipalities face . Therefore, “this quagmire 
creates a tricky scenario in municipalities, which at times results in generalised training 
interventions that are not in touch with the reality on the ground” (Durst, Lindvall & 
Bruns 2018:726). This argument , therefore, calls for municipal training stakeholders 
to know the goals of employee training to avoid the distortion of this intervention (Durst 
et al. 2018:728). There is also an obstacle in the form of poor allocation of trainin g 
budgets, which results in funding matters not linked to the key performance indicators 
and the municipality’s goals (Osei-Tutu 2007:35). Therefore, the gloss over of training 
that is not linked to key results areas of employees , considerably impedes  local 
government’s effective functioning. 
Regarding the previously described issue, it appears that South African municipalities' 
workplace skills plans (WSPs) are not routinely thoroughly examined to verify 
compliance with the municipalities' strategic needs, and training is not tailored to suit 
those needs. This statement is substantiated by Alshammari (2020:719), who argues 
that the glaring lack of such training and development reviews affects the ability of 
public entities to continuously im prove their practices for the inclusion of emerging
<<<PAGE=60>>>
51 
trends in the human capital development matrix. Other obstacles that Osei -Tutu 
(2007:34) identifies include training not being monitored to ensure that it is effective 
and markedly adds value to the learn ers (employees) and the municipality. The 
importance of monitoring cannot be understated to public entities because employee 
training also suffers from the absence of effective partnership of all stakeholders in the 
training endeavour (that is, Line Manage rs, Human Capital Consultants, Training 
Providers and Trainees) , leads to ineffective training being provided (Wisetsri 
2022:21). In other words, a municipality can train and develop its human capital on its 
own, but it needs expertise and partnerships to adequately impart the precise and 
necessary skills to its human capital.  Fookes (1996:24) characterises monitoring as 
the collection of data and analysis used to provide and report information and the 
provision of feedback and review.  
Dlamini and Migiro ( 2016:377) note that it is widely accepted that monitoring serves 
as a crucial management tool, as its smooth and effective operationalisation improves 
managerial functions. Its effectiveness and efficiency play a crucial management role 
that contributes immensely towards developmental programmes. Furthermore, Kusek 
and Rist (2004:19) argue that monitoring is crucial to managerial tracking, is not limited 
to management's achievements and organisations at large, and ensures that further 
checks and results are met and that resources are channelled in the right direction . 
Therefore, the absence of monitoring training processes is a significant obstacle to the 
ability of South African local government municipalities to improve the performance of 
their employees. Thus, there is a need to ensure that the design, adoption, execution 
and all other aspects of employee training and development interventions set the 
foundation for monitoring and evaluation for improved accountability and goal 
attainment. 
4.3.2 Operational management-level employee performance challenges 
Additionally, there is low morale in the operational echelons of South African local 
government municipalities (Makapela & Mtshelwane 2021:4). The ability of shop floor 
employees to freely contribute to the workplace skills plans (WSPs) by providing their 
personal information as a crucial component in creating effective training or 
comprehensive WSP for a specific municipal ity is inexorably impacted by such a 
situation.
<<<PAGE=61>>>
52 
A study by Luthuli et al. (2019) indicate s that employees in the Umzumbe Local 
Municipality said that the implemented training and development interventions were 
never aligned with its WSP but rather a mere compliance measure by the municipal 
entity. Further to the above arguments, the study by Luthuli et al. (2019) shows that 
local government employee training programmes did not align  with essential 
development tools such as the integrated development plan and the municipal service 
delivery budget plan, an anomaly that dented their efficacy.  
The challenges discussed in this section of this chapter are indicative of a municipality 
whose employees are likely to be less skilled, have low morale, are demotivated and 
are unable to achieve their personal and municipal service delivery goals. The study 
deduces that the training and development of employees in the local sphere of 
government are significantly affected by some operational aspects, making it difficult 
for those responsible to give input, take part or even effectively use feedback f rom 
their performance. This affects the efficacy of training a nd the interventions that are  
unable to resolve the challenges they target. Similarly, this affects the morale of lower-
level employees who feel short-changed and undervalued in the process. 
4.3.3 Technology-related employee performance challenges 
The development of employees in local government has many difficulties in terms of 
technology. The term technology for Enwereji and Uwizeyimana (2019:13579) means 
the scientific application of machinery and other devices to the work process in order 
to achieve the purpose of an organisation . These include the information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) that have beco me part of the 4IR. There is a 
challenge of a lack of capacity in local government related to technological skills. This 
researcher understands that professionals are the kinds of employees equipped with 
the soft skills needed for the modern 4IR local government entities. In addition to the 
above technical abilities, there is the challenge of the absence of, among other things, 
the technical expertise to adopt and implement intelligent solutions to municipal 
service delivery problems , such as innovative public service interventions. South 
African municipalities fail to refocus their employees ’ training and development 
programmes on the technical abilities that have become mandatory.
<<<PAGE=62>>>
53 
4.3.4 Finance-related employee performance challenges 
This challenge is t wo-pronged, that is, in terms of the financing model of municipal 
skills development and the skills capacities of municipalities to manage these finances. 
Skills development in South African municipalities is affected by funding cycles , 
primarily from the dis cretionary grant. This is a municipal skills development grant 
through the Skills Development Levies Act ( No. 9 of 1999), provided to deserving 
municipalities to enhance their skills development pool of funds (Telukdarie , 
Munsamy, Mohlala, Monnapula and Viswanathan, 2022:661). Specifically, the various 
determinant factors and process of discretion and disbursement of this grant make 
municipalities wait much longer (usually three to four years ) to receive funds (Beyers 
2016:170). Moreover, in some instances (and often), this skills development grant will 
be too meagre to cater to the municipality's employee training and development needs, 
thereby leading to the underfunding of training and development (Beyers 2016:170). 
This is in synchrony wi th what Shah (2005:72) identifies as an obstacle to the 
effectiveness of local government service delivery.  
Organisational effectiveness in the local government system in South Africa is 
negatively impacted by decisions often directed by a bureaucratic ag enda, and 
citizens’ inputs are limited ; hence this has an effect of constraining the potential for 
local government responsiveness to the needs and circumstances of their local 
communities (Shah 2005:72). There is voluminous evidence to the negative impact of 
centralised decision-making (when it comes to discretionary municipal funding), which 
has thus inhibited the ability of South African municipalities to get critical funding for 
training and development initiatives. Another dimension of this theme of ch allenges 
relates to the absence of skills in municipalities to manage the funds they are 
supposed to spend on behalf of their residents or constituents.  
From the AGSA reports argued earlier in this chapter, this researcher makes a solid 
observation that m unicipalities have a shortage of human capital that is able to 
manage public funds. This includes the ability to prioritise service delivery and comply 
with laws such as the Public Finance Management Act ( No. 1 or 1999), the Local 
Government: Municipal Fin ance Management Act ( No. 56 of 2003) and other 
regulations for sustainable financial management in South African municipalities. Van 
der Waldt et al. (2018:6) aver that, because of the critical importance of financial
<<<PAGE=63>>>
54 
management skills to local government, this is one skill that all planning and workplace 
skills intervention must prioritise. In the end, poor financial management affect s how 
economics, effectiveness and efficiency are applied to public sector finances. In the 
design and execution of the WSPs , and auditing municipal skills, this researcher 
advocates for the urgent prioritisation of municipal financial management human 
capital capacitation. 
4.3.5 Planning premised employee performance challenges 
Steiss (2019:50) describes planning as the act or  process of making plans for 
something. It is important to discuss the planning context of employee skills 
development in South African municipalities. First, these relate to the most vital local 
government skills development matrix institution , the LGSETA . In enabling skills 
development, the LGSETA has the responsibility of ensuring that all municipalities 
have the requisite sector skills plans and that these are fully as well as judiciously 
implemented within the terms of the local government legislative framework (Thakhathi 
& Kanyane, 2019:53). Furthermore, the LGSETA is solely reliant on all municipalities 
to develop and submit their Workplace Skills Plans [WSP] and their Annual Training 
Reports [ATR] in order to provide credible information on what kind s of skill are 
available, and which skills are needed in the sector (Kanyane & Thakhathi 2019:53). 
Thus, there is need for an ample and comprehensive planning process by 
municipalities, which itself is dependent on the availability of the skill to plan. In terms 
of these statements, Davids et al. (2022:38) state that the challenge that municipalities 
face is that the mandatory or obligatory requirements are not monitored in terms of the 
need to have all these requirements uniformly in place  and continuously improve the 
skills sets of the human capital in municipalities.  
Furthermore, the local government skills and training development intervention get s 
affected when the workplace skills plan for various municipalities in South Africa is 
seen as being inconsequential (Thakhathi & Kanyane 2019:54). In some instances, 
skills development fails because of the arbitrary management styles (Thakhathi & 
Kanyane 2019:54). Therefore, there is need for all levels of employees and 
supervisors to develop an appreciation of the need for training and development in 
order for it to be effective. Note that planning for employee skills development is also 
dependent on the skills gap analysis process. Another challenge that affects the
<<<PAGE=64>>>
55 
effectiveness of employees  training and development interventions in South African 
local government is the issue of poorly done training needs analyses by municipal 
officials responsible for this mandate (Van der Waldt, Fourie, Jordaan & Chitiga -
Mabugu 2018:4). This is the planning domain of local government. In the context of 
this particular challenge, the efficacy of training and development interventions is 
hugely dependent on the ability of the top management in an entity to do a thorough 
training needs analysis that identifies every employee whose performance is lagging 
behind required thresholds and the possible interventions that can be done. This thus 
avoids a shot-gun effect type of training and development where resources are wasted 
in blanket training interventions which end-up training some employees on a skill that 
they do not require (Siegel 2020:626).  
For Van der Waldt et al. (2018:5), undertaking these skills gap analyses enables the 
planning, resourcing, design and implementation of employee training and 
development interventions that can effectively resolve  targeted problems. Luthuli, 
Nyawo and Mashau (2019:120) lament the problem that municipalities face “when the 
training needs analysis is poorly executed usually as a consequence when resources 
for training and development are limited while at the same time, the current employees 
are faced with broad training needs .” As a result, generalised interventions will  not 
consider the various unique and divergent train ing needs of the municipality’s 
workforce (Luthuli et al. 2019:120).  
Mohlala et al. (2014:221) refer to a study in the Department of Public Service and 
Administration that show s that the training needs analyses were not being 
meticulously done, resulting in its training needs priorities not being clear, resulting in 
the inefficacy of employee training interventions for this crucial public service entity. 
This researcher argues that these common challenges are ubiquitous in the local 
government sphere of South African today, where municipalities use the ‘one size fits 
all’ strategy in executing their employee training as well as capacity-building initiatives 
and interventions. The researcher, therefore, values these to be something that must 
be do ne meticulously and effective ly by any public entity, including Sou th African 
municipalities. Therefore, a haphazard training needs or skills gap analysis can 
effectively lead to an outcome of unchanged municipal employees’ performance. 
Hence, Reddy (2021:19) concludes that South African municipal entities need
<<<PAGE=65>>>
56 
effective skills development interventions because it is the  site of post -1994 
transformation. 
4.4 MUNICIPALITIES’ SKILLS DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS  
This section discusses South African municipalities' various interventions  to address 
their skills deficiencies. The interventions towards skills development in municipalities 
must be done within the human resources development context of the public sector. 
Draai and Oshoniyi (2013:871) note that human resource development (HRD) refers 
to the process whereby the government holistically invests in the development of 
requisite skills that will lead to improved performance and economic growth by the 
initiation of various national strategies . The study emphasises that the HRD practice 
is an interventive strategy that targets the creation of skill sets that will be in sync with 
the current developmental agenda of  the NDP Vision 2030. While the NDP posits 
achieving a ‘capable and developmental state’ (National Planning Commission (NPC) 
2012:26), it is unclear how the skills it seeks to develop will be concordant with the 4IR 
era. However, the emphasis of the national government on the NDP thrust has seen 
some municipalities taking into account the skills development that enables them to 
be part of the community development agenda that target the three monstrous societal 
evils at the local government level : poverty, unemployment and inequality (Noyoo 
2019:43).  
Hart, Booyens and Sinyolo (2020:25) note that to support the provision of innovation 
and skills -driven municipal services, the Department of Science and Technology 
convened the Innovation Partnership for Rural Development in 2011. This forum is 
meant to strategise and map out how to resolve the skills development quagmire that 
local government entities. The, “intention of this partnership is to pool the skills and 
knowledge of a number of science, technology and innovation actors, which include 
South African universities, science councils and public officials working in 27 priority 
or ‘distressed’ district municipalities” (Hart et al. 2020:27). This was an intervention to 
help ailing municipalities, most of which were unable to train their employees 
effectively on 21st-century compliant technical and technological skills. The researcher 
notes that such initiatives, interventions and programmes are a sign that a multi -
stakeholder approach to skills development can rescue municipalities . Davids and 
Esau (2012:94) observe t hat one strategy that the city of Cape Town and other
<<<PAGE=66>>>
57 
employee-performance-conscious public entities have done towards intervening in 
their skills deficiencies is to view that talent management is a strategic initiative that 
advances the development of new skills and retention of scarce skills. This has been 
achieved by designing, adopt ing, implement ing and sustaining a comprehensive 
human resources development (HRD) strategy in 2007 (Davids & Esau 2012:93). This 
study implores other local government entiti es to emulate this example of how 
employee skills development must be viewed as the lifeblood of local government.  
Further to the above, the HRD strategy of the city of Cape Town facilitates the 
introduction of training and development strategies through activity-based budgeting, 
which cuts down on excess and non -essential training interventions. Such can help 
one of the challenges discussed earlier in this chapter, where the prioritisation of 
training and development interventions was weak , leading to hap hazard municipal 
employee training. Note that activity -based budgeting can take the shape of 
interventions such as internship programmes, graduate programmes, workshops, 
seminars and conferences, and the city-sponsored bursary scheme (Davids & Esau 
2012:86). The study views this kind of budgeting to be good for employee skills 
development in local government since it caters only for the direct and current costs , 
thereby avoiding generic training interventions that are less targeted and , at times, 
irrelevant. 
A positive that can be realised in the Cape Town example is that the ir HRD strategy 
also facilitates monitoring and evaluati ng municipal employee training and 
development plans. This process involves various echelons in the municipality and 
local government system, inter alia, the management team, the LGSETA, the portfolio 
committee, and the education, training and development committee (Davids & Esau 
2012:86). Such an arrangement makes it easy to collect and use data on various 
performance indicators due to the involvement of the various stakeholders. The merit 
of a municipality and entity that values employee training, both in policy and practice, 
is that the employees have a tendency to react positively to training, and those who 
are afforded opportunities to partake in training initiatives are more likely to be 
committed to the organisation, creating both productivity and loyal ty (Linde & Maritz 
2013:354). Such a situation is advantageous for South African local government 
entities, which are central to the government’s transformation agenda. Overall, Draai
<<<PAGE=67>>>
58 
and Oshoniyi (2013:880) implore South African municipalities to resolve the scarcity 
of vital and critical skills by considering strategies such as  the design and 
implementation of scarce and critical skills retention programmes for technical staff 
towards the goal of markedly accelerating the transformation of local government, the 
grassroots government.  
The WSP ha s also been aligned to the needs of the municipalities in a few entities, 
while the remainder of the municipalities lag behind. The city of Cape Town has also 
ensured that the developed skill sets align with its main service delivery tool, the IDP, 
to en sure that there is ample and able human capital for achieving its mandate. 
Nonetheless, some loose ends must be tied if South African municipalities' stated and 
appropriate employee skills development interventions are to succeed. 
4.5 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IMPLEMENTATION GAPS IN MUNICIPALITIES 
This section discusse s the implementation gaps regarding South African 
municipalities’ interventions towards employee skills capacitation.  
One skills development gap that this researcher notes from both the literature and the 
above discussion is  the absence of skills by top management to prioritise skills 
development. Most municipalities use a ‘one size fits all’ strategy to train and develop 
their employees. This strategy has numerous problems because it generalises the skill 
sets and sometimes trains some employees on skills they will never apply to their jobs. 
In the end, the skills training is not activity-based and takes critical financial resources, 
which is sometimes un necessary. The other gap identifie d relates to the lack of 
sufficient funding for skills development. Some municipalities have been seen not to 
prioritise budgets for employee training and development. Such lack of resources, 
which are primarily financial, impacts the quality of training employees get from their 
municipality. Some private service providers require funds to be hired , and if the 
finances are limited, the municipality will rely on poor-quality service providers or even 
in-sourced experts who are  not well versed with the current dynamics of the labour 
market. This researcher argues that the discretionary fund and other grants that fund 
municipal employee training must not take too long to be decided and dispatched to 
the areas where they are needed most.
<<<PAGE=68>>>
59 
The l ack of top management buy -in in the context of employee training and 
development is another gap not addressed by the intervention in Section 4.4 of this 
chapter. However, i t does appear in the challenge s discussed in Section 4.3. This 
researcher notes that training and development intervention s start and stop with the 
top management. The absence of buy -in or commitment from top management can 
cloud how even middle - and lower -level employees perceive and accept skills 
development interventions. If the top management is negative towards training and 
development, that can easily cascade down to other levels of management since there 
will not be a culture of effective training and development instilled in the entity. The top 
management sets the key performance indicators, measures periodic performance 
and determines the training needs of individuals and teams in the municipality. Without 
that willingness, employee training and development will be futile. Management also 
has been found deficient in conducting skills gap analyses, which has left many 
municipalities unable to determine the urgent and priority sets of skills. In such a case, 
intervening through employee skills training is impossible unless management decides 
to consider and implement blanket employee development programmes blindly. 
Another gap the study identifies is the misalignment between skills development plans 
and key results areas. This challenge presents itself through a haphazard and very 
disjointed skills development strategy. Th e lack of synchrony and synergy between 
these two implies that the training needs are unclear because there is no  agreement 
between the target and the measures to determine the target and intervene. 
Municipalities need to ensure that key performance indicators agree with the WSP to 
ensure that the latter keeps feeding into the skilling of municipal employees. The city 
of Cape Town has managed to adopt the strategy . However, most local government 
entities discussed in the previous sections of this chapter are still far from achieving 
that. Lastly, the study sees a gap of low morale amongst lower -level employees who 
feel disempowered to partake in the WSPs drafting due to mainly man agement 
attitudes. This study note s in the previous sections that this kind of morale makes 
employees want to give  out false information , distorting the skills and training 
development process. This leave s top management rely ing on false outcomes 
indicators that will be the foundation of devising interventions. By so doing, this implies 
that the kinds of interventions that will be design ed are false since they will be based 
on false input from demoralised employees. Municipalities that fail to acknowledge t o
<<<PAGE=69>>>
60 
moral sanity of their lower -level employees tend to face the consequences of poor 
employee performance and ineffective employee training programmes due to the 
entire system being built of false indicators. Therefore, loyalty, motivation and morale 
at all levels of the municipality’s employees’ hierarchy are equally important for 
employee training programmes to be effective. 
4.6 SUMMARY 
This chapter holistically discussed various employee performance and corresponding 
skills development challenges that Sou th African municipalities face. In Section 4.2, 
the study discussed the general employee performance and skills challenges, 
emphasising the stipulation of the NDP vision 2030 on skills development. The section 
further discussed the 4IR context of employee performance and municipal employees’ 
skills development. Section 4.3 unpacked the various challenges , emphasising how 
they impact employee skills training and performance. Section 4.4 focused on 
municipalities' interventions to resolve the identified chall enges. The closing section 
focused on the gaps that have exacerbated the inhibit ed effective employee training 
and development. The researcher notes that the discussions in this chapter indicate a 
local government whose entities have been affected by the same challenges caused 
by skills scarcity and poor interventions. The chapter realised research objectives: To 
explore the causes and implications of skills shortage on employee performance in 
South African municipalities; To describe challenges affect ing the efficacy of existing 
skills development initiatives and programmes in South African municipalities; To 
discuss strategies that can be adopted and implemented towards an effective skills 
development practice in South African municipalities to improv e employee 
performance (see Chapter 1, Section 1.4).  
The next chapter offers the conclusion and synthesis and offers recommendations.
<<<PAGE=70>>>
61 
CHAPTER FIVE 
SYNTHESIS, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Skills development is one key aspect that can h elp transform South African local 
government service delivery by improving employee performance. This study aims to 
assess the impact of such an intervention on employee performance in municipalities. 
In doing so, this dissertation, in its previous chapter s, presented the conceptual, 
contextual, institutional, and legislative frameworks of skills development and 
employee performance in South African local government. These sections discussed 
the various aspects involved in the South African local government  sphere's skills 
development and employee performance matrix . Such is important because this is 
the tier of government closest to the people; and is the actual site of service delivery 
that is key in transforming local communities' living standards. Chapter 5 provides a 
synthesis of the study. It aims to provide evidence realising the research objectives 
set in Chapter 1. The chapter concludes by offering significant and feasible 
recommendations towards enhancing skills development for improved employee 
performance in South African municipalities. 
5.2 SYNTHESIS AND REALISATION OF RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
Chapter 1 discussed the study's background, rationale and problem statement. It also 
discussed and laid bare the serious challenges that the local sphere of government in 
South Africa faces when it comes to the competencies and skills of their employees. 
Furthermore, the chapter provided a synopsis of how the lack of seriousness by 
municipalities to develop the skills of the employees is hampering the effective delivery 
of municipal goods and services. The preceding ensured that the study realise d its 
first research objective: to ascertain the level of skills deficiencies and scarcity in South 
African local government. This opening chapter also provided the research objectives 
and questions that guided this study. Also discussed in Chapter 1 is the study’s 
significance and rationale, where it was mentioned that the study concurrently 
expands the existing body of academic scholarship on skills development for improved 
employee performance, as well as the practices of municipal service delivery that are 
tied to employees’ skills, competencies and aptitudes. The introductory chapter of the
<<<PAGE=71>>>
62 
study further discussed the key terms and concepts, clarified the research design and 
methodology, the ethical principles of the study, the measures taken to ensure that the 
study produces trustworthy findings, and the delimitation and limitations of the study. 
In this chapter, the study note s that employee performance issues in the context of 
skills development are pertinent and need exploration, thus warranting the research. 
Chapter 1 answered the following research question (see Section 1.3): What are the 
conceptual frameworks of skills development and employee performance? This was 
achieved by comprehensively discussing  the various concepts central to  
understanding the issues surrounding skills development and employee performance 
(see section 2.2.1). In this chapter, the research clarified why skills are the foundation 
on which employee performance is anchored.  
Furthermore, the chapter dissected the problem of skills scarcity in South African local 
government and the need to address such shortfalls since it is hugely hampering 
employee performance (See Section 2.4.1). Additionally, presented in this chapter are 
the concepts of competency and skills de velopment that are pertinent issues since a 
competent employee is productive and able to carry out the various tasks that promote 
local government service delivery and community development. Skills development 
(see Section 2.2.4) was discussed as one effec tive intervention South African local 
government entities must pursue to plug the holes in their employee performance 
matrices. The role of the LGSETA, skill development facilitators and training 
committees were examined in this chapter (see Section 2.4.3) in the context of skills 
development. Education and training were also discussed as the activities a nd 
interventions municipalities can use to augment the skills development agenda in their 
areas of jurisdiction. Employee performance was also discussed at  length in the 
second chapter (see Section 2.3.2). In this discussion, employee performance was 
regarded as their ability to execute tasks and responsibilities in a manner that 
promotes local government service delivery.  
The various impediments to skills development, such as lack of compliance with 
legislation, were discussed in Chapter 2. In Section 2.5, the study discussed skills 
development advantages, including  creating good and lasting rapport between the 
municipality and its residents. From the discu ssions in Chapter 2, the researcher 
observes that the study gave a comprehensive literature review on the central
<<<PAGE=72>>>
63 
concepts that informed this study. In the end, it enabled the understanding of skills 
development regarding the issue of employee performance in the local sphere of 
government. 
Chapter 3 answered the following research question (see section 1.3): Which are the 
theoretical, legislative, and institutional frameworks regulating skills development in 
South African municipalities? This chapter gave an in -depth look at the theories, 
legislation, and institutional and policy frameworks that inform skills d evelopment in 
the case of South African municipalities. The third chapter discuss ed the legal and 
policy framework of skills development in South Africa, which included Section 195(1) 
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996), which calls for good human 
resources development practices in the public sector (see Section 3.3.1). Furthermore, 
the Skills Development Act (1998), which implores public entities to prioritise employee 
training and development for effective public service delivery (see Section 3.3.3), and 
the Skills Development Levies Act (1999) , which regulates the levying of payroll s for 
funds meant to develop employee skills (see Section 3.3.4). The third chapter also 
touched on the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act ( No. 32 of 2000), which 
implores municipalities to develop the human capital capacities of its employees (see 
Section 3.3.5), Public Service Regulations (2001); White Paper on Human Resource 
Management in the Public Service (1997), and the National Qualifications Framework 
Act (No. 67 of 2008).  
The third chapter closed by discuss ing the institutional frameworks supporting skills 
development, such as the SETAs, the SALGA and the National Skills Authority, all of 
which endeavour to ensure that South African local government entities have the right 
skills sets and arrangements that promote this culture of continuous improvement in 
employees’ performance. From this outgoing summary and findings, this researcher 
values the contribution of this chapter to this study since  it thoroughly exposes the 
institutional, statutory, policy and other aspects guiding and cultivating the practice of 
skills development for improved local government employee performance. 
Chapter 4 of the dissertation answered the following research questions (see Section 
1.3): What are the causes and implications of skills shortage on employee 
performance in South African municipalities?; Which are the challenges affecting the 
efficacy of existing skills development initiatives and programmes in South African
<<<PAGE=73>>>
64 
municipalities?; Which strategies can be adopted and implemented towards an 
effective skills development practice in South African municipalities to improve 
employee performance? Chapt er 4 is the inner core of the study since it revealed 
various findings related to the three research questions as listed in the above section 
of this current chapter. Th e researcher discussed the challenges that affect skills 
development as an intervention  to address employee performance issues in South 
African local government. This was done through an exposition of the challenges in 
board terms where skills scarcity was once again the centre of the argument, where 
critical human capital competencies were revealed to be deficient (see Section 4.2). 
In the same section, the study lambasts the lack of enough return on investment by 
municipalities where vast sums of money are poured into skills development but with 
little or no return on the investment, hence a waste of resources. It was further 
established in the fourth chapter of this dissertation that local communities are finding 
it extremely difficult to improve their living standards because the people serving in 
their municipalities are not possessing th e requisite skill sets. The other impediment 
impacting skills development that the chapter looked at is the absence of investment 
in 4IR soft skill sets (see Section 4.2.1). The study establishes that the South African 
municipality employees’ skills are ob solete and incompatible  with the 21 st-century 
demands of local government service delivery.  
The fourth chapter further revealed in Section 4.2.2 that the state of local government 
(public) service delivery was shambolic , as seen in the rampant  financial 
mismanagement in most municipalities, where taxpayers’ money is not economically, 
effectively and efficiently used. In the context of this finding, this researcher notes that 
the inability of South African local government employees  to possess f inancial 
management competencies consistently  is a massive contributor to losses in 
community development potential. Furthermore, the study discovered that the rise in 
service delivery protests that have cause d the loss of human life and infrastructure 
was a testament to the poor employee performance in South African municipalities. 
The top -level employee performance challenges discussed include leadership 
deficiencies, corruption, political bickering, lack of proper monitoring and evaluation 
practices, poor prioritisation of skills development as a major cost item in municipal 
budgets and absence of consistent workplace skills plans (see Section 4.3.1). In 
Section 4.3.2, the issue of low employee morale and poor motivation has been
<<<PAGE=74>>>
65 
identified as a major ope rational challenge to skills development in South African 
municipalities. There are additional findings related to the absence of skilled 
professionals to push this 21st-century skills development agenda (see Section 4.3.3) 
and the poor financing options and procedures of local government skills development 
(see Section 4.3.4). Another finding related to the issue of employee performance and 
skills development refers to the lack of synchrony between the municipalities’ 
workplace skills plans and the LGSETA’ s plans for local government skills 
development, where the former is seen to neglect the regular skills planning , 
something that automatically affects how the LGSETA moves forward (see Section 
4.3.5).  
Chapter 4 further discussed the various interventions and measures meant to improve 
skills development in municipalities. These included the NDP ’s focus on a public 
sector-wide innovation and skills development champion by the Department of 
Science and Technology, the use of mentoring and coaching for municipal employees, 
and activity-based budgeting and the synchronisation of WSPs and IDPs. Examples 
of leaders in skills development in local government have been identified as the city of 
Cape Town. The findings from Chapter 4 from the preceding synopsis show t hat the 
South African local government is in a severe predicament regarding skills 
development. Therefore, there is a need for strategies and interventions aimed at 
making employees more effective, productive and community-centred. 
Chapter 5 discusses the realisation of the research objectives and the main findings. 
This closing chapter of the dissertation thereby achieve s the following research 
objective (see Section 1.4): To offer recommendations for effectively addressing skills 
development for improved employee performance in South African municipalities. 
Chapter 5 also discusses the scope for further research and the proving that the study 
has achieved its set research objectives and adequately answers the research 
questions that the researcher sought to address fully upon embarking on this research 
journey. 
5.3 RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STUDY 
Based on the review of literature and documents to explore skills development and 
employee performance, discussed in Chapters 2,  3 and 4, this study proposes the
<<<PAGE=75>>>
66 
following recommendations for improvement. These recommendations and suggested 
strategies and interventions can be adopted and implemented by the identifie d role 
players to improve skills development continuously in the local sphere of government. 
• Improving local government skills development funding:  
The study recommends pooling funds into a central local government fund for 
municipal skills training and development. Such a consolidated local government skills 
development fund can be housed in the Department of Cooperative Government, and 
such must be a national budget cost item. Such a structure of local government skills 
development can ensure that funds are available as and when required by 
municipalities. That will addr ess the shortage of funds  for real, wholesome 
interventions in local government employee skills development. In the same vein, this 
fund can be the only fund where all contributory levies, budget allocation and 
donations from other role players are kept fo r municipal skills development. The 
management of this fund needs to be legislated , and there must be stringent 
conditions and procedures for funding to be allocated. However, once due diligence is 
done, there must be swift disbursement of funds while the target skill sets are still 
relevant and impact directly on local government employee performance. 
• Developing fourth industrial revolution soft skills for municipalities:  
Therefore, the study vouches for adopting  4IR soft skills -related skills development  
practices in South African municipalities. Such a strategy will be implemented through 
a partnership between local government and the various stakeholders encompassing 
the LGSETA, tertiary education institutions and community-based organisations to do 
a f easibility study, diagnose urgent and relevant skill sets, and develop training 
programmes and the corresponding implementation modalities. This 4IR -related 
intervention can help municipalities train their employees and improve their 
competencies on relevant and time-compliant skills that can help the delivery of goods 
and services in a 21 st-century context. This can be further aided by combining such 
skill development initiatives with an activity-based budgeting practice where funds are 
allocated only to relevant and urgent activities to avoid blind budgeting that sometimes 
allocates funds to activities far from urgent.
<<<PAGE=76>>>
67 
• Undertaking skills audits for municipal employees:  
The design and implementation of interventions into employee skills development are 
best done when the extent and gravity of the problem are ascertained and known. 
Some interventions fail to improve employee performance in South African local 
government because the basics of problem -solving are not followed, hence the need 
for a thorough skills audit. An audit of the available skills in municipalities has always 
been mandatory. However, this study suggests that this be done as a crisis intervention 
where the LGSETA, municipalities, the Department of Cooperative Government and 
Traditional Affairs and other relevant stakeholders do a holistic and comprehensive 
audit of local government skill sets and deficiencies. Such an exercise can help 
municipalities and the national government know the urgent priority areas that  require 
more attention. An o verall audit can also help funders to know the gravity of the 
problem, and if successfully done, the design, implementation and evaluation of 
possible and diverse interventions will be easier and swift er. This researcher values 
the effect of this skills au dit because it can also help the adoption of 4IR skills 
development interventions or programmes , as argued in the previous 
recommendations. Therefore, workplace skills audits must be redesigned, and punitive 
measures attached to those not complying with such requirements. 
• Coaching and mentoring employees:  
Coaching and mentoring have been identified as some of the tried and tested 
strategies modern organisations use to develop the skills and competencies of 
employees. In the context of the South African local government, the deficiencies in 
the required skills have been blamed on leadership failure s, where leaders resort to 
personal aggrandisement instead of coaching and mentoring their junior subordinates. 
As a result, the senior leaders do not mentor their juniors on effective skills 
development, good leadership, and effective employee performance. Furthermore, the 
poor morale witnessed in S outh African municipalities also signals that the relations 
between senior management and their junior counterparts are sour and rotten. 
Consequently, there is virtually no succession plan , coaching, mentoring, or  proper 
talent management. Using talent man agement practices such as coaching and 
mentoring is one of the proposed strategies South African municipalities can use.
<<<PAGE=77>>>
68 
As an intervention to local government skills development challenges, coaching is a 
personal (usually one -to-one) on -the-job approach to helping people develop their 
skills and levels of competence. Through the coaching intervention, subordinates are 
motivated and use effective feedback derived from their coaches' skills, expertise, and 
commitment. While mentoring can work well when the municipality uses selected and 
trained individuals to provide guidance, pragmatic advice and continuing support will 
help the person or persons allocated to them  learn and develop. Therefore, this can 
help municipalities develop skills critical for organis ational success , especially in 
senior management or leadership. Coaches and mentors must be dedicated experts 
carefully selected to train, develop and sharpen employees' leadership skills. 
• Introducing employee performance incentives and sanctions:  
Sanctions and incentives have long been proven to be the carrot and stick analogy of 
human behaviour. This is premised on rewarding good behaviour and punishing bad 
behaviour within organisations. Municipal entities can use this tactic to promote and 
demote certain behaviours linked to skills development and employee performance. 
For example, i ncentivising good behaviour can encourage employees to seek 
professional development and skills training initiatives that can make them earn more 
rewards within their munici palities. Furthermore, the post -training period in an 
organisation can serve as a time when a municipality rewards employees whose 
performance has been improved as a result of them attending skills development 
interventions. Furthermore, using sanctions fo r employees w ith a negative attitude 
towards improving their skills and competencies can be another working strategy that 
South African local government entities can use. This can be done through severe 
salary deductions, using performance -based incentives and bonuses, and demoting 
those municipal employees who do not produce as expected.  
Therefore, this study recommends that the South African local government entities tie 
rewards and sanctions to employee performance to motivate their employees to seek 
skills development initiatives. Employees who fail to improve their skills and 
competencies will face serious medium - to long-term consequences, such as being 
relieved of their duties or having benefits withdrawn. This strategy must be applied to 
every employee to create some positive impetus towards the acceptability of training 
and development initiatives, even those the organisation does not initiate. In the end,
<<<PAGE=78>>>
69 
skills development must be considered suitable to both the individual ’s career goals 
and the municipality's objectives and mission . The researcher observes that the 
success of skills development and other strategies depends on how the employee 
contingent accepts the interventions due to it targeting employees to a greater extent. 
• Making workplace skills plans and skills audits more binding:  
One challenge identified in several parts of this dissertation is  the failure of 
municipalities to perform mandatory audits and draft workplace skills plans. This study 
suggests that these must be made compulso ry, and any municipality found wanting 
and non -compliant must face sanctions. This is because the design and 
implementation of skills development interventions in municipalities have to begin with 
the skills gap analysis and the training need analysis. A correctly done audit can 
correspondingly lead to a properly designed intervention. Therefore, South African 
local government has to ensure that there are binding local government regulations, 
be it through a White Paper on Skills Development in Local Government or otherwise, 
making it obligatory for the workplace skills plans and skills audits to be done regularly. 
Such a situation will ensure that every municipality stays in touch with its skills needs, 
deficiencies and status quo towards ensuring that skil ls development becomes the 
starting point of enhancing employees' performance and keeping the local government 
transformation agenda on track. The LGSETA and the Department of Cooperative 
Government and Traditional Affairs at the national sphere of government can lead this 
intervention by making these major skills development tools mandatory for South 
African local government. 
5.4 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE STUDY 
This section provides evidence that the findings of this study support the human capital 
theory. In Section 3.2, the discussion centred on the theoretical framework that guides 
the study, which is the human capital theory, regarded as the pillar onto which training 
and skills development are based since it seeks to improve the effectiveness of human 
capital by giving them more competencies, abilities, and aptitudes. This has also been 
related to talent management initiatives in municipalities or public entities. The overall 
premise of Chapter 3 was that skills development (for improved local gover nment 
employee performance) is an intervention to improve South African municipalities' 
human capital capacities and capabi lities. In Chapter 3, it was argued that improved
<<<PAGE=79>>>
70 
human capital capacity improves the entity’s productivity and  the earning and fringe 
benefits of the employees of such an entity. The third chapter further looked at the 
critique levelled against the human capital theory, especially its obsession with money, 
rewards and productivity , since it is guaranteed that trai ning and development can 
result in a corresponding increase in employee performance, loyalty and impetus.  
Chapter 4 show ed the findings related to the challenges faced in the skills 
development agenda by local government entities in South Africa. The findings of this 
chapter show ed that the human capital theory is enduring because it has been 
championing skills development for improved employee performance in the past, 
present and future. At present, in the context of the 4IR, it is the human capital theory 
that best describes the need for entities such as municipalities to always ground their 
productivity on the issue of skills, abilities, competencies, capacities and training 
interventions to make employee performance more effective and productive. The 
various challenges affecting skills development, from poor leadership, lack of planning 
or monitoring, evaluation, and poor legal compliance in municipalities, all point to an 
absence of a robust human capital theory practice in South African local government. 
Overall, from the findings of this study, the human capital theory has been vindicated 
as a pillar on which employee performance is solidly linked and hence must be used 
to improve municipal effectiveness in service delivery. 
5.5 LESSONS LEARNT FROM BEST PRACTICES  
This section discusses lessons the South African local government can learn from 
international and African best practices in the following sub-sections. 
5.5.1 Skills development for improved employee performance in 
municipalities in the city of Whittlesea (Australia): An international case 
study 
According to the Australian Local Government Association (ALGA) in their Workplace 
Local Government Workforce and Futu re Skills Report (2018), there were several 
issues such as 69% of local governments were experiencing a skill shortage and skill 
gaps (ALGA 2018:6). Such shortages are mainly in the areas of Engineers, Urban and 
Town Planners, Building Surveyors, Environme ntal Health Officers, and Project 
Managers topping the list of occupations in demand (ALGA 2018:45). Furthermore, 
this ALGA report shows that  the skills shortage is the inability of councils to compete
<<<PAGE=80>>>
71 
with the private sector on remuneration; lack of suita bly qualified or experienced 
candidates available locally; high demand across the labour market for certain critical 
skills and occupations; and remoteness or location making it difficult for councils to 
attract and retain workers (ALGA 2018:45). In additi on, 60% of municipalities have 
unmet training needs arising from the high cost of training and lack of training available 
locally (ALGA 2018:57). In the same vein, 70% of municipalities have done no analysis 
or forecasting of changing roles or skills requi rements arising from digital disruption 
and technology changes (ALGA 2018:57). As a result, the city of Whittlesea (CoW) 
has adopted its municipal lifelong learning-action and strategy plan (2016). This 
strategy seeks to respond to the preceding findings where it now focuses to improve 
their position in relation to soft skills for their local government employee, particularly 
the ability to work productively, drive engagement and demonstrate presence as a 
member of a virtual team; ability to under stand concepts across multiple disciplines; 
and digital skills (CoW 2016). The municipality prioritised the skills development of its 
employees in its budgets and committed more resources such as time and expertise 
(CoW 2016).  
Furthermore, the CoW resorted to plu gging the skills gap by hiring part -time experts 
while its employees undergo training. The synergy between local government entities 
and other stakeholders in skills development and training has augmented this 
intervention. These include local councils themselves; local government associations, 
professional associations, and industry skills councils; registered training 
organisations; universities and colleges of technical and further education; private 
sector providers; departments of local government in each jurisdiction; the Department 
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations of the Australian Government; 
and trade union (Woods, Artist & O’Connor 2015:112). Furthermore, learning within 
local government in Australia has been institutionalis ed to ensure that the skills 
development packages take care of the career and professional development needs 
of both current and future employees (Woods et al. 2018:123). As a result, this places 
the municipalities on par with private sector entities regarding competition for talent 
and the critical skills needed for local government service delivery. 
The South African local government can derive a lesson from the preceding section 
by way of adopting strategies such as the creation of skills development syn ergies
<<<PAGE=81>>>
72 
with various stakeholders, the use of priority areas for skills development budgets, the 
hiring of experts on a part-time basis while the skills packages are designed to make 
the municipality an employer of choice. Hence, there is a need to make loc al 
government careers attractive for potential employees, who will join them knowing that 
their personal career goals are taken care of, and their community-centred passion for 
service delivery will also be realised in the process. 
5.5.2 Skills development  for improved employee performance in 
municipalities in the city of Kigali, Rwanda: An African case study 
Rwanda’s current development strategy , the national skills development and 
employment promotion strategy (2019 –2024), has various priority areas, including 
Priority Area 3, which seeks to make the country  a globally competitive knowledge-
based economy. Moreover, within this particular priority area is the project related to 
local government skills development called the Develop Kigali Innovation City (KIC) 
agenda that has become  the host of a thriving skills ecosystem including industries, 
universities and academic institutions with the aim to train engineers and business 
graduates as ‘Job Creators’ rather than ‘Job Seekers’ and eventua lly exporting skills 
(Republic of Rwanda (RoR) 2019:68). This research notes the issue of the skills 
development ecosystem hosted by the city of Kigali, which shows that the focus here 
is on skills development as a local government culture and a result of 
intergovernmental cooperation. Furthermore, the city of Kigali thrives on a market-led 
education initiative where there is an increased private sector involvement in 
curriculum design to ensure that emerging skills sets are incorporated into education 
and skills development (City of Kigali (CoK) 2018:72). Such strategies of skills 
development also encompass the training of potential employees of the Rwandese 
local government system on the latest and relevant skills sets which include soft skills 
(CoK 2018:75).  
The Kigali Innovation City concept fosters university-industry government cooperation 
to ensure synergies of skills development and knowledge sharing  (Republic of 
Rwanda 2019:110). There is also an issue of establishing joint training centres with 
leading private sector entities to always tap into critical skills and expanding as well as 
professionalising business and innovation centres at universities, colleges and higher-
level TVET institutions (RoR 2019:110). Lastly, the Kigali Innovation City progr amme
<<<PAGE=82>>>
73 
has revamped sector skills councils to inform skills development in technical vocational 
education and training (TVET) and higher education towards bridging the skills gap in 
priority sectors with high potential for growth (RoR 2019:110). The city development 
strategy (2018) of Kigali also emphasises the use of coaching and mentoring by senior 
managers to groom and train junior employees as part of a success ion plan in 
leadership and promoting delegation (CoK 2018:81). 
The South African local government system can pluck feathers of knowledge from the 
city of Kigali by making municipalities the centres of innovation and incubation of ideas, 
forging partnerships with stakeholders towards skills development and putting skills 
and professional development a t the centre of innovation and effective service 
delivery. Other lessons from Kigali include using coaching and mentoring culture to 
develop subordinates’ skills in the municipality. Such a practice can help tap into the 
on-demand skills and ensure that the municipality stays within prevailing practices of 
effective employee performance for good service delivery. This is vital, especially 
given that skills development is most successful  when various stakeholders are 
brought on board. 
5.6 SCOPE FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 
A f uture study could be extended to embrace a detailed investigation in which the 
following area can be explored: skills development for improved employee 
performance in South A frican public service. It would be a comparative study to 
explore two public service departments selected to form part of the study.
<<<PAGE=83>>>
74 
REFERENCES 
Abbadia, J. 2022. Research Paradigm: An Introdu ction with Examples. Available at:  
https://mindthegraph.com/blog/research-paradigm/ (Accessed on 15 October 2022). 
Aguinis, H. 2013. Performance management . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education. 
Al Mehrzi, N. and Singh, S.K. 2016. Competing through employee engagement: A 
proposed framework. International Journal of Productivity and Performance 
Management, 65(6):831-843. 
Almendarez, L. 2013. Human capital theory: Implications for educational development 
in Belize and the Caribbean. Caribbean Quarterly, 59(3-4):21-33. 
Alshammari, A.A. 2020. The impact of human resource management practices, 
organizational learning, o rganizational culture and knowledge management 
capabilities on organizational performance in Saudi organizations: a conceptual 
framework. Revista Argentina de Clinica Psicologica, 29(4):714-721. 
Anand, R., Kothari, S. and Kumar, N. 2016. South Africa: Labor market dynamics and 
inequality. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  
Annett, M. 2019. Human resource risk and knowledge workers: propositions for theory 
and research. Journal of Management Policy and Practice, 20(4):10-20. 
Armstrong, M. 2009. Armstrong’s handbook of human resource management practice. 
London: Kogan Page Publishers.  
Armstrong, M. and Taylor, S. 2020. Armstrong’s handbook of human resource 
management practice. Philadelphia, PA: Kogan Page Publishers. 
Armstrong, M. and Tayl or, T.S. 2014. Armstrong's Handbook of Human Resource 
Management and Practice. London: Kogan Page.
<<<PAGE=84>>>
75 
Ashton, D., Sung, J. and Turbin, J. 2010. Towards a framework for the comparative 
analysis of national systems of skill formation. International Journal of T raining and 
Development, 4(1):8-25 
Asian Development Bank. 2007. Moving toward knowledge-based economies: Asian 
experiences. Manila: Asian Development Bank. 
Auditor General South Africa (AGSA). 2020. Consolidated General Report on the 
Local Government Audit Outcomes (MFMA 2019/2020). Pretoria: AGSA. 
Auriacombe, C.J. 2008. UJ Internal Handbook. Research design and methods for 
essays, dissertations and theses. Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg. 
Auriacombe, C.J. 2009. Methodological perspectives for novice grounded theory 
researchers in Public Administration and Management research. Journal of Public 
Administration, 44(4.2):824-848. 
Auriacombe, C.J. 2016. Towards the Construction of Unobtrusive Re search 
Techniques:  Critical Considerations when Conducting a Literature Analysis. African 
Journal of Public Affairs, 9(4):1-19. 
Australian Local Government Association (ALGA). 2018. Australian Local Government 
Workforce and Future Skills Report. Melbourne: ALGA. 
Baartman, L.K. and De Bruijn, E. 2011. Integrating knowledge, skills and attitudes: 
Conceptualising learning processes towards vocational competence. Educational 
Research Review, 6(2):125-134. 
Balwanz, D. and Ngcwangu, S. 2016. Seven problems with the ‘scarce skills’ 
discourse in South Africa. South African Journal of Higher Education, 30(2):31-52. 
Bangani, A. 2019. Factors Influencing the Implementation of the Strategic Framework 
for Gender Equality within the South African Public Service . Master’s Dissertation. 
Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg. 
Bashir, B. and Gani, A. 2020. Testing the effects of job satisfaction on organizational 
commitment. Journal of Management Development, 1-18.
<<<PAGE=85>>>
76 
Becker, G. 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirica l Analysis. Chicago, IL: 
Chicago University Press. 
Becker, G. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis.  Chicago, IL: 
Chicago University Press.  
Becker, G.S. 1976. The economic approach to human behavior . Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Beyers, L.J.E. 2016. Service Delivery Challenges Facing Municipalities: A Case Study 
of Fetakgomo Local Municipality in Sekhukhune District Municipality, Limpopo 
Province. Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology, 13(2):167-178. 
Boadu, F., Dwomo -Fokuo, E, Boakye, J.K. and Kwaning, C.O. 2014. Training and 
development: A tool for employee performance in the district assemblies in Ghana. 
International Journal of Education and Research, (5):513-522. 
Bolisani, E. and Bratianu, C. (Eds.). 2018. Emergent knowledge strategies: Strategic 
thinking in knowledge management. Cham: Springer. 
Boon, C., Eckardt, R., Lepak, D.P. and Boselie, P. 2018. Integrating strategic human 
capital and strategic human resource management.  The International Journal of 
Human Resource Management, 29(1):34-67. 
Bouchrika, I. 2022a. How to Write a Research Question: Types, Steps and Examples. 
Available at: https://research.com/research/how-to-write-a-research-question 
(Accessed on 22 November 2022). 
Bouchrika, I. 2022b. How to Write Research Methodology: Overview, Tips, and 
Techniques. Available at: https://research.com/research/how-to-write-research-
methodology Accessed 23 November 2022). 
Bouckaert, G., Peters, B.G. and Verhoest, K. 2016. Coordination of public sector 
organizations. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Bowen, G.A. 2009. Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qualitative 
Research Journal, 9(2):27-40.
<<<PAGE=86>>>
77 
Boyatzis, R.1982. The Competent Manager. New York, NY: Wiley & Sons. 
Brottman, M.R., Char, D.M., Hattori, R.A., Heeb , R. and Taff, S.D. 2020. Toward 
cultural competency in health care: a scoping review of the diversity and inclusion 
education literature. Academic Medicine, 95(5):803-813. 
Bruwer, J.P. and Smith, J. 2018. The role of basic business skills development and 
their influence on South African small, medium and micro enterprise sustainability. 
Journal of Economics and Behavioural Studies, 10(2):48-62. 
Bryman, A. and Bell, E. 2003. Business Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Bryson, J. and George, B. 2020. Strategic management in public administration. 
(In Oxford Research Encyclopaedia of Politics . New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. Pp. 1-26). 
Burger, P. 2014. Facing the Conundrum: How Useful is the developmental state 
concept in South Africa. South African Journal of Economics, 82(2):159-180. 
Burkholder, G.J. and Burbank, P.M. 2019. Philosophical foundations and the role of 
theory in research. (In Research Design and Methods: An Applied Guide for the 
Scholar-Practitioner). London: SAGE. 
Business Research Methodology. 2022. Formulating Research Aims and Objectives. 
Available at: https://research-methodology.net/research-methodology/research-aims-
and-objectives/. (Accessed on 21 November 2022). 
Butler, A. 2017. Contemporary South Africa. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Chan, J.F. 2015. Training Fundamentals: Pfeiffer Essential Guides To Training Basics. 
Jakarta: Erlangga. 
Chenoy, D., Ghosh, S.M.  and Shukla, S.K. 2019. Skill development for accelerating 
the manufacturing sector: the role of ‘new -age’ skills for ‘Make in India’. International 
Journal of Training Research, 17(1):112-130.
<<<PAGE=87>>>
78 
Chu, S.K.W., Reynolds, R.B., Tavares, N.J., Notari, M. and Lee, C.W.Y. 2021.  21st 
century skills development through inquiry -based learning: from theory to practice . 
Singapore: Springer International Publishing. 
City of Kigali. 2018. City Development Strategy (CDS 2018-2024). Kigali: City of Kigali. 
City of Whittlesea. 2016. Municipal Lifelong Learning Strategy and Action Plan (2013-
2016). Melbourne: City of Whittlesea. 
Clayton, B., Jonas, P., Harding, R., Harris, M. and Toze, M. 2013. Industry currency 
and professional obsolescence: what can industry tell us? Commonwealth of Australia. 
Cote, R. 2019. Motivating Multigenerational Employees: Is There a Difference? 
Journal of Leadership, Accountability and Ethics, 16(2):15-29. 
Daily, B.F., Bishop, J.W. and Massoud, J.A. 2012. The role of training and 
empowerment in environmental performance: A study of the Mexican maquiladora 
industry. International Journal of Operations & Production Management , 32 (5):631 -
647. 
Davids, B. and Esau, M. 2012. The Prevailing Skills Crisis in South Africa: An 
Exploration of the Skills Development Strategy of the City of Cape Town. Journal of 
Developing Societies, 28(1):81-113. 
Davids, Y.D., Houston, G., Steyn -Kotze, J., Sausi, K., Betancourt, S.D., Pienaar, G., 
Kanyane, M., Viljoen, J., Ngqwala, N., Mchunu, N. and Fokou, G. 2022. Municipal 
skills and capacity assessment study: views from municipal officials at eight South 
African municipalities. Pretoria: HSRC. 
Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S.  2005. Introduction: The discipline and practice of 
qualitative research. (In N.K. Denzin and Y.S Lincoln. 2005. (Eds.). The SAGE 
Handbook of Qualitative Research. London: SAGE). 
Diamantidis, A.D. and Chatzoglou, P.D. 2014. Employee post‐training behaviour and 
performance: evaluating the results of the training process. International Journal of 
Training and Development, 18(3):149-170.
<<<PAGE=88>>>
79 
Dlamini, P.C. and Migiro, S.O. 2016. Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Systems 
in the South African Local Government. Journal of Public Administration , 51(3):376-
390. 
Dobre, O.I. 2013. Employee motivation and organizational performance. Review of 
applied socio-economic research, 5(1):53-60. 
Draai, E. and Oshoniyi, O . 2013. Scarce and Critical Skills for Local Government: 
Assessing the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality. Journal of Public 
Administration, 48(4.1):867-882. 
Durst, S., Lindvall, B. and Bruns, G. 2018. Knowledge risk management in the public 
sector: insights into a Swedish municipality. Journal of Knowledge Management , 
24(4):717-735. 
Eldor, L. 2016. Work engagement: Toward a general theoretical enriching model. 
Human Resource Development Review, 15(3):317-339. 
Elnaga, A. and Imran, A. 2013. The ef fect of training on employee performance. 
European journal of Business and Management, 5(4):137-147. 
Ensor, P. 2003. The National Qualifications Framework and higher education in South 
Africa: some epistemological issues. Journal of Education and Work, 16(3):325-346. 
Enwereji, P.C. and Uwizeyimana, D.E. 2019. Challenges in strategy implementation 
processes in South African municipalities: a service delivery perspective. Gender & 
Behaviour, -(-): 13756-13776. 
Erasmus, J. and Breier, A. (Eds). 2009. Skills shortages in South Africa: case studies 
of key professions. Pretoria: Human Sciences Research Council. 
Fields, Z. 2019. Cognitive skills development at higher educational level in the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution: A case for creativity. In Imagination, creativity, and responsib le 
management in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. IGI Global. (pp. 126-157).  
Flabbi, L. and Gatti, R. 2018. A primer on human capital. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper, (No. 8309). Washington, DC: World Bank.
<<<PAGE=89>>>
80 
Fleckenstein, T. and Lee, S.C. 2019. The political economy of education and skills in 
South Korea: democratisation, liberalisation and education reform in comparative 
perspective. The Pacific Review, 32(2):168-187. 
Florida, R., Mellander, C. and Stolarick, K. 2008. Inside the black box of reg ional 
development-human capital, the creative class and tolerance. Journal of economic 
geography, 8(5):615-649. 
Fookes, T. 1996. Monitoring and evaluation in local government.  Retrieved from: 
http://www.qualityplanning. org.nz/pubs/3270.pdf (Accessed on 22 August 2022). 
Fugar, F.D.K., Ashiboe-Mensah, N.A. and Adinyira, E. 2013. Human Capital Theory: 
implications for the Ghanaian construction industry development.  Journal of 
Construction Project Management and Innovation, 3(1):464-479. 
Furner, J. 2006. Conceptual Analysis: A Method for Understanding Information as 
Evidence, and Evidence as Information . Available Online at: 
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s105 (Accessed 10 December 2022). 
Galagan, P., Hirt, M. and Vital, C. 2019. Capabilities for talent development: Shaping 
the future of the profession . Jacksonville, FL. American Society for Training and 
Development. 
Galiakberova, A.A. 2019. Conceptual analysis of ed ucation role in economics: The 
human capital theory. Journal of History Culture and Art Research, 8(3):410-421. 
Geldenhuys, K. 2019. The Hawks: flying higher to wipe out corruption -inside and 
outside the police.  Servamus Community-based Safety and Security 
Magazine, 112(12):18-21. 
George, B., Walker, R.M. and Monster, J. 2019. Does strategic planning improve 
organizational performance? A meta ‐analysis. Public Administration Review , 
79(6):810-819. 
Gleason, N.W. 2018. Higher Education in the Era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.  
Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan.
<<<PAGE=90>>>
81 
Gordon, G.L. 2013. Strategic planning for local government . Washington, DC: ICMA 
Publishing. 
Govender, M. and Bussin, M.H.R. 2020. Performance management and employe e 
engagement: A South African perspective. SA Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 18(0):1215-1234. 
GTZ (German Technical Cooperation). 2008. The Monitoring and Evaluation 
Handbook for Business Environment Reform : A Handbook for Practitioners . 
Washington, DC: World Bank.   
Haggard, S. 2019. Developmental States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hakansson, P.G. and Bejakovic, P. 2020. Labour market resilience, bottlenecks and 
spatial mobility in Croatia. Eastern Journal of European Studies, 11(2):5-25. 
Hall, M.D. 2016. Perceived Self-efficacy of Teachers Who Receive Discipline-specific 
Instruction in Writing through One -to-One Instructional Coaching -A Case Study. 
(Doctoral dissertation, Point Park University). 
Hart, T.G., Booyens, I. and S inyolo, S. 2020. Innovation for development in South 
Africa: experiences with basic service technologies in distressed municipalities. (In 
Forum for Development Studies,47(1):23-47). London: Routledge. 
Hartog, J. and van den Brink, H. M. 2007. Human Capital: Advances in Theory and 
Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hermina, U.N. and Yosepha, S.Y. 2019. The model of employee performance. 
International Review of Management and Marketing, 9(3):69-73. 
Heymans, C. 2006. Local Government Organizatio n and Finance: South Africa. (In 
Shah, A. (Ed.). Local Governance in Developing Countries . Washington, DC: World 
Bank Publications. Pp. 47-92). 
Hicks, P.J., Schumacher, D., Guralnick, S., Carraccio , C. and Burke, A.E. 2014. 
Domain of competence: personal and professional development. Academic 
Pediatrics, 14(2): S80-S97.
<<<PAGE=91>>>
82 
Hilt, L.T., Riese, H. and Soreide, G.E. 2019. Narrow identity resources for future 
students: The 21 st century skills movement encou nters the Norwegian education 
policy context. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 51(3):384-402. 
Hobo, M. 2016. An analysis of the skills development programmes within the context 
of human resource development: the case of the Eastern Cape Provincial Department 
of Social Development. Potchefstroom: North-West University Campus. (Dissertation-
MA). 
Holden, L. and Biddle, J. 2017. The introduction of human capital theory into education 
policy in the United States. History of Political Economy, 49(4):537-574. 
Iskamto, D. 2021. Stress and Its Impact on Employee Performance. International 
Journal  
Jonck, P. and De Coning, R. 2020. A quasi-experimental evaluation of a skills capacity 
workshop in the South African public service. African Evaluation Journal, 8(1):1-9. 
Jonck, P., De Coning, R. and Matseke, M. 2020. Factors affecting ‘evaluation 
influence’ with specific reference to skills development in the South African Public 
Service. Journal for New Generation Sciences, 18(2):30-42. 
Kang, Y. and Mok, K.H. 2022. The Broken Promise of Human Capital Theory: Social 
Embeddedness, Graduate Entrepreneurs and Youth Employment in China.  Critical 
Sociology, 00(0):1-15. 
Kanyane, M.H., Houston, G.F. and Sausi, K. 2013. State of South Africa public service 
in the context of macro socio-economic environment. Journal of Public Administration 
and Governance, 3(1):126-141. 
Kidd, C.V. 1980. Manpower policies for the use of science and technology. New York, 
NY: Pergamon Policy Studies. 
Koch, M. 2016. Skills, tasks and the scarcity of talent in a global economy. Review of 
International Economics, 24(3):536-563.
<<<PAGE=92>>>
83 
Korkmaz, E. and Afşar, A. 2021. Activity -Based Budgeting for Hotel Food and 
Beverage Services: A Case Study. International Journal of Arts and Commerce , 
10(9):19-40. 
Kowo, K. 2013. The Ro le of Training and Skills Development in Promoting 
Performance Improvement by Municipalities in the Free State Province.  
Vanderbijlpark: North-West University. (Thesis-PhD). 
Kraak, A. 2008. Human Resources Development Review 2008. Education, 
Employment and Skills in South Africa. Pretoria: Karen Press. 
Kroukamp, H. 2002. Skills training a prerequisite for changing position and status of 
public servants in South Africa. Journal of Public Administration, 37(4):453-474. 
Kroukamp, H. and Cloete, F. 2018. Improving professionalism in South African local 
government. Acta Academica, 50(1):61-80 
Kucharcikova, A. 2011. Human capital –definitions and approaches. Human 
Resources Management & Ergonomics, 5(2):60-70. 
Kusek, J.Z. and Rist, R.C. 2004. A handbook for D evelopment Practitioners: Ten 
Steps for Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Lapuente, V. and Van de Walle, S. 2020. The effects of new public management on 
the quality of public services. Governance, 33(3):461-475. 
Law, P. 2010. Gaming outcome of accountants and human capital theory: Macau 
evidence. Management Research Review, 33(12):1174-1186. 
Le Granje, L. 2011. Initiating debate: Human capital, (human) capabilities and higher 
education.  South African Journal of Higher Education, 25(6):1039–1046. 
Levin, H.M. and Kelley, C. 1994. Can education do it along? Economics of Education 
Review, 13(2):97-108. 
Linde, B.J. and Maritz, C. 2013. The State of the Skills Development Expectations and 
Obligations of Municipal Employees. Journal of Psychology in Africa, 23(2):353-358.
<<<PAGE=93>>>
84 
Longenecker, J.G., Petty, J.W., Palich, L.E. and Hoy, F. 2013. Small business 
management. Scarborough, ON: Nelson Education. 
Lussier, R.N. 2017. Management fundamentals: Concepts, applications, and skil l 
development. New Delhi: Sage. 
Luthuli, S., Nyawo, J.C. and Mashau, P. 2019. Effectiveness of training and 
development on employees’ performance in South African municipalities with special 
reference to Umzumbe Local Municipality. African Journal of Devel opment Studies, 
9(Special 1):117.-129. 
Mabe, I.I., Makamu, N.I. and Juta, L.B. 2018. The impact of training and development 
on employees’ performance in Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality. Journal of 
Public Administration, 53(3):718-730. 
Machika, D. M. 2014. Capacity building programmes for the skills development of 
employees at the Gauteng Department of Education . Vanderbijlpark: North West 
University (Dissertation: Masters). 
Machin, S. and Vignoles, A. 2004. What is the Good of Education.  New York, NY: 
Princeton University Press. 
Maclean, R., Jagannathan, S. and Sarvi, J. 2013. Skills Development for Inclusive and 
Sustainable Growth in Developing Asia. London: Springer.  
Maduka, N.S., Edwards, H., Greenwood, D., Osborne, A. and Babatunde, S.O. 2018. 
Analysis of competencies for effective virtual team leadership in building successful 
organisations. Benchmarking, 25(2):696-712 
Madumo, O.S. 2015. Developmental local government challenges and progress in 
South Africa. Administratio Publica, 23(2):153-166. 
Madzivhandila, T.S. and Musara, M. 2020. Taking responsibility for entrepreneurship 
development in South Africa: The role of lo cal municipalities. Local Economy , 
35(3):257-268.
<<<PAGE=94>>>
85 
Makapela, L. and Mtshelwane, N.D. 2021. Exploring the use and influence of human 
resource policies within South African municipalities. South African Journal of Human 
Resource Management, 19(0):1-14. 
Makgato, M. 2019. STEM for Sustainable Skills for the Fourth Industrial Revolution: 
Snapshot at Some TVET Colleges in South Africa . Available at: 
https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/69249 (Accessed on 12 December 2022). 
Malesa, D. and Maleka, M.J. 2021. An Integrated Skills Development Framework for 
Lepelle Northern Water. Journal of Public Administration, 56(3.1):790-802. 
Mamokhere, J. 2019. An exploration of reasons behi nd service delivery protests in 
South Africa: A case of Bolobedu South at the Greater Tzaneen Municipality. A paper 
presented at the 4 th Annual International Conference on Public Administration and 
Development Alternatives (IPADA).  03- 05 July 2019, Southern Sun Hotel, OR Tambo 
International Airport, Johannesburg, South Africa. 
Mansfield, B. 1999. What is ‘competence’ all about? Competency, 6(3):24-28. 
Maphumulo, W.T. and Bhengu, B.R. 2019. Challenges of quality improvement in the 
healthcare of South Africa post-apartheid: A critical review. Curationis, 42(1):a1901. 
Marginson, S. 2019. Limitations of human capital theory. Studies in Higher Education, 
44(2):287-301. 
Martela, F. 2019. What makes self -managing organizations novel? Comparing how 
Weberian bureaucracy, Mintzberg’s adhocracy, and self -organizing solve six 
fundamental problems of organizing. Journal of Organization Design, 8(1):1-23. 
Martinez-Fernandez C. and Choi K. 2013. Skills Development Pathways in Asia. (In: 
Maclean R., Jagannathan S., Sarvi J. (Eds) Skills Development for Inclusive and 
Sustainable Growth in Developing Asia -Pacific. Technical and Vocational Education 
and Training: Issues, Concerns and Prospects, 19. Springer, Dordrecht).
<<<PAGE=95>>>
86 
Maruatona, T. 2010. International Perspectives on Competence Development: 
Developing skills and capabilities. International Journal of Lifelong Education , 
29(6):767-770. 
Masipa, M.J., Manganyi,  P.S. and Mogorosi, L.D. 2022. Indigent household 
experience of Free basic services in rural settlements: A case of Molemole 
municipality in Limpopo province. Gender and Behaviour, 20(3):19769-19785. 
Masuku, M.M. and Jili, N.N. 2019. Public service delivery in South Africa: The political 
influence at local government level. Journal of Public Affairs, 19(4):1935-1942. 
Matebesi, S. 2018. “A hungry stomach knows no allegiance”: Transactional activism 
in community protests in Ficksburg. Southern Journal for Contemporary History , 
43(1):242-261. 
Matlala, L.S. 2018. Factors influencing the implementation of the Auditor -General’s 
recommendations in South African municipalities . Johannesburg: University of 
Johannesburg. (Dissertation- Masters). 
Matlala, L.S. and Uwizeyimana, D.E. 2020. Factors influencing the implementation of 
the Auditor General’s recommendations in South African municipalities. African 
Evaluation Journal, 8(1):1-11. 
Mazenda, A., Molepo, N., Mushayanyama, T. and Nga rava, S. 2022. The invisible 
crisis: the determinants of local food insecurity in Gauteng municipalities, South Africa. 
British Food Journal, 124(13):274-289. 
Mbandlwa, Z., Dorasamy, N. and Fagbadebo, O.M. 2020. Leadership challenges in 
the South African l ocal government system.  Journal of Critical reviews , 7(13):1642-
1653. 
McClelland, D.C. 1973. Testing for competence rather than for intelligence. American 
Psychologist, 28(1):1-14. 
Mchunu, N. 2019. Corruption perceptions and their effects on young graduate s’ 
attitudes towards public sector recruitment processes and trust in public institutions-a
<<<PAGE=96>>>
87 
quantitative exploration of students from the University of KwaZulu -Natal and the 
KwaZulu-Natal Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. 
African Journal of Public Affairs, 11(3):59-78. 
McKinnon, A., Flothmann, C., Hoberg, K. and Busch, C. 2017. Logistics competencies, 
skills, and training: a global overview. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Moghtader, B. 2017. Human Capital and Education of Desires af ter Michel Foucault. 
Journal of Self-Governance and Management Economics, 5(4):35-52. 
Mohlala, G. Phago, K.G. and Mpehle , Z. 2014. Management training and 
development- a case study of the Greater Tubatse Local Municipality. Journal of Public 
Administration, 49(1):217-228. 
Mok, K.H. and Qian, J. 2018. Massification of higher education and youth transition: 
skills mismatch, informal sector jobs and implications for China. Journal of Education 
and Work 31(4):339-352. 
Mokhethi, M. and Oladele, O.I. 2013. Assessment of Compliance to Skill Development 
Act in Ratlou Municipality North West Province. Journal of Human Ecology, 44(2):97-
104. 
Moore, M. 1996. Creating Public Value. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Moore, M., Prichard, W. and Fjeldstad, O.H. 2018. Taxing Africa: coercion, reform and 
development. London: Zed Books. 
Morethe, S.L.M. Swarts, I. and Schultz, C. 2020. Talent Development Practices 
Predict the Employee Engagement of Human Resource Professionals. Southern 
African Business Review, 23(1):1-20. 
Motala, S. and Dieltiens, V. 2010. Educational access in South Afri ca: Country 
research summary. Sussex: University of Sussex. 
Mothabi, P. and Vyas -Doorgapersad. S. 2022. Overview of misconduct influencing 
ethical culture in the Local Government Sector Education Training Authority, South 
Africa. International Journal of Research in Business & Social Science, 11(4):365-374.
<<<PAGE=97>>>
88 
Mouton, J. 1996. Understanding Social Research. Pretoria: Van Schaik Publishers. 
Mpehle Z. 2012. Are service delivery protests justifiable in the democratic South 
Africa? Journal of Public Administration, 47(1.1):213-227. 
Mphahlele, M. and Zandamela, H. 2021. Local Government Capacity Development: A 
Case Study of a South African District Mun icipality. Journal of Public Administration 
and Governance, 11(2):156-177. 
Mpofu, M. and Hlatywayo, C.K. 2015. Training and development as a tool for 
improving basic service delivery; the case of a selected municipality. Journal of 
Economics, Finance and Administrative Science, 20(39):133-136. 
Mumford, M.D., Todd, E.M., Higgs, C. and McIntosh, T. 2017. Cognitive skills and 
leadership performance: The nine critical skills. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(1):24-
39.  
Munzhedzi, P.H. 2016. South African public sec tor procurement and corruption: 
Inseparable twins? Journal of Transport and Supply Chain Management , 10(1):197-
205. 
Munzhedzi, P.H. 2017. A reflection on the relationship between performance 
management and training in the South African public service. South African Journal of 
Human Resource Management, 15(1):1-7. 
Munzhedzi, P.H. 2021. An evaluation of the application of the new public management 
principles in the South African municipalities. Journal of Public Affairs, 21(1), p.e2132. 
Murthy, S. N. & Bhojanna, U. 2009. Business Research Methods (2nd ed.). New Delhi: 
Excel Books India.  
Murthy, S.N and Bhojanna, U. 2009. Business Research Methods. Delhi: Excel Books. 
Mutenga, M. 2021. The determinants of Zimbabwe’s economic policies on socio -
economic developm ent: 1980 -2015. Auckland Park: University of Johannesburg 
(Thesis-PhD).
<<<PAGE=98>>>
89 
Mutereko, S. 2019. Accountability through Continuous Professional Development: 
Perceptions of Educators in Umgungundlovu District, South Africa.  International 
Journal of Business and Management Studies, 11(1):74-100. 
Naidoo, V. and Mare, A. 2015. Implementing the National Development Plan? Lessons 
from co-ordinating grand economic policies in South Africa. Politikon, 42(3):407-427. 
Naong, M.N. 2009. Impact of Skills Development Training on Employee Motivation, 
Perceptions of Organisational Climate and Individual Performance. Durban: University 
of KwaZulu-Natal (Thesis-PhD). 
Ncamphalala, M. 2019. The role of ICT to promote smart governance in local 
governments (Masters dissertation: University of Johannesburg). 
Ndevu, Z. and Muller, K. 2017. A conceptual framework for improving service delivery 
at local government in South Africa. African Journal of Public Affairs, 9(7):13-24. 
Nel, P.S, Kirsten, M, Swanepoel, B.J, Erasmus, B.J, Poisat, P. 2008. South African 
Employment Relations: Theory and Practice. Pretoria: Van Schaik. 
Nhlapo, T.M.S. 2020. Human resource development strategy for gender equality 
within the Department of Correctional Services . Auckland Park: University of 
Johannesburg (Thesis-PhD). 
Nkhabu, M.F. 2021. The role of local government in the implementation of Sustainable 
Development Goals: A case of Tshwane Municipality. Pretoria: University of Pretoria.  
(Dissertation-Masters).  
Noyoo, N. 2019. Social policy in post-Apartheid South Africa: Social re-engineering for 
inclusive development. New Delhi: Routledge. 
NPC (National Planning Commission). 2012. Our Future - Make it Work: National 
Development Plan 2030. Pretoria: NPC. 
O’Byrne, D. and Moizer, J. 2014. Training Soft Skills in Social Enterprises Using Virtual 
Environments for Role Play. London: University of Plymouth Press.
<<<PAGE=99>>>
90 
Olsen WordPress. 2022. Research Paradigms: Interpretivism.  Available at: 
https://www.intgrty.co.za/2016/08/15/research-paradigms-interpretivism/ (Accessed 
on 22 November 2022). 
Olssen, M., Codd, J. and O’Neill, A. 2004. Education policy: Globalization, citizenship 
and democracy. New Delhi: SAGE. 
Ongori, H. and Nzonzo, J.C. 2011. Training and development practices in an 
organisation: an intervention to enhance organisational effectiveness. International 
Journal of Engineering and Management Sciences, 2(4):187-198. 
Osborne, S. and Hammoud, M.S. 2017. Effective employee engagement in the 
workplace. International Journal of Applied Management and Technology , 16(1):50-
67. 
Osei-Tutu, T. 2007. Skills Development in Mun icipal Finance: The bottlenecks and 
how to tackle them. IMFO (Winter):34-35. 
Parker, B. and Walters, S. 2008. Competency based training and national 
qualifications frameworks: Insights from South Africa.  Asia Pacific Education 
Review, 9(1):70-79. 
Patton, D .U., Hong, J.S., Patel, S. and Kral, M.J. 2017. A systematic review of 
research strategies used in qualitative studies on school bullying and victimization. 
Trauma, Violence & Abuse, 18(1):3-16. 
Peters, S. and Van Nieuwenhuyzen, H. 2012. Understanding the dynamics of the 
capacity challenge at local government level.  Technical Report: 2013/14 Submission 
for the Division of Revenue, Pp. 271-300. 
Plant, K. and Padotan, R. 2017. Improving skills development in the South African 
public sector: An internal audit perspective. Southern African Journal of Accountability 
and Auditing Research, 19(1):35-48. 
Punch, K. F. 2009. Introduction to research methods in education . Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE.
<<<PAGE=100>>>
91 
Rachidi, M.F. 2020. Implications of the COVID -19 Pandem ic on Management of 
Human Capital. Journal of Public Administration, 55(4):668-700. 
Ramulumisi, T.V., Schultz, C.M. and Jordaan, C.J. 2015.  Perceived effectiveness of 
a performance management system. Journal of Contemporary Management , 
12(1):517-543. 
Rankin, N. 2002. Raising performance through people: the ninth competency survey. 
Competency and Emotional Intelligence, (January). Pp 2-21. 
Reddy, P.S. 2016. The politics of service delivery in South Africa: The local 
government sphere in context’. Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern 
Africa, 12(1):a337. 
Reddy, P.S. 2021. Post-Conflict Reconstruction, Governance and Development: Has 
the Tide Turned in South Africa? (In  Public Administration in Conflict Affected 
Countries. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. Pp. 135-154). 
Republic of Rwanda. 2019. National Skills Development and Employment Promotion 
Strategy (2019-2024). Kigali: Government of Rwanda. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). 1996. Constitution of South Africa.  Pretoria: 
Government Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). 1997. White Paper on Human Resource Management 
in the Public Service). Pretoria: Government Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). 2000. Local Government: Municipal Systems Act (32 
of 2000). Pretoria: Government Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). 2001. Public Service Regulations.  Pretoria: 
Government Printer. 
Rieckmann, M. 2018. Learning to transform the world: Key competencies in Education 
for Sustainable Development. Issues and trends in education for sustainable 
development, 39(1):39-59.
<<<PAGE=101>>>
92 
Rogerson, C. and Rogerson, J. 2012. Business development and local economic 
development in South Africa: Addressing the disconnect.  Acta Academica, 44(2):41-
69. 
Rogerson, C.M. and Rogerson, J.M. 2020. Racialized landscapes of tourism: from Jim 
Crow USA to apartheid South Africa. Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic Series, 
48(48):7-21. 
Saltman, K.J. 2016. The politics of education. Oxon: Routledge.   
Sandhya, K. and Kumar, D.P. 2011. Employee retention by motivation. Indian Journal 
of science and technology, 4(12):1778-1782. 
Sanghi, S. 2016. The handbook of competence mapping: understanding, designing 
and implementing competence models in Organizations. New Delhi: SAGE. 
Schleutker, K.E.J. 2022. Detecting, defining and developing soft skills in business and 
ICT contexts. Valencia: Universitat Politècnica de València (Thesis: PhD). 
Schram, T.H. 2006. Conceptualising and proposing qualitative research. Upper Sadle 
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.  
Schultz, T.W. 1961. Investment in human capital. American Economic Review, 51(1): 
1–17. 
Schwandt, T.A. 2007. The Sage dictionary of qualitative inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE. 
Sebola, M.P. 2015. Local government administration in post -Apartheid South Africa: 
Some critical perspectives. Polokwane: Batalea Publishers. 
Shah, A. (Ed). 2005.  Public services delivery . Washington, DC: World Bank 
Publications. 
Shah, A. (Ed.). 2006. Local Governance in Developing Countries . Washington, DC: 
World Bank Publications.
<<<PAGE=102>>>
93 
Shava, E. and Chamisa, S.F. 2018. Cadre Deployment Policy and its Effects on 
Performance Management in South African Local Government: A Critical Review. 
Politeia (02568845), 37(1):1-18. 
Siegel, D. 2020. Public servants and politics: Developing political acuity in local 
government. Canadian Public Administration, 63(4):620-639. 
Silva, E. 2009. Measuring skills for 21 st century learning. The Phi Delta Kappan , 
90(9):630-634. 
Singh, M. and Duvekot, R. (Eds). 2013. Linking Recognition Practices and National 
Qualifications Frameworks. Hamburg: UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning. 
Singh, O. 2019. Durban municipal workers’ illegal strike caused R3.5m in damage -
premier. Retrieved online from: https://www.timeslive.co.za/news/south -africa/2019-
05-03-durban-municipal-workers-illegal-strike-caused-r35m-in-damage-premier/ 
(Date of Access: 15 October 2022). 
Smith, A. 1937. Wealth of Nations. New York, NY: Random House. 
Sokoh, G.C. 2019. Effect of Training and Development on the Performance of Delta 
State Civil Service Employees. Journal of Emerging Trends in Educational Research 
and Policy Studies, 10(2): 115-122. 
Sonmez, J. 2015. Soft Skills: The software developer's life manual . Shelter, NY: 
Manning Publications. 
Steiss, A.W. 2019. Strategic management for public and nonprofit organizations. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Sugiura, L., Wiles, R. and Pope, C. 2017. Ethical challenges in online research: 
Public/private perceptions. Research Ethics, 13(3-4):184-199. 
Sun, R. and Van Ryzin, G.G. 2014. Are Performance Management Practices 
Associated With Better Outcomes? Empirical Evidence from New York Public Schools. 
American Review of Public Administration, 44(3):324-338.
<<<PAGE=103>>>
94 
Swanepoel, B., Erasmus, B. and Schenk, H. 2008. South African human resource 
management: Theory & practice. Cape Town: Juta and Co. Ltd. 
Swanson, R.A. 2022. Foundations of human resource development . Oakland, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers. 
Tan, E. 2014. Human Capital Theory: A Holistic Criticism.  Review of Educational 
Research, 84(3):411-445. 
Taylor, S. 2018. Resourcing and talent management. London: Kogan Page. 
Telukdarie, A., Munsamy, M., Mohlala, P.J., Monnapula, L.L. and Viswanathan, R. 
2022. A predictive framework for sustainable youth skills development.  Higher 
Education, Skills and Work-Based Learning, 12(4):661-673. 
Thakhathi, D. and Kanyane, M. 2019. Analysing the credibility of local government 
workplace skills development planning. Civil Engineering, 27(2):53-55. 
Thomas, H., Smith, R.R. and Diez, F. 2013. Human Capital and Global Business 
Strategy. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Thornhill, C. 2013. South African public administration and management. Pretoria: Van 
Schaik.  
Thurow, L. 1975. Generating inequality. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Trilling, B. and Fadel, C. 2009. 21st century skills: Learning for life in our times . San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Tschang, F.T. and Almirall, E. 2021. Artificial intelligence as augmenting automation: 
Implications for employment. Academy of Management Perspectives, 35(4):642-659. 
Tshilongamulenzhe, M.C. 2012. Enunciating the skills development challenge facing 
South Africa. Journal of Law and Social Sciences, 1(1):30-45.
<<<PAGE=104>>>
95 
Turner, M., Halabi, A.K., Sartorius, K. and Arendse, J. 2013. An investigation of the 
efficiency of South Africa ’s sector education and training authorities (SETAs). South 
African Journal of Business Management, 44(2):1-9. 
University of Miami. 2020. How is reliability and validity realized in qualitative 
research? Available at: https://sites.education.miami.edu/statsu/2020/09/22/how-is-
reliability-and-validity-realized-in-qualitative-research/ (Accessed on 18 November 
2022). 
Van der Waldt, G., Fourie, D.J., Jordaan, J. and Chitiga -Mabugu, M. 2018. Skills 
profile of technical staff in the South African local government sector: an empirical 
survey. Problems and Perspectives in Management, 16(1.2):1-13. 
Van der Walt, F., Thasi, M.E., Chipunza, C. and Jonck, P. 2016. Skills shortages and 
job satisfaction-insights from the gold-mining sector of South Africa. African Journal of 
Business and Economic Research, 11(1):143-183. 
Van Dyk, P.S., Nel, P.S., Van Loedol ff, P. and Haasbroek, G.D. 2002. Training 
management: a multidisciplinary approach to human resources development in 
Southern Africa. Cape Town: Oxford University Press. 
Vyas-Doorgapersad, S. and Mothabi, P. 2022. Overview of misconduct influencing 
ethical culture in the Local Government Sector Education Training Authority, South 
Africa. International Journal of Research in Business and Social Science , 11(4):365-
374. 
Wallenborn, M. 2009. Skills development for poverty reduction (SDPR): Th e case of 
Tajikistan. International Journal of Educational Development, 29(6):550-557. 
Warner, L.M. 2016. Productivity and Management in Public Sector. (In Farazmand A. 
(ed.). Global Encyclopaedia of Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance. 
Cham: Springer). 
Watson, J.P. 2004. Foundations of human resource development: Learning & Training 
for individuals & organizations. London: Kogan Page.
<<<PAGE=105>>>
96 
Webb, W.  and Auriacombe, C.J. 2006. Research design in Public Administration: 
Critical considerations. Journal of Public Administration, 41(3.1): 21-38. 
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2019. The Global Competitiveness Report 2019 . 
World Geneva: World Economic Forum. 
Weiss, M. and Barth, M. 2019. Global research landscape of sustainability curricula 
implementation in higher education. International Journal of Sustainability in Higher 
Education, 20(4):570-589.  
Werner, J.M. and DeSimone R.L. 2012. Human Resource Develop ment. London: 
Cengage Learning. 
Wessels, R.G. 2022. Training and development model for municipal frontline staff. 
Teaching Public Administration, 40(1):42-69. 
Williams, C. 2007. Research Methods. Journal of Business & Economic Research , 
5(3): 65-72. 
Wincup, E. 2017.  Criminological research: Understanding qualitative methods . 
London: SAGE. 
Wisetsri, W. 2022. Human Resource Management in the 21 st century. Delhi: Blue 
Rose Publishers. 
Woods, R., Artist, S. and O’Connor, G. 2015. Learning in Australian local government: 
A roadmap for improving education and training. Commonwealth Journal of Local 
Governance, 18(1):108-126.  
World Economic Forum (WEF). 2019. The Global Competitiveness Rep ort 2019 . 
Geneva: World Economic Forum. 
Yarrow, D. 2022. Valuing knowledge: The political economy of human capital 
accounting. Review of International Political Economy, 29(1):227-254.
<<<PAGE=106>>>
97 
Zannazi, S. 2017. Investing in skills to overcome the crisis? Low -skilled workers in 
Italy: European strategies, policies and structural weaknesses.  International Journal 
of Lifelong Education, 37(2):216-233.