<<<PAGE=1>>>
Summary
In Ghana in the wake of government shortfalls, civil society has played a strong role 
in financing, researching and designing processes and projects for service delivery, 
unlike many of its African peers. This case study explores the role of civil society 
tools in showcasing sanitation services at district level, including the I Am Aware 
initiative (IAA) and the more synthesised District League Table (DLT), promoted 
through an NGO, the Ghana Centre for Democratic Development (CDD-Ghana). 
The latter is a tool that provides an overall assessment of social development, rank-
ing all districts across the country. The chapter examines how different stakeholders 
have used the DLT as evidence for enhancing performance in the sanitation sector. 
It highlights strengthened evidence use in assessing sanitation performance at the 
local level: citizens putting pressure on district assemblies for improving perfor-
mance in sanitation; strengthening avenues for citizen-level engagement, creating 
a source of pressure at district level; civil society using the evidence for their own 
project planning; and motivating district assemblies to improve performance.
Background
This case study explores the role of civil society in the generation and use of 
evidence in influencing performance in the sanitation sector in Ghana, with a 
particular focus on the contribution of the I Am A ware (IAA) initiative, drawing 
on the District League Table (DLT) as the evidence base. Both were promoted 
through an NGO, CDD-Ghana. While both these tools look at basic services 
in general, the chapter looks at their role in relation to the sanitation sector in 
particular. While the IAA and DLT play a valuable role in helping to refine and 
improve the quality of indicators used to monitor district level performance in 
sanitation, it is important to recognise they are only a small part of civil society’s 
contribution to move the sanitation sector forward over the past two decades. 
The concluding part of this chapter will briefly touch on some public engage-
ment tactics used by civil society and how they have cumulatively contributed 
to positive reforms in the sanitation sector more broadly.
Data collection for this case study took place in late 2018 using qualitative 
methods involving primary and secondary research, a desk review of published 
11 The contribution of civil 
society generated evidence 
to the improvement of 
sanitation services in Ghana
Laila Smith, Dede Bedu-Addo, Mohammed Awal  
and Anthony Mensah
<<<PAGE=2>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 189
documentation on the sector in general, and research and evaluation more 
specific to Ghana. Thirteen interviews were conducted with selected stake -
holders. T wo focus group meetings were conducted, including 14 civil society 
representatives and private sector faecal sludge service providers active in the 
urban sanitation sector. Further interviews were carried out in January  2019 
with district-level government officials at Amasaman in the Ga West Munici -
pal Area of the Greater Accra Region and in April and May  2019 with the 
Ministry of Sanitation and Water Resource Management and CDD-Ghana.
Limitations of the study included the difficulty in tracking the work of the 
large number of NGOs contributing to the sector. Their work and achieve -
ments are rarely documented (with the exception of reports directly to the 
donors funding them) and there is no clear mechanism for gathering and dis -
seminating their substantial contributions to sanitation service delivery. This 
made it difficult to trace how their efforts were contributing to overall progress 
in the sector performance. However, it was clear that their efforts had brought 
about significant change in the sector.
Context
National context
Ghana was the first African country to gain independence in 1957. The coun-
try is largely decentralised with 16 regions that coordinate the bulk of public 
services. As at February 2019 Ghana had 260 metropolitan, municipal and dis-
trict assemblies (MMDAs) that implemented government policies and provided 
social services at the local level.
Ghana is one of the fastest growing economies in Africa, recently recognised 
by the IMF as a middle-income country. Ghana’s urban population doubled 
from 1984 to 2013 with growth averaging 3.5%. T oday, the country is one of 
the most rapidly urbanising countries in Africa with an estimated 54.8% of the 
population living in towns and cities (WorldoMeters, 2019). However, many of 
these people still do not have adequate access to basic services.
The sanitation sector
Sanitation the world over is a major challenge because of limited political prior-
itisation and low fiscal commitments, and there is a weak understanding of the 
factors influencing high-level decision makers to commit to improved sanitation.
In Ghana sanitation provision is fraught with inequities, with the largest gap 
in access to improved sanitation (WHO/ UNICEF , 2017). The brunt of poor 
levels of sanitation is borne by the poorest in Ghana, where as recent as 2015, 
only 1% had access to basic sanitation and about 19 % practised open defecation 
(OD) (WHO/UNICEF , 2017, Ntow, 2019). Almost 57% of the population use 
shared latrines – a standard that is below the UN’s acceptable levels for promot-
ing safe and effective sanitation
The Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) established by UNICEF to track 
country progress towards achieving MDG targets is a universally recognised
<<<PAGE=3>>>
190 Laila Smith et al.
source of evidence for tracking country coverage in water and sanitation. In 
2015, the JMP ranked Ghana as the second lowest in the world with 15% of 
the population covered by basic sanitation, following South Sudan (Ibid.). This 
became a point of international embarrassment for Ghana’s political leader -
ship and an important catalyst for change, together with the evidence-based 
advocacy campaigns driven by large INGOs active in Ghana, such as WaterAid, 
Trend and SNV as well as Coalition of NGOs in Water and Sanitation (CONI-
WAS), the sector’s coalition of civil society organisations. According to the 
latest available domestic statistics, there has been an improvement of basic pro-
vision for sanitation moving from 15% in 2015 to an estimated 21% in 2018 
(Ghana Statistical Services, 2018).
Institutions and stakeholders influencing the sector
STATE ACTORS
Following sustained lobbying from civil society in the lead up to the 2016 elec-
tions, President Nana Addo Danquah Akuffo-Addo provided crucial leadership 
and commitment to driving efforts in addressing the country’s challenges in 
the sector. In January  2017, the Ministry of Sanitation and Water (MSWR) 
was established, absorbing the functions of the Directorate of the Environ-
mental Health and Sanitation Division (EHSD), which had previously been in 
the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD). The 
MSWR is responsible for policy formulation, harmonisation and coordination 
of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) activities, through its Water Direc -
tor and Environmental Health and Sanitation Directorate (
Appiah-Effah et al., 
2019, p. 404).  The Ministry also determines key indicators that are tracked by 
the Ministry of Monitoring and Evaluation.
At district level, Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs) 
are the basic unit of government and the statutory deliberative and legislative 
body for the determination of broad policy objectives of the development pro-
cesses within their jurisdictions (Government of Ghana (GoG), Ministry of Water 
Resources Works and Housing, 2010). They are responsible for rural, small-town 
and urban water and sanitation delivery using the private sector for infrastructure 
planning and delivery, and communities or private operators for management 
(Respondent 6 – Government). They also play the role of regulator, for example, 
approving tariffs. District assemblies (DAs) are responsible for the planning, imple-
mentation, operation and maintenance of water and sanitation facilities and the 
legal owners of communal infrastructures in rural communities and small towns 
(Water and Sanitation Monitoring Platform, 2009). Under this authority, District 
Environmental Health Officers educate communities on sanitation and hygiene 
and enforce regulations regarding the construction, use, and management of pub-
lic as well as institutional and household facilities (Respondent 8 – Government).
The EHSD is responsible for sanitation policy-based oversight (Ibid). The abil-
ity to provide effective oversight is hampered by inadequate evidence from perfor-
mance monitoring and annual reports from the National Development Planning
<<<PAGE=4>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 191
Commission (NDPC), which are usually published late. The overall responsibil-
ity for district performance rests with MLGRD as it carries the human resource 
responsibilities for the civil service at district level. Embedding similar roles in 
different ministries at different levels makes coordination a challenge. As indi-
cated by one of the district assembly staff, their dual responsibility to MLGRD 
and MSWR is difficult as they feel as if their ‘head is with MLGRD and legs are 
with MSWR’ (Respondent 1 – Government). Sanitation issues are underreported 
because most agencies at district level do different WASH activities for which 
they are not responsible to MSWR. Coordination is particularly problematic with 
regards to the regulation, monitoring and supervision of private sector service 
providers.
The Sanitation Ministry is developing its own reporting system to address 
these coordination gaps (Respondent 8  – Government), but this has been in 
the making for over a decade. Although most service delivery in the sector at 
district level has been outsourced to the private sector, government provides 
little support for their work and consequently has little oversight of their activi-
ties (TREND, 2003, Focus group 1). Moreover, where activities are regulated 
by other agencies, the MSWR has little control over them and may not even 
receive reports of their activities. For instance, the Environmental Protection 
Agency, which regulates sanitation provision, is not under the Ministry of Sani-
tation. This makes coordination of the private sector’s work in this area even 
more difficult (Respondent 3 – Private sector).
Part of the limited performance of sanitation coordination and regulation at the 
district level is that it has historically been an unfunded mandate. As such, the lim-
ited resource allocation for liquid waste in particular at the district level has nega-
tively affected the effectiveness of decentralisation of sanitation service delivery.
NON-STATE ACTORS
Ghana, unlike many of its African counterparts, is a relatively inclusive society1 
with a favourable environment for civil society participation in service provision. 
One underlying reason is the historical leadership that civil society has provided 
in financing, researching and designing processes and projects for service delivery 
in the wake of government shortfalls. This was made possible through interna-
tional donors’
2 funding of sanitation, predominantly in rural areas, over several 
decades. The bulk of these resources have been channelled through international 
non-government organisations (INGOs) and civil society organisations (CSOs).
The state’s openness to consultation, debate and engagement has created an 
opportunity for civil society to play a leading role in moving the sanitation 
sector forward. This has given civil society legitimacy in the eyes of the state, 
which has been leveraged to ensure regular and systematised engagement with 
government in service delivery and polity reform in the sanitation sector.
INGOs and CSOs support government and other agencies in implementa -
tion of sanitation programmes through participation in policy dialogue; facilita-
tion of innovation and sharing of best practices; provision of capacity support 
to community structures; and participation in thematic studies and/or action
<<<PAGE=5>>>
192 Laila Smith et al.
research. They also support collaboration and coordination within the sanitation 
sub-sector. These international organisations tend to work in partnership with 
local CSOs at the district level or in collaboration with other national CSOs.
The coordination of these international and local alliances for advocacy 
purposes is steered through the Coalition of NGOs in Water and Sanitation 
(CONIWAS), which has been vital in uniting the voice of civil society in the 
water and sanitation sector. This has been applied in advocacy, lobbying and 
engagement with the state on policy reform, and mobilising sector actors for 
actions that are non-confrontational but capable of resolving sector concerns.
A key protagonist for this story is the CDD-Ghana, which is not sector-
focused but rather advocacy-oriented in promoting inclusive participation 
aimed at strengthening democratic governance and the demand for pub -
lic accountability in Ghana and Africa. CDD-Ghana was established in 1998 
as an independent, non-partisan, not-for-profit research and advocacy think 
tank. The centre uses research, ideas and partnerships to encourage dialogue 
to inform and influence public policy and to mobilise citizen engagement at 
district level on local development issues. A mentioned earlier, this case pays 
particular attention to two linked interventions by CDD-Ghana for evidence 
production at district level that have influenced a reform agenda for sanitation 
and social service provision: the I  Am A ware (IAA) campaign leading to the 
District League Table (DLT) as a source of evidence for this advocacy.
Evidence gaps in the sanitation sector and the need for citizen engagement
Within Ghana, a key constraint to citizen participation, governmental account-
ability and responsiveness of public services is limited access to user-friendly, 
government-produced information on the state, provision and quality of public 
goods and services ( CDD-Ghana, 2017
; Respondent 10 – Non-government). 
The state needs more robust and uniform sources of evidence to continually assess 
the sector’s key policy objectives and improve accountability and investment out-
comes at both national and local levels. Meanwhile, from a citizens’ perspective, 
the public needs greater evidence to address weak accountability at the district 
level and improve district assembly responsiveness to service delivery challenges.
This situation is compounded by weak incentives at all levels of govern-
ment around the use of evidence. Decision making is often not evidence-based 
and driven by emotional or political considerations (T wende Mbele, 2019). 
In addition, availability of data within government entities is constrained due 
to limited resources and capacities for evidence generation, coordination and 
use at the district level and upwards. There is weak regulation by the Ministry 
of Sanitation and Water Resources due to the reliance on evidence from the 
districts, which themselves have limited capacity to assess performance in sani-
tation (Respondent 6 – Non-government). Where evidence is being generated 
by non-state actors, its use by the state is hindered by bureaucratic rigidities. 
For example, many civil society actors do not formally register their presence at 
the district level. Without this registration, the evidence from non-state actors 
cannot be used by district authorities when collating service delivery data.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 193
In response to these challenges, over the years various partnerships have 
emerged between key national, policy and management institutions as well as 
CSOs to produce and manage data. These partnerships undertake analysis to 
inform the development of evidence-based human development policy, stra -
tegic planning, monitoring and evaluation, and management capacity, and to 
build the capacity of the citizenry to participate in the development process and 
take advantage of emerging economic activities (UNDP Ghana, 2019).
Increasing access to evidence in the sanitation sector
Many state and non-state agencies in Ghana have worked together to use evidence 
to move the sanitation sector forward. The key champions include UNICEF 
Ghana, CDD-Ghana, WaterAid, SNV and IRC working with government 
departments such as MLGRD, Office of the Head of Civil Service, MSWR, the 
Ministry of Monitoring and Evaluation (MoME), NDPC and MMDAs. Civil 
society, through its various engagements in generating evidence within the sanita-
tion sector, is an important source of data and engaging in an evidence-informed 
way through their own respective advocacy efforts and through CONIWAS, as 
well as through their direct district to national level partnerships.
Bridging the gaps – the IAA and DLT tools
In 2011, CDD-Ghana began the IAA initiative, a ‘non-partisan citizen empow-
erment tool’ established to empower citizens and improve their awareness and 
engagement with duty bearers by providing free, user-friendly, accessible infor-
mation on the provision of public goods and services in order to strengthen the 
demand for public accountability. Working with various partners and govern-
ment agencies at both national and sub-national level, the project disseminates 
district-level information focused on service delivery performance through 
radio, town hall meetings, and the use of SMS text messages (
Jones et al., 2019, 
p. 4).  IAA has a data facility centre that helps assemble, archive, and dissemi -
nate information related to citizen feedback on service delivery performance 
through the channels outlined earlier. IAA conducts further analysis of the 
institutional, accountability and governance context of different services. These 
are prepared by CDD-Ghana staff and shared locally through fact sheets and 
briefing reports in local languages with citizens and used for discussions with 
government officials in live interaction sessions.
CDD-Ghana works with CSO partners who have been trained to work in 
the regions: each region is covered by one CSO for two districts per region. 
These IAA district partners organise Citizens’ Social Action Groups (compris-
ing 13 to 15 members each) within each Local Area Council/community group 
and these citizen accountability-demanding groups are trained on how to ana-
lyse data and use it to demand accountability and better services. Other groups 
include parent/teacher associations (PTAs), farmer-based organisations (FBOs), 
and women’s and youth groups that are representative and inclusive of all 
zones of the project’s districts. They also receive governance and accountability
<<<PAGE=7>>>
194 Laila Smith et al.
literacy training at the local level. The groups then go back to work with their 
communities to raise awareness on public service delivery issues.
In 2014, CDD-Ghana, through the IAA project, partnered with UNICEF 
Ghana to design and launch a new social accountability tool dubbed the Ghana 
District League Table (DLT), previously tested in Latin America, which sum-
marises performance against a set of service indicators at the outcome level. It 
seeks to improve citizens’ access to information about the state, provision and 
quality of basic public services in order to increase their demand for account -
ability and to improve responsiveness in service delivery. The DLT also seeks 
to support government to track development levels across the country and use 
peer pressure to motivate district assemblies to improve services.
The DLT is an extension of the IAA project concept. While the IAA focuses 
on sector-based input and output indicators, the DLT focuses on outcome 
indicators in six sectors: education, health, water, sanitation, security and gov-
ernance. The information from these six sectors is aggregated into a single 
index that is used to rank all the districts in Ghana to identify those doing well 
and those performing poorly. All DLT data is sourced from administrative data 
provided through the ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) responsible 
for the six DLT sectors.
3 These ministries depend on District Assembly report-
ing on the state of provision and quality of services generated annually. The data 
is collected annually and cleaned and processed by CDD-Ghana.
The IAA disseminates the DLT evidence through a website that enables 
users to compare quality in selected districts. This district level data is presented 
as graphs. Furthermore, the IAA prepares bulletins that provide infographics 
that compare the quality of service in particular districts to national averages. 
A free SMS platform is also set up for citizens to text in requests for data from 
the DLT, which is sent to them on their phones (Jones et al., 2019, p. 4).
What makes up the sanitation DLT indicator
The sanitation sector performance indicator used in the DLT is Open Defeca-
tion Free (ODF) certification (percentage of communities certified as ODF), 
as it was a chief concern of both the wider public as well as government. Dis-
cussions with CDD-Ghana and the MSWR revealed that the ODF indicator 
is seen as a multi-sectoral outcome indicator to measure quality of sanitation, 
with links to health, education and the environment. ‘Open defecation free 
villages’ is a composite indicator that is made up of numerous other output 
indicators relating to systems being in place to keep villages free of visible waste 
and employing hygiene practices.
For instance, output indicators would monitor latrine construction at the 
household level, with handwashing facilities with soap or ash close to these facil-
ities, and evidence of handwashing practices being available to ensure hygiene 
behaviour. These output indicators are tracked by various ministries who carry 
responsibility for specific elements of the sanitation system. The Ministry of 
Health engages in the hygiene dimensions of the composite indicator and the
<<<PAGE=8>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 195
illnesses that arise from poor hygiene behaviour; the Ministry of Education 
engages in the mechanisms around awareness-raising associated with hygiene 
promotion; while the Ministry of Sanitation engages with latrine construction 
and overall outcome of the composite indicator.
Promoting the use of the evidence from IAA/DLT
A number of interventions were intentionally used in order to promote use of 
the evidence emerging from DLT. Many of these interventions built relation-
ships, a sense of ownership and trust in the evidence through enabling interac-
tion between evidence users. For example, the use of workshops and regular 
meetings to engage government at multiple levels around methodological design 
resulting in ensuring ownership as well as building of relationships and trust. 
The interventions also strengthened incentives for evidence use – through, for 
example, using a ranking system and strengthening awareness and understand-
ing of the value of evidence for improving performance. Table 11.1 provides an 
overview of the use interventions and change mechanisms activated.
Types of evidence use that emerged
Strengthening capabilities for evidence-based advocacy
According to a formative evaluation conducted on the IAA, its evidence-
informed campaigns using DLT data have helped strengthen the confidence 
and capabilities of citizens to engage through civic groups. This has become a 
pressure point on government actors to improve service delivery, particularly 
at the sub-national level, and has also inspired citizens to work with district 
assemblies to use the DLT evidence to monitor the state of service delivery 
(
Jones et al., 2019). In particular, the role of citizens in interrogating the output 
indicators and engaging with district assemblies on the accuracy and relevance 
in how they are used has contributed to improving the quality of district level 
data in the sanitation sector (Respondent 3 – Civil society).
The work done at the ground level through the IAA has helped create more 
robust evidence for civil society at a national level to use in their advocacy 
engagements (
Jones et al., 2019; Ntow, 2019).
Supporting evidence-informed advocacy for improved service delivery
The DLT is utilised by CSOs to influence the development of District Medium 
T erm Development Plans and local CSOs use the evidence to convince the 
district assembly to provide more equi table distribution of national resources 
to communities living in deprived areas. The Garu T empane District is a good 
example of the use of data for advocacy by CSOs. RISE Ghana, a local NGO, 
and a citizen’s group called the IAA Volunteers used district data to put forward 
a written petition from citizens to the District Assembly. This was successful
<<<PAGE=9>>>
196 Laila Smith et al.
T able 11.1  Evidence use interventions ar ound the IAA/DLT and the changes these 
influenced
Evidence use interventions Effect – change mechanisms activated that enabled use of evidence
Workshop to review the CDD-Ghana and UNICEF organise an annual 
indicators and to explore methodological review consultative workshop, with 
new ones for inclusion government data-producing agencies at the central 
in the DLT performance government level responsible for all sectors assessed 
assessment in the DLT, to review the indicators and to explore 
new ones for inclusion into the DLT performance 
assessment. The workshops enable building of 
relationships, and create a sense of ownership, 
ultimately strengthening evidence uptake from the 
findings of the DLT
Training of citizen groups Increases awareness of the potential of evidence as well as 
to analyse and utilise data the ability to analyse and use evidence
to demand accountability 
and better services as 
well as governance and 
accountability literacy 
more broadly
Active advocacy by CSOs Dialogue and engagement processes enable agreement 
and citizen groups for between and ownership of the evidence by partners as 
government to support the well as district staff
use of evidence
Convening of regular Interaction with districts allows for the development of 
meetings with sectors at relationships between CSOs and District Assemblies, 
district level therefore strengthening trust in the evidence and 
building abilities and confidence of district staff to use 
the evidence
Annual national launch of The regional- and district-level engagements include 
the DLT hosted by CDD- town hall meetings, meetings with government officials, 
Ghana and UNICEF and specific policy planning meetings, e.g. district annual 
regional- and district-level MTDP planning meetings. These forums engage and 
engagements after the enable citizens in understanding the data for their own 
analysis of the report/ social action together with the media and provide a 
production of the scorecard space for interaction and engagement with politicians 
and sector-based bureaucrats.
Providing access to data and This allows individuals to understand and relate to the 
analysis in user-friendly evidence
formats
Presenting the evidence Promoting awareness of the evidence and appreciation 
in comparative formats of the value of evidence, leading to the improved 
through using a ranking institutionalisation of evidence use by making it a part 
system for districts of professional norms and cultures and thereby creating/
strengthening motivation for use
CDD/UNICEF promoting 
DLT uptake to have the 
DLT used as an additional 
criterion for the DPAT
Allocation of national budget 
based on the provision of 
data and reports
<<<PAGE=10>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 197
in convincing the district to construct a toilet and urinal in the Garu market 
(Jones et al., 2019).
Influencing district performance management systems
Evidence from the evaluation of the IAA confirms that the greatest responsive-
ness to the DLT data is at the district level. Having sampled staff in four dis -
tricts across Ghana, the IAA evaluation found that these district assemblies have 
integrated some citizen priorities into their medium-term development plans 
and that these have commenced service delivery improvements in three of the 
four districts noted earlier (Ibid., p. 6).  The evaluation found that the publicity 
and pressure around the DLT has been a significant driver for increased district 
level responsiveness because it created competition and embarrassment among 
district officials and the space for citizen dialogue on sector data (Ibid.). DAs 
that perform poorly on the DLT are flagged at national level as ‘problem dis-
tricts’, a status that few district authorities want to be labelled with (Respond-
ent 8 – Government).
The DLT has no reward system be yond peer pressure through benchmarking 
and so districts are not always motivated to respond to its requirements. This is 
slowly changing, with greater awareness among districts of the links between 
the DLT and improved district performance (discussed further around the Dis-
trict Performance Assessment T ool (DPAT) system). This awareness raising is 
also promoted through nationally led campaigns (Wumbel 2017).
Informing planning and budget allocations
Evidence of civil society use of the DLT can also be found in the IAA evalua-
tion (Jones et al., 2019). The evaluation found evidence that the DLT had been 
widely disseminated at national level and that most policy and advocacy organi-
sations had used it, and that civil society used the DLT to plan their geographi-
cal focus for service delivery interventions, for advocacy at the district level and 
for policy analysis (Ibid., p. 5).  Further evidence through a series of workshops 
held with national sanitation civil society role players found that the DLT was 
foundational to the more sophisticated generation of evidence through their 
service delivery work (Ntow, 2019).
CSOs and citizens use the DLT for advocacy from the district level down -
wards. The District Performance Assessment T ool (DPAT) is a performance 
assessment system that relies on the same administrative data that feeds the DLT 
but is used upwards from the District Assemblies by the MDAs (Government 
of Ghana, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD, 
2018). The NDPC and MOME noted that the allocation of national budget -
ary resources by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is now based on submission of 
plans, implementation reports and medium-term development plans, certified 
by NDPC (Respondents 4 and 11 – Government). The growing responsiveness 
of district assembly officials to how they are ranked through the DPAT system,
<<<PAGE=11>>>
198 Laila Smith et al.
drawing on the same administrative data that feeds the DLT, has helped motivate 
improved performance. The carrot is the implication of not being able to access 
further funds from central government if the assessment in the DPAT for the 
environment, within which the category of sanitation sits, is low. This behaviour 
change has influenced the structure and process of the public administration by 
influencing decision making in budgetary allocation at the district level. This, in 
turn, has led to greater budgetary support from the national treasury for sanitation 
at district level because districts are performing better in addressing the systems 
required to increase the number of villages/settlements that are ODF .
Analysing use and the factors that contributed to use
Interventions undertaken to promote use of evidence
The IAA campaign, drawing on the DLT evidence, has entailed a series of 
process facilitation activities that are beginning to produce higher-quality data 
generation at the district level and greater citizen capacity to hold local govern-
ment to account for sanitation performance. This has been achieved through 
CSOs and government stakeholders drawing on deliberate and strategic use 
interventions to ensure use of the district sanitation evidence that is gener -
ated at the local level and fed into national administrative systems. Table
 11.1 
describes these interventions and the effect they had on individuals, which 
ultimately resulted in use of the evidence at an organisation and systems level.
The interventions used by the IAA campaign (described in Table
 11.1) draw-
ing on the DLT evidence was timely, strategic and effective in enabling evi -
dence use.
Process facilitation
Enabling dialogue (through workshops, meetings, etc.), for example, allowed 
district assemblies and CSOs to work together to co-create the methodolo -
gies and approaches used to generate the evidence as well as jointly engage 
in sense-making of the evidence. The trust, relationships, sense of ownership 
and understanding that emerged through these interactions were important in 
building capabilities to use the evidence.
While this has been the general sense, there are still some districts that feel 
there is room for improvement in how the DLT process is integrated into District 
Assembly assessments used for the DPAT system. This would enable district offi-
cials to gain a better understanding of what the criteria for performance assess-
ments are and how these measurements used are used by national institutions.
Knowledge brokering
As discussed in Chapter 2, linkages between supply and demand of evidence 
need to be deliberately enabled and supported. Accessing, synthesising and
<<<PAGE=12>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 199
analysing as well as disseminating this data through the use of fact sheets, briefs 
and forums, and training citizen groups was seen as essential in bridging supply 
and demand at the local level. These functions also essentially served to translate 
the evidence into an accessible and useful format thereby strengthening the 
opportunities to utilise evidence.
Institutionalising evidence use
Formalising the use of evidence through linking it to performance management 
systems provided incentives and, therefore, motivation for evidence use. CDD 
and UNICEF , through their efforts to encourage policy uptake and advocacy, 
are working with MLGRD for the DLT to be used as additional criteria for 
the DPAT. The use of the DLT as a simple and ready-to-use source of evidence 
for national performance assessment in sanitation has not yet been institution -
alised by MLGRD for use in assessing the performance of district assemblies in 
relation to sanitation. Nevertheless, two civil society workshops on sanitation 
indicators held in April and June have indicated that this formalisation is well 
on its way.
4
Barriers and enablers of evidence use
There were multiple barriers and enablers that influenced the success of inter-
ventions described earlier and overall evidence use.
Enablers
At the outset, Ghana had a developed culture of inclusivity with effective plat-
forms and mechanisms for consultation and participation and the support of 
development partners to promote social accountability, and well-established 
collaborative relationships between the different stakeholders. This enabled the 
flow of information and involvement of civil society, notably in the lead up to 
decision-making processes (Respondent 2 – Non-government). Of importance 
to the sanitation sector was the presence of CSOs with capacities to assist in 
addressing challenges.
This provided a receptive environment for changes to the sector advocated 
for by external influencers (e.g. the eThekwini Declaration by African water 
and sanitation ministers)
5 as well as popular pressure from within the country, 
driven by national coalitions of sanitation NGOs such as CONIWAS (Water 
Aid Ghana, 2012). However, this may not have been sufficient without the 
leadership of the newly elected president, who championed the changes neces-
sary to improve the performance of the sector.
The DLT introduced a shift in the types of evidence being generated from 
input/output levels to outcomes, which better enabled assessment of perfor -
mance and decision making around service delivery. In addition, the DLT/IAA 
projects also provided higher levels of brokered knowledge, such as analysing
<<<PAGE=13>>>
200 Laila Smith et al.
the information developing score cards, fact sheets and policy briefs better 
suited to decision making at the district level.
Barriers
There continue to be insufficient resources allocated to evidence generation, 
resulting in gaps in the types of evidence generated, and the data does not cover 
the entire sanitation chain. For example, there is not enough data collected on 
transport of waste from the household and how it is treated and disposed of. 
This is further compounded by inadequate coordination of non-state actor-
generated evidence, which is needed to understand performance at the dis -
trict level, particularly in urban areas. The limited scope of the DLT indicators 
being tracked affects the ability to see the overall bigger picture around sector 
performance.
One of the most significant barriers to the use of evidence in the sanitation 
sector is staff capacity. Coordinating directors and engineers in the MMDAs 
all have first and second degrees. In an environmental unit or department, an 
environmental health officer who does not hold a degree is often ‘found want-
ing’ when they come face-to-face with other staff and directors who are degree 
holders. Psychologically, there is the feeling that they are not at par or co-equals 
in the workplace (Respondent 8: Government). This negatively affects their 
capacity to perform their roles, especially when it comes to regulatory oversight 
at the district level.
Another barrier around capacity is that, although they appreciate the outputs 
of the projects, many key state and non-state political and social accountability 
stakeholders, such as Parliament, CSOs and media, lack the capacity to analyse 
and use the evidence generated by the IAA and DLT projects to inform policy 
and demand for responsiveness and accountability in public service provision.
Use of evidence is in itself an enabler to evidence use (or conversely in the 
case of lack of use as earlier discussed). Although public discussion of engage -
ment with DLT evidence through the IAA is heightened around the release of 
the annual DLT report, it is not sustained until the next round of the report is 
released (Respondents 9, 10 – Non-government). This leads to poor use of the 
evidence or data gathered as people soon forget about the DLT results until 
the next report is due. Finding social champions to lead advocacy initiatives 
is needed to sustain the momentum following the national annual launch of 
the DLT.
Emerging lessons
How context and intervention influenced the use of evidence
Overall, it appears that the environment was appropriate for changes in the use 
of evidence in the sanitation sector. The political milieu was more conducive 
to inclusion of all stakeholders in the national development process and Ghana
<<<PAGE=14>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 201
was making strides in political democracy and social cohesion. T o address the 
historically poor performance of sanitation at district level, UNICEF , devel -
opment partners and a wide spectrum of national CSOs sought to promote 
greater social accountability between the state, CSOs, and other partners in 
improving the performance of the sanitation sector.
Moreover, sanitation was on the rise as an area of focus of increased pres -
sure from civil society. This coincided with increasing use of the DLT to help 
standardise government’s own data on district performance, combined with 
increasing citizen engagement in making sense of district data and using this 
to lobby for improved district performance in sanitation. The use of informa -
tion and communication technology for disseminating the DLT data fit well 
with the wave of interconnectivity and the current, high use of social media in 
Ghana. This has made the data generated more user-friendly and easily acces -
sible to all citizens.
Overall, the DLT partnership is working well. However, after four years of 
implementation, partners are now frustrated because broader resource alloca-
tion at national level is still not working well through MOFEP , MDAs and 
the District Assembly Common Fund (DACF). The partners are, therefore, 
advocating for the District Development Fund (DDF) to become part of a 
reward system to serve as motivation for the MMDAs to participate in the 
DLT. The partners are working with Parliament to query budget allocation 
and push for better resource allocation. Learning from the National Develop -
ment Planning Commission’s ‘carrot’ reward scheme with the certification of 
development plans for the receipt of government budget allocations, may be a 
good way to ensure wider resource allocation at the national level (Respondent 
5 – Non-government).
Strengthening and coordinating the data system
Ghana has strong, capable national-level CSOs that have played a significant 
contribution in moving the sector forward. Their contributions on service 
delivery, however, are limited to the districts where they are funded to work, 
and therefore the ability to feed these results into a national picture is non-
existent. There has been a long-standing plea from civil society to the Ministry 
of Sanitation and Water Resources and its institutional predecessors to play this 
coordinating role so as to be able to better use the various sources of evidence 
that civil society is generating. The data ecosystem and governance infrastruc-
ture in Ghana needs to be strengthened and harmonised to support the produc-
tion and access to timely, trusted/reliable, relevant data for policy uptake.
Suppliers of evidence need to better understand policy processes
As civil society players are still significant actors in the delivery of sanitation ser-
vices, they are also the generators of the evidence stemming from this engage-
ment (Ntow, 2019). As noted earlier, this evidence feeds into their monitoring
<<<PAGE=15>>>
202 Laila Smith et al.
systems, which report to a variety of funders. However, as it is not centralised, 
it is difficult to gain a broader national understanding of how each project is 
influencing the progress in systems of delivery.
The systematic practice of evidence use in policy making, analysis and eval-
uation within and across government and key social actors in Ghana needs 
to be strengthened. Non-state data producers (CSOs and academia) need to 
improve their understanding of how, when and which government institutions 
and other actors use evidence to inform policy design, implementation and 
monitoring so that they are better equipped to use these opportunities well for 
improved sanitation services. CONIWAS has been loudest in lobbying the state 
to address the coordination of data systems highlighted earlier. As a knowledge 
broker trusted by civil society and the state, CONIWAS could play a valuable 
role in mentoring civil society in where and when to influence decision mak-
ing with the evidence they have generated from their service delivery work.
Ownership of the evidence is critical for use
Developing and building an inclusive culture is paramount in promoting evi -
dence use at all levels of society. Evidence tends to be used when government 
and key stakeholders are involved in the evidence process from the design stage. 
Uptake of evidence by government is facilitated when government sees the 
evidence as part of its developmental objectives in ensuring informed deci -
sion making. With reference to non-state actors, community and individual 
ownership of the evidence process is key in creating the environment for pol-
icy mechanisms to work for the desired policy outcomes where these require 
behaviour change by citizens.
Champions are key
The role of champions, such as a president, UNICEF , CONIWAS and CDD, 
when combined can be catalytic in moving a sector forward. This was illus -
trated in this case study through the President, declaring his support for a par-
ticular policy intervention during his presidential campaign through intense 
lobbying by CONIWAS. Once in power, he then followed through to create 
and support the mechanisms for it to happen until the desired policy outcomes 
are achieved. UNICEF’s funding of a Ghanaian adaptation of the IAA and DLT 
has built the tools to benchmark and expose poor performance in the sector 
at the district level. Government and other stakeholders act speedily when the 
evidence shames or embarrasses them.
Collaboration requires trust
Fortunately, the history of an inclusive culture in Ghana has helped build 
a historically close engagement between civil society as implementors of 
sanitation, and as such, also valuable knowledge brokers because of their
<<<PAGE=16>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 203
own role in evidence generation. This long-standing state dependency on 
civil society to carry the sector forward, thanks in large part to development 
partner funding, has been instrumental in creating the foundations for trust 
between the state and civil society, an uncommon trait in many other African 
countries. This also calls for improved and increased access to and use of basic 
indicators for social development. This makes it easier for all stakeholders and 
citizens to engage with the data as knowledge and use of data/evidence is 
empowering for all: citizens, government (at all levels) and CSOs. However 
there needs to be more trust between policy makers and other data produc -
ers, users, evaluators (CSOs/think tanks) to facilitate and amplify learning 
and innovation around the relevance and use of evidence in policy/decision 
making.
Conclusion
The IAA campaign and the DLT have begun to effect change in the use of 
evidence for improving district level performance in sanitation. However, these 
changes cannot be isolated from broader changes over the last decade with 
sustained and active engagement by a community of active civil society actors 
at the national level. These combined efforts have contributed to a series of 
interventions and investments that demonstrate the state’s growing presence in 
raising awareness through incentive schemes and increasing allocations to this 
long-neglected sector.
6
Around the world, many NGOs have demonstrated the ability to undertake 
high-quality research using results and evidence-based approaches. However, 
this evidence is not always recognised as credible or legitimate by other actors 
in accountability processes. The IAA campaign, drawing on DLT evidence, is 
an illustration of moving beyond this barrier to provide ongoing and sustained 
evidence that has now become institutionalised within government, at vari-
ous levels. The need for increased recognition of the potential use of CSO-
generated evidence in policy interventions is a key lesson emanating from this 
study. In terms of relevance for Africa, the findings from this research will be 
particularly valuable in informing engagements in addressing institutional bar-
riers around greater use of CSO-generated evidence and advocacy tools for 
promoting greater prioritisation of sanitation in state decisions around budget 
and human resource allocations.
Notes
 1 According to the Mo Ibrahim Index IIAG scorecard on Governance, Ghana ranks fifth in 
Africa on participation and human rights.
 2 Notably UNICEF and World Bank.
 3 These include Ghana Education Service (GES);  Ghana Health Service (GHS); Com -
munity Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA); Ghana Water Company (GWC); Ghana 
Police Service (GPS); and Environmental Health and Sanitation and Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural Development (MLGRD).
<<<PAGE=17>>>
204 Laila Smith et al.
 4 This progress was confirmed at a meeting between UNICEF , GMEF and the NDPC on 
16 December 2019.
 5 The eThekwini declaration was part of the second Africasan Conference held in Durban 
in 2008. Water and Sanitation ministers announced the commitment for a separate budget 
line for sanitation to enable greater transparency in tracking state resources going towards 
sanitation as well as an annual budget allocation commitment of 0.5% of GDP .
 6 Including substantive b udget allocations by the state towards the government contribu -
tion of the second phase of the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area (GAMA) sanitation pro-
ject, funded through a USD 150 million World Bank loan to the Ghanaian government 
in 2015; increased budgetary allocations to MSWR; a promotion of the development and 
use of tools such as the Sanitation Index for all MMDAs; and an award scheme launched 
by MSWR to reward private sector actors supporting MMDAs in a National Sanitation 
Challenge programme to successfully implement their liquid waste management strategy 
proposals.
References
Appiah-Effah, E., Duku, G., Azangbego, N., Aggrey, R., Gyapong-Korsah, B. and Nyarko, K. 
2019. Ghana’s post-MDGs sanitation situation: An overview. Journal of Water, Sanitation and 
Hygiene for Development, 9, 3.
CDD-Ghana. 2017. Ghana’s district league table report 2017 . Retrieved 6 November, 2018, 
from www.iamawareghana.com; www.cddgh.org/publications
Ghana Statistical Service. 2018. Snapshots on key findings, Ghana Multiple Indicator Cluster Sur-
vey (MICS 2017/18). Survey, Findings Report, Accra, Ghana.
Government of Ghana, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD). 
2018. District performance assembly tool: Operational manual . Retrieved from www.mlgrd.
gov.gh/ctn-media/filer_public/b1/d2/b1d2f2c0-66fb-4f1a-9366-bfc169e49396/2018_
dpat_operational_manual.pdf
Government of Ghana (GoG), Ministry of Water Resources Works and Housing (MWR WH). 
2010. Water and sanitation sector performance report
. Retrieved 20 March 2019, from www.
washghana.net/ . . . /Final_2010_Sector_Perfor mance_Report[1].pdf
Jones, E., Amidu, I. and Nyarko, C. 2019. Formative evaluation of the ‘I Am Aware’ social account-
ability project in Ghana. Oxford, UK: Oxford Policy Management Limited.
Mo Ibrahim Index. 2018. Retrieved from http://s.mo.ibrahim.foundation/u/2018/10/ 
26173830/2018-IIAG-scorecard-GH.pdf
Ntow, S. 2019. Baseline report: Sanitation status in Ghana and the role of CSOs in the policy pro-
cesses. Report Commissioned by T wende Mbele.
Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. 2017. Update and SDG baselines. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF). Licence: CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Trend Group. 2003. Water, sanitation and service delivery in Ghana, Ghana . Retrieved 20 
March 2019, from www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/WELL-2003-Water.doc
T wende Mbele. 2019. M&E culture baseline study. Ghana: Executive Summary.
UNDP . 2019. Promoting inclusive growth and development. Retrieved from www.gh.undp.org/
content/ghana/en/home/operations/projects/poverty_reduction/all-projects.html
World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
2017. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Base-
lines. Geneva. Licence: CC BY -NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Water Aid Ghana. 2012. CSOs’ assessment of Ghana’s eThekwini commitments compiled by Ibra-
him Musa, Economic Impacts of Poor Sanitation in Africa, UNDP-Water & Sanitation Program
<<<PAGE=18>>>
The contribution of civil society generated evidence 205
Report, March  2012. Retrieved from https://washwatch.org/uploads/filer_public/86/
d2/86d2ad38-ae52-4e77-bf3c-36c68cc39d75/cso_ethekwini_assement_-_ghana.pdf
Water and Sanitation Monitoring Platform. 2009. Status of Ghana’s drinking W&S sector . 
Country summary sheet. Ghana. Retrieved 18 March 2019, from www.wsmp.org/down 
loads/country-summary-sheet-09.pdf
WorldoMeters. Retrieved 14 April 2019, from www.worldometers.info/world-population/
ghana-population/.
Wumbel, A. Every day is sanitation day . Retrieved 28 November 2017, from www.ircwash.
org/news/every-day-sanitation-day