<<<PAGE=1>>>
241
Evidence & Policy • vol 14 • no 2 • 241–58 • © Policy Press 2018 
Print ISSN 1744 2648 • Online ISSN 1744 2656 • https://doi.org/10.1332/174426417X14890741484716 
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which 
permits adaptation, alteration, reproduction and distribution without further 
permission provided the original work is attributed. The derivative works do 
not need to be licensed on the same terms. 
Accepted for publication 23 February 2017 • First published online 15 March 2017 
research
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision 
making: an example from South Africa
Ruth Stewart, ruths@uj.ac.za 
Laurenz Langer, llanger@uj.ac.za 
Russell Wildeman, russelw@uj.ac.za 
Yvonne Erasmus, yerasmus@uj.ac.za 
Louis Gerald Maluwa, maluwa.geraldlouis@gmail.com 
Sunet Jordaan, sunetj@uj.ac.za 
Desyreé Lötter, eerysed@gmail.com 
Janine Mitchell, janine.mitchell@yahoo.ca 
Precious Motha, pnmotha@uj.ac.za 
Africa Centre for Evidence, University of Johannesburg, South Africa
To maximise the potential impact and acceptability of EIDM capacity building, there is a need 
for programmes to coordinate their remits within existing systems, playing both ‘insider’ and 
‘outsider’ roles. Through a review of the South African evidence-policy landscape and analysis 
of a stakeholder event that brought together EIDM role players, this paper illustrates how one 
capacity-building programme navigated its position within the national evidence-policy interface. 
It identifies strategies for improving the acceptability and potential effectiveness of donor-funded 
EIDM capacity-building activities: understanding the evidence-policy interface, incorporating 
programmes into the decision-making infrastructure (being an ‘insider’), whilst retaining an element 
of neutrality (being an ‘outsider’).
key words evidence-informed decision making • capacity building • South Africa • evidence use
key message
In order to maximise impact and acceptability, there is a need for EIDM capacity-building 
programmes to identify and coordinate their remit and position within the existing system, playing 
both ‘insider’ and ‘outsider’ roles.
To cite this article: Stewart, R., Langer, L., Wildeman, R., Erasmus, Y., Maluwa, L.G., Jordaan, S., 
Lötter, D., Mitchell, J, and Motha, P. (2018) Building capacity for evidence-informed decision 
making: an example from South Africa, Evidence & Policy, vol 14, no 2, 241–58,  
DOI: 10.1332/174426417X14890741484716
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
242
Background
EIDM and demand for evidence in South Africa
Evidence-informed decision making (EIDM) is a tool for public officials to design 
policies and programmes incorporating the best available evidence on the effectiveness 
and efficiency of the intended initiatives. In 2015, the South African government 
spent R155 billion on social protection programmes to transform the country’s 
high levels of poverty and inequality (RSA, 2015). With one in five South Africans 
living below the national poverty line 1 (StatsSA, 2015) this extensive funding for 
anti-poverty programmes faces a challenge.  The government is therefore starting to 
carefully monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of its programmes, having created 
the National Department for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) in 2010 
(Goldman et al, 2015). Part of the DPME’s objective is to produce and commission 
high-quality evidence of which social programmes and polices work (for whom, under 
what circumstances, and at what cost). DPME has, for example, conducted a large-
scale evaluation of the country’s Early Childhood Development programme (Davids 
et al, 2015).  There is also an increasing supply of evaluation evidence produced by 
consultancies and universities in the country (Abrahams, 2015). 
While the supply of evaluation evidence has improved, the produced studies and 
their results often fail to feed back into policy and policy-implementation processes. 
Efforts to improve the South African evidence-policy interface seem to have placed 
less emphasis on the decision-making systems and use of evidence by public decision 
makers. A survey of senior decision makers across government departments showed 
that their main sources of evidence were of informal nature, drawing from personal 
experience as well as the opinions of individual experts and interest groups (Cronin 
and Sadan, 2015). Decision makers themselves were aware of the limitations of this 
evidence to inform the policy process and expressed an active demand to be able to 
use evidence from scientific primary research as well as syntheses of these primary 
studies (Cronin and Sadan, 2015; Goldman et al, 2015). 
As a direct response to these findings, a number of initiatives have been implemented 
in order to support decision makers’ capacity to use research evidence during the 
formulation and design of policies and programmes. Within government, these 
initiatives include demand-side components in DPME’s national Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework (Goldman et al, 2013), the Department of Public Service and 
Administration’s National School of Government (NSG), and the European Union-
funded Programme to Support Pro-poor Policy Development (PSPPD).  These 
initiatives are complemented by a number of external capacity-building programmes2 
that aim to support policymakers’ and researchers’ EIDM skills.  
EIDM capacity building
EIDM skills refer to decision makers’ abilities to access and make sense of various 
forms of evidence and to integrate this evidence into the decision-making process. 
As Oliver and colleagues observe, there is a bias in this area towards improving the 
impact of research, as opposed to understanding the processes that underpin policy 
change (Oliver et al, 2014). There is nonetheless a body of existing research that has 
investigated the effectiveness of programmes aiming to support decision-makers’ 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
243
EIDM skills, as well as contextual factors mitigating programme effectiveness (Lavis et 
al, 2003; Oliver et al, 2014; Clar et al, 2011; Siron et al, 2015). We know that a lack of 
technical skills is one of the main barriers to decision makers’ effective use of evidence 
(for example, Clar et al, 2011; Siron et al, 2015). We also know that the most promising 
facilitators identified are collaboration between researchers and policymakers, as well 
as improved relationships and skills (Oliver et al, 2014). Capacity building, as an EIDM 
intervention approach, has the potential to improve relationships between decision 
makers and researchers and to enhance decision makers’ ability to access and make 
sense of evidence. Capacity building can therefore be positioned on the nexus of 
building demand for evidence (Newman et al, 2012), as well as facilitating channels for 
its uptake through joint interaction. However, little is known about which approaches 
to capacity building are most effective. Evaluations of capacity-building programmes 
are often set in High-Income Country (HIC) contexts.
Capacity-building interventions vary by programme approach and objective 
(Newman et al, 2012). Existing systematic reviews of the effectiveness of different 
capacity-building approaches suggest that mentorship programmes are effective to 
improve decision makers’ attitudes towards EIDM, and may also have an impact 
on organisational outcomes (Abdullah et al, 2014). Likewise, training in critical 
appraisal skills seems to be beneficial to decision makers’ EIDM knowledge and 
related behaviour (Horsley et al, 2011). However, the existing research has exclusively 
been conducted in HIC settings with an explicit focus on healthcare. Evaluations 
of individual capacity-building programmes in Southern Africa highlight the 
importance of good facilitation, trusting relationships, clarity of purpose, and the 
use of a participatory, problem-based approach (Stewart et al, 2005; Stewart, 2007). 
Barriers to effective capacity building 
Capacity building to use evidence seeks to change the behaviour of decision makers. 
Behaviour change in turn is a function of capability, motivation, and opportunity 
to change (Michie et al, 2011). Individual capacity-building programmes in EIDM 
have mainly focused on one of these three functions. T wo landscape reviews of the 
evidence-policy interface in South Africa and Malawi (Choge et al, 2014; Erasmus et 
al, 2014) find that none of the identified programmes addressed all three components 
of behaviour change. At the same time, both reviews identified a larger than expected 
number of ongoing initiatives and programmes. While this reflects the increasing 
breadths and depths of EIDM interventions, the narrow focus of these programmes 
raises the question of relevance and potential duplication of efforts. 
These findings also question whether EIDM capacity-building programmes are 
targeting real capacity needs and the right audience, and whether the current multi-
faceted and rather haphazard approach to capacity building is sustainable from a systems 
perspective (for example, Schneider et al, 2014; Champagne et al, 2014; NORAD, 
2015; Kislov et al, 2014). NORAD’s extensive literature review of capacity building 
in international development bemoans the fact that a vast majority of programmes 
cluster around the support of individual EIDM capacities, such as critical appraisal 
skills, and neglect the more complex and sustainable support to organisational and 
institutional capabilities (NORAD, 2015). Kislov and peers (2014) challenge the same 
phenomenon in health, and outline how these three levels of capacity (individual, 
organisational, institutional) interact and how better targeted programmes can set in 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
244
motion a virtuous circle of mutually reinforcing levels of capacities. NORAD (2015, 
6) cites this mismatch of capacity needs to result from ‘a failure to conduct appropriate 
assessments and analysis during the preparatory stages of capacity development 
interventions’. 
In certain contexts, capacity building also seems to have reached a point of decreasing 
returns (Kislov et al, 2014; Hawkes et al, 2015; Christoplos et al, 2014). There is a risk 
of building the same individual EIDM skills among the same set of decision makers 
(easily accessible, national level of government, well-educated, and so on) (NORAD, 
2015; Christoplos et al, 2014). The results of a survey of decision makers by Schneider 
and peers (2014, 5) highlight this risk of duplicating efforts: decision makers expressed 
the need for ‘less training and more skills’. 
In the light of the above, this paper argues that, in order to increase the potential 
for impact, we must focus on increasing acceptability, and in order to achieve the 
latter there is a need for EIDM capacity-building programmes to identify and 
coordinate their remit and position within the existing evidence-policy interface. 
Based on data from a national landscape review and qualitative analysis of feedback 
from our stakeholders, we present how a South African EIDM capacity-building 
programme navigated its position within the national evidence-policy interface. 
We outline how this careful identification and co-ordination of programme remit 
allowed the programme to assume both ‘insider’ (that is, incorporating programmes 
into the decision-making infrastructure) and ‘outsider’ (that is, retaining an element of 
neutrality from the decision-making infrastructure) roles in relation to its government 
partners. This ability directly supported programme acceptability and, we propose, 
increased potential impact. 
We present both the applied methods, that is, our review of the EIDM landscape 
in South Africa and our qualitative analysis of feedback from our stakeholders. This is 
followed by a thematic synthesis of both empirical data sets, which informs our key 
message that EIDM capacity-building initiatives might benefit from a more careful 
identification and coordination of their role and contribution to the wider evidence-
policy interface. Lastly, we use the identified themes to challenge ourselves as much 
as the reader to reflect on capacity-building initiatives. 
Methods
We conducted a landscape review of the role players facilitating EIDM in South 
Africa, and a qualitative analysis of a one-day stakeholder feedback event, which, 18 
months after the publication of the review, brought together these role players to 
reflect on progress made and lessons learned concerning how to build capacity for 
EIDM in South Africa. 
The landscape review applied a rapid evidence assessment methodology. We rapidly 
screened key government and other public sector websites, as well as higher education 
and research consulting sources to identify relevant EIDM role players in South Africa. 
We also searched academic publications and Grey literature reports for potential 
references to initiatives. Searches were conducted between January and March in 2014 
and used keywords related to evidence supply/use and policy/decision-making. The 
results of this rapid systematic search were initially visually mapped and shared with 
decision-makers in the EIDM sector. This process of extensive consultation served 
to refine the map of South Africa’s research-policy landscape as well as to engage in 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
245
a snowballing search for additional role players, which we then individually followed 
up with to understand their space in the landscape. The final landscape review was 
published in July 2014 (Choge et al, 2014), but did not present a static document. 
Acknowledging that any such review effort is limited in scope, the published review 
served as a snapshot to guide understanding of the South African research-policy 
landscape at a particular point in time. The landscape review was updated in 2015, 
which highlighted the iterative process required to map the range of role players and 
vibrant nature of interaction and relations among them. 
The landscape review highlighted the diversity of the evidence-policy interface 
in South Africa indicating organisational structures and gaps within this system. It 
emphasised a need for increased networking between actors within the system to 
identity relevant activities and projects proposed to support the functioning of the 
system. Following publication of the landscape review, we started to work together 
with many of the identified role players to design and support relevant EIDM 
capacity-building activities in South Africa (Stewart et al, 2015). After 18 months of 
designing, implementing, and iterating different EIDM capacity-building approaches 
and activities, we then brought together many of the EIDM role players for a one-
day meeting to reflect on the progress of the research-policy landscape. The meeting 
focused on reviewing how to build capacity in evidence-informed decision making 
and was attended by 44 individuals, representing 21 recipients and 23 providers of 
capacity building. Agreed agenda items included: developing relevant theories of 
change for increasing the use of evidence in decision making in South Africa; finding 
approaches for individual capacity building, including formal and informal training 
as well as mentorships, coaching and secondments; how to facilitate institutional 
change; how to influence systemic change in the decision-making environment; and 
montoring and evaluation [M&E] of capacity building in EIDM.
The meeting followed an interactive format with short presentations followed by 
open discussion and small-group exercises to reflect on each agenda item, and map 
out experiences and reflections from amongst the group. 
We used rapid consensus-building techniques during the meeting, including 
feedback to the participants of emerging findings in real time during the event to 
allow for further discussion and iteration. 3 Qualitative and quantitative data were 
collected by two researchers. This data collection included: visual recordings of the 
event; two sets of researcher transcriptions and notes; flipchart and poster records of 
the group activities and consensus-building exercises; social network activity, and an 
opportunity for attendees to share views by email after the event. 
We analysed the collected data using thematic analysis (Saldaña, 2013). T wo 
researchers independently coded all data sources to derive two independent sets 
of descriptive themes. These descriptive themes were compared and in case of 
disagreement the opinion of a third team member was consulted. Descriptive themes 
were then synthesised into analytical themes and shared with the wider research 
group, as well as with the event participants.4 A final event report was published only 
after all attendees had had an opportunity to verify information within the report. 
This article draws from both data sources (that is, landscape review and qualitative 
analysis of the stakeholder feedback event) to show how the programme benefited 
from acting in both insider and outsider roles in relation to its government partners; 
an ability that came as a result of an in-depth understanding of the national research-
policy landscape, and that enhanced programme acceptance and potential impact.  
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
246
Findings
As presented below, our research suggests that in order for capacity-building activities 
to be acceptable, integrated, and sustainable there is a need to: understand the 
evidence-policy interface and incorporate initiatives as closely as possible into the 
decision-making infrastructure (that is, assuming an insider role), whilst also retaining 
an element of neutrality (that is, assuming an outsider role). 
Understanding the evidence-policy interface
Through our efforts to map out the research-policy landscape in South Africa, we 
learned that the mapping process in itself had value and that the findings of this process 
could help us shape our capacity-building programme. Specifically we found that: 
there is a readiness for evidence use in sections of the South African government; 
there is a need to avoid duplication of effort; there is value in building partnerships 
and identifying one another’s niche contributions to the sector; it is important 
to understand institutional silos and the limitations of working within them; and 
sustainability of effort relies on the extent to which initiatives are integrated into the 
decision-making infrastructure. 
Initially we identified a wider range of role players than we had anticipated, with 
many varied and interacting remits (Choge et al, 2014). Rather than finding a 
formal system, which we could then describe, we found several strands of different 
evidence-policy pathways and institutional linkages. These were often of informal 
nature and pathways overlapped between different organisations and institutions, as 
well as the departments within these. Indeed, we found the results of our review both 
controversial and stimulating. This was reflected in the debates the landscape review 
enticed when we presented it for feedback and refinement. 
We learned that even a three-month landscape review exercise would only scratch 
the surface in understanding the national system, and that the learning process is a 
continuous one. However, we also found that presenting our initial understanding of 
the EIDM landscape to various audiences was a useful tool to highlight the vibrant 
nature of this system and to challenge role players to reflect and comment on their 
perceived position in the system. Insights from the landscape review directly assisted 
in the design of our capacity-building programme, demonstrating how exercises 
such as this can help to position capacity-building activities (especially time-bound, 
one-off programmes such as our own) within the national evidence-policy interface, 
and increase their acceptability and likely impact. Both the review and the responses 
to our findings suggested that capabilities, motivations, and opportunities all existed 
across the South African public service, albeit sometimes in pockets and without 
strong systems underlying them.
Institutionally speaking, we found that areas of government play a role in setting 
the research agenda within the research supply system, which hints at an appetite 
for evidence, and echoes Kislov and colleagues’ (2014) call for focus on institutional 
change, and not only a focus on individual EIDM capacity. The DPME establishing 
a national evaluation system is one such example (Goldman et al, 2015). Incentives 
for motivation and opportunity were present. However, we did not find many 
instances where the government was utilising this role to its full potential. Instead, 
the use of ad hoc contracts with research consultants was, for many we spoke to, the 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
247
primary means by which they commissioned and accessed research evidence. This 
raises concerns as to whether a focus on individual researchers alone weakens the 
potential for organisational and institutional capacities in the production of policy-
relevant research, as well as suggesting serious limitations in the potential use of their 
research within government.
We identified a large number of related initiatives and a high risk of duplication of 
effort. The need for us to engage with related programmes was clearly evident. Co-
ordination of efforts was necessary to ensure we complemented existing initiatives, 
and prioritised where we could add value. We also found duplication already existed 
within some areas of the system, suggesting potential pockets of saturation. 
While the findings of the landscape review highlighted how to avoid duplication of 
efforts, they also supported us to identity possible effective partnerships. As there were 
many different initiatives working in the same space of supporting the translation of 
research into use, it was important to aim for a greater integration of programmes. In 
our case, this was facilitated through relationship-building efforts with key partners, 
and more generally through our support to the Africa Evidence Network, a regional 
community of practice for people interested in EIDM. Through greater understanding 
of the role other initiatives fulfilled, we were also able to identify our own niches, for 
example in support for the use of systematic reviews.
Our landscape review suggested a prevalence of institutional and systemic silos. 
By mapping out the relationships between organisations and institutions, we got a 
picture of the flow of evidence and exchange of capacities. In some institutional and 
systemic silos supporting capacity seemed unlikely to allow a spread to the wider 
system, potentially limiting and not enabling opportunities for evidence use. This is not 
to suggest that close clusters of institutions are necessarily a barrier to evidence use. A 
close collaboration between a research centre and a government department can be 
a highly effective tool to support research use. Our findings suggest that supporting 
capacities in these silos may be limited in scope and might not reach other sectors 
of the evidence-policy interface. While silos arguably cannot be avoided altogether, 
it is important to understand their nature and to be aware of their implications for 
capacity-building programmes. There is a need to go beyond only organisational 
engagement with evidence, to consider institutions and systems. 
We found that many research use programmes in South Africa remain donor-funded, 
suggesting limited sustainability of capacity, raising issues of mandate and motivations. 
The extent to which initiatives are integrated and embedded within larger structures, 
and have sufficient cross-linkages and clout, clearly shapes their ability to support the 
development of the overall system. As a result, different initiatives have had varied 
effects on the system. 
In sum, our landscape review enabled us to identify and coordinate our remit 
and position within the existing vibrant evidence-policy interface in South Africa, 
highlighting the importance of understanding the landscape in which our capacity 
building programme sits.5 
Incorporating programmes within the existing infrastructure: being an insider 
Discussion of our programme after 18 months of implementation highlighted the 
importance of integrating capacity-building initiatives as closely as possible into the 
existing decision-making infrastructure: that is, being an insider. We were encouraged 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
248
to work hard to understand the difficulties of decision makers in government when 
working with outsiders, and to identify mechanisms to increase our acceptability 6 
within the government decision-making structures.
This call to invest efforts into understanding government’s difficulties in working 
with outsiders, and the subsequent advice to enhance our insider role, is based 
on three themes that arose during discussions with our stakeholders: (1) outside 
capacity-building efforts are too abstract in content; (2) outside efforts struggle to 
realise government structures, motivations and incentives; and (3) there is a risk of 
perpetuating an unhelpful dichotomy between researchers and decision makers which 
restricts rather than enables opportunities for evidence use.  
These themes are dealt with in more detail below.
Government participants at our stakeholder feedback event expressed a concern 
that capacity-building initiatives that were not accustomed to working with South 
African government departments were often too abstract in content. They cited how, 
while important in their own right, university-led public governance and management 
courses often focused on theoretical models and did not communicate skills that were 
practical enough to fit within the work routines of civil servants. Even with explicit 
EIDM capacity-building programmes, decision makers questioned how they could 
apply these capacities in their work settings. As one government stakeholder expressed: 
‘Workshops can only help to a certain point. We also need to look at systems and 
opportunities for application of learning’. What decision makers perceived to be 
lacking from outside efforts was the provision of practical EIDM tools and context-
specific skills tailored to decision makers’ professional domains. Generic EIDM skills 
that had no direct link to an acute decision-making challenge and need were often 
regarded as still too abstract.  
We were further advised that it is challenging for decision makers within 
government to work with partners who fail to realise how EIDM capacities will be 
embedded and mitigated by the organisational structures and incentives. Without 
an in-depth  understanding of contextual factors and an insight into the working 
of bureaucracies, motivation cannot be ‘created’. We learnt that decision makers 
sometimes experienced the strong promotion of the value of evidence to inform 
their work as a lack of appreciation and downplaying of their on-going decision-
making efforts. Rather than proclaiming ‘evidence to the rescue’,7 efforts to promote 
EIDM require mutual respect and recognition of the policy profession. These efforts, 
too, should realise that decision makers – as any employee – act on organisational 
incentives. Communicating EIDM skills, whose application is not incentivised by 
senior officials supportive of the capacity-building programme, might be sub-optimal. 
The value of evidence can thus not be communicated in isolation from the work 
structures and processes in government. 
Linked to this call for an increased understanding and appreciation of the processes 
and structures in which decision makers in government work and strive to make 
the best possible policy decisions, the government stakeholders bemoaned the fact 
that outside capacity-building initiatives often drew an artificial division between 
research producers and users. Government stakeholders did not agree that EIDM 
capacity building should start from the assumption that decision makers always 
represent ‘users’ and thus the last link in the EIDM chain. They were not entirely 
comfortable with evidence and/or capacities being ‘pushed’ onto decision makers, 
and questioned the applicability of such a linear model in light of the complexities 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
249
of implementing evidence-informed decisions and their own ability to influence 
the research process too.
Having established some of the challenges decision makers face when partnering 
with outsiders to build EIDM capacity, and thus the rationale for assuming more of an 
insider role, we received advice, too, on a number of mechanisms that might support 
programmes to position themselves as more of an insider. We grouped these into four 
main themes: (1) public sector understanding and cross-linkages; (2) engagement; (3) 
applied learning; and (4) co-production. 
The need for capacity-building programmes to deepen their knowledge of 
government structures and decision-making processes was a major theme in the 
collected data. It emerged as the strongest mechanism to improve programme 
acceptability and to integrate EIDM capacities into decision-making processes. We 
have, however, already established and discussed this mechanism, that is, understanding 
the public sector and public sector landscape, at length above (Understanding the 
evidence-policy interface). A related sub-theme concerned whether targeting EIDM 
capacities at national government departments is the most relevant approach to 
achieving developmental objectives. Both government and academic stakeholders 
argued that for EIDM to translate into tangible impacts on poverty reduction and 
social development, EIDM capacity building needs to be provided to sub-national 
levels of government,8 as service delivery to beneficiaries is executed at this level. 
Targeting different levels of government also creates cross-linkages and increases 
the credibility and legitimacy of the programme across government. This directly 
influences programme acceptability and the potential for long-term sustainability. 
It does, however, also raise many questions as to the practicalities of implementing 
activities at sub-national levels not addressed in this paper. There is no one size fits 
all approach to supporting EIDM, and working at other levels of government would 
need tailored solutions. We also believe that it would require a significantly larger 
and longer programme to address such multiple levels of role players with a range of 
appropriate activities. More research is needed to provide greater understanding of 
the challenges and potential solutions for such work. 
Stakeholder feedback indicated that early engagement with decision makers 
enhances the acceptance and relevance of capacity-building programmes. One 
government stakeholder, for example, expressed the view that ‘relationship-building 
from the outset is key’. There was agreement that simple mechanisms such as co-
facilitating workshops – both decision makers inputting into capacity-building 
exercises and, vice versa, researchers contributing to government workshops and round 
tables – improve trust and willingness to engage. Engagement with, and learning from 
one another, was seen as an effective mechanism to better align programmes with 
decision makers’ capacity needs. This alignment could then allow EIDM capacity 
building to more closely target applied learning. Such integrated programmes might 
be more likely to identify decision makers’ practical capacity needs and deliver a 
more applied learning approach, for example by providing practical tools and linking 
educational components to decision makers’ ad hoc policy issues and challenges. The 
language of ‘demand-driven’ capacity building was often used by the government 
colleagues we spoke with to express the above sentiments.
T o increase their acceptability and organisational embeddedness, capacity-building 
programmes might benefit from targeting decision makers’ operational skills before 
turning to more explicit EIDM capacities. Operational skills were seen as an effective 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
250
entry point for capacity building, as public officials might initially be more susceptible 
to such professional development and could more swiftly transfer these skills into 
their work setting – building capabilities requires better prior understanding of 
existing capacity and capacity-development needs. The established relationship 
and familiarity with the capacity-building approach could then be used to target 
professional development related to EIDM. While this raises questions as to who has 
the remit to develop such operational skills, our stakeholders did not express any such 
concerns. Their overriding priority was that EIDM capacity building is too abstract 
if delivered in isolation from the practical operational skills they see as essential to 
decision making in government.
In the context of these demand-driven capacity-building approaches, we were 
also encouraged to consider ‘co-production’ as an effective mechanism to embed 
programmes within the existing organisational structures. Co-production refers to 
an enhanced form of engagement, and suggestions for its application ranged from 
co-producing systematic reviews to decision makers setting policy-relevant research 
questions. This raised the question as to where the boundary lies between working 
as an insider and being employed within government. While an integrated capacity-
building programme is more acceptable, a capacity-building programme that actively 
engages in research production might neither be sustainable nor set effective incentives 
for evidence use; rather it risks creating a parallel research production structure within 
the decision-making sphere that undermines and competes with production structures 
in the research realm. Assuming the role of an insider is thus a delicate balance, and 
in some instances programmes might actively benefit from deciding to remain more 
independent, that is deliberately being an outsider. We have sought to maintain this 
balance by investing considerable time and effort in understanding the capacities and 
requirements of our government colleagues (giving us ‘insider’ knowledge), and yet 
remaining outside of government employment (giving us independence), being based 
within a university structure (which brings legitimacy), and remaining transparent as 
to our specific contributions to co-created evidence (Stewart, 2015).
Retaining neutrality: being an outsider 
At the same time as encouraging greater integration into the decision-making system 
to enhance acceptability and effectiveness, stakeholders within the South African 
system encouraged us to retain our neutrality as outsiders. The virtue of being an 
outsider was expressed in three main themes by the stakeholders: (1) being able to 
build bridges; (2) co-ordinating space with other capacity-building efforts; and (3) 
avoiding the creation of new organisational silos. 
Considering the entire evidence-policy interface, both government and academic 
stakeholders held that organisations trusted by both the government and the research 
sector are uniquely positioned to serve as some form of fuel in the system. Using 
terms such as ‘knowledge broker’, ‘mediator’, and ‘building bridges’, they ascribed 
these mutually-respected actors the ability to encourage cross-sector working as well 
as the creation of new organisational and institutional relationships. Such relationships 
could refer to research/government relations, but the benefits of being perceived as a 
neutral outsider could likewise allow programmes to build cross-government linkages. 
In the South African context, the latter seems particularly important as individual 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
251
departments have become increasingly receptive to EIDM, and effective processes 
and structures to apply and retain EIDM capacities are being developed. 
Given this development, we identified a linked theme that reflected the sentiment 
that there is an increasingly mature demand for evidence by South African decision 
makers: coordinating space with endogenous EIDM capacity-building efforts. As 
an outsider, less integrated with the existing infrastructure, programmes might 
find it easier to recognise when the overall evidence-policy interface requires less 
external input. Being an outsider could thus mitigate the risk of crowding out 
nascent endogenous programmes and institutions. South Africa, for example, has 
institutionalised a new National School of Government in 2014, after previous 
consecutive attempts to build this institution were largely unsuccessful (RSA, 2014; 
NSG, 2014). The NSG is legally mandated to hold compulsory training courses for all 
prospective public servants (RSA, 2014) and could thus serve as an endogenous body 
for EIDM capacity building. There, too, is sufficient willingness among government 
departments to share EIDM practices and expertise, allowing for an increased process 
of cross-government learning. Our stakeholders therefore challenged us to use an 
outsider perspective to critically reflect on whether an external approach to EIDM 
capacity building adequately mirrors the current structures and institutions set up 
across South African government. 
Lastly, remaining an outsider might also benefit programme acceptability and 
potential impact by interrogating whether individual capacity-building programmes 
– in particular if they are successful – run the risk of creating new organisational silos. 
Given that few external programmes will be able to work across all spheres and levels 
of government, most EIDM capacity building, by design, creates isolated pockets 
of expertise.9 A capacity-building programme that is too embedded within a small 
number of governmental partners might unintentionally create a new organisational 
silo, clustering EIDM capacities in a close network and thereby inhibiting cross-
government work by reinforcing the established close relationships and organisational 
structures. Our stakeholders therefore advised us to always carefully weigh whether 
to target breadth or depth in EIDM capacity building. We were advised to remain 
‘big on vision and weak on boundaries’. This decision, again, requires a detailed 
knowledge of the existing research-policy landscape to be able to assess the likely 
impact of supporting either breadth or depth on systemic change. 
Discussion of our findings
Through applying two methodologies (a landscape review and a qualitative analysis 
of a stakeholder engagement event), we identified three strategies for improving 
the acceptability and potential impact of donor-funded EIDM capacity-building 
activities such as our own. These were: (1) making an effort to understand the 
evidence-policy interface at individual, organisational, and systems levels before 
designing the programme, (2) incorporating initiatives as closely as possible into the 
decision-making infrastructure (being an insider), while (3) also retaining an element 
of neutrality (being an outsider). We learned that in order to maximise potential 
impact and acceptability, there is a need for EIDM capacity-building programmes 
to identify and coordinate their remit and position within the existing community 
with careful consideration of existing capabilities, motivations, and opportunities. We 
have shown that reflection on position in general can help to reduce duplication and 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=12>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
252
saturation of efforts, build partnerships and find relevant niches, avoid institutional 
and systemic silos, and increase potential for sustainability. We have demonstrated 
the need for this reflection to consider not just individuals, but organisational and 
institutional positions. We have also shown how our programme was able to derive 
benefits (such as acceptability) from occupying different positions within the EIDM 
sector in South Africa. 
These findings link to recent suggestions to approach EIDM from a systems 
perspective, and not merely at individual or organisational levels, applying tools 
such as systems thinking and network analysis to understand how actors in the 
decision-making infrastructure (for example, policymakers, government departments) 
manoeuvre their social and professional environment to interact with research and 
integrate it in decision-making processes and structures (for example, Best and Holmes, 
2010; Cherney and Head, 2011; Shepherd, 2014; Peirson et al, 2012). In South Africa, 
we expected to find an existing evidence-policy interface within national governments 
that would help us frame the role of EIDM capacity building, but faced highly 
diverse and unequal systems characteristics. On the one side, we were surprised how 
piecemeal and informal much of the ‘system’ was. On the other side, some areas in 
the research-policy landscape showed dense clusters of activity and duplication of 
effort. There is a real danger that too many capacity-building programmes at once 
might challenge system sustainability, in particular as a majority of programmes 
remain donor-driven and initiatives are not owned by in-country decision makers 
(NORAD, 2015; Christoplos et al, 2014). In other cases, we see isomorphic mimicry, 
for example with M&E systems being copied across from other settings and never 
applied with appropriate consideration of the new context (for example, NORAD, 
2015; Pritchett, 2013). 
We would therefore counsel against jumping to conclusions about the broader 
context, and can vouch for the need to avoid assumptions as to the role or value of 
a particular programme’s contribution to the capacity-building environment. Kislov 
and peers (2014) in this context argue for the understanding of EIDM capacity as an 
emergent property of the overall research-policy interface. Using the term ‘dynamic 
capabilities’, they explain how sustainable EIDM capacities are nested in organisational 
structures able to reproduce and adapt individual EIDM skills in varying contexts. 
The authors propose, therefore, to target EIDM capacity-building initiatives less at 
individual decision makers, and to reduce efforts to enhance ‘ordinary capabilities’ (for 
example, critical appraisal, knowledge management) in favour of systemic, dynamic 
capabilities. 
In addition to using such a multilevel capabilities perspective, a number of 
scholars also suggest unpacking the social and organisational networks shaping the 
existing decision-making infrastructure, to avoid a saturation of EIDM capacity and 
organisational bottlenecks (Shearer et al, 2014; Palinkas et al, 2011; Bevc et al, 2015; 
Y ousefi-Nooraie et al, 2012). Understanding the existing capabilities, motivations, 
and opportunities can be a useful framework to unpack these existing networks 
(Michie et al, 2011). Shearer and colleagues (2014) use statistical network analysis to 
show how the exchange and use of research evidence in policymaking can be partly 
explained by the structure of decision makers’ networks of relationships. Introducing 
EIDM capacities to organisations and individuals that are disconnected from the wider 
evidence-policy network, or are already part of high-performing silos of expertise, 
contributes little to the overall system performance and sustainability. For instance, 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
253
in a network analysis study, by Palinkas and peers (2011), of health organisations in 
12 Canadian counties, the total spread of EIDM capacities between these counties 
was fostered by a single network component, which contained 81% of the overall 
network activity. 
Literature on the political economy of EIDM highlights that these initiatives are 
inherently political and embedded in contextual factors arising from the workings 
of bureaucracies (Hodgkinson, 2012; Crewe and Y oung, 2002; Shaxson et al, 2016), 
which is in keeping with our data relating to the importance of programmes gaining 
better understanding of government realities, and raises important questions about 
whether or not externally-funded programmes have a valid mandate to try to change 
government decision making. However, our work also illustrates that although EIDM 
capacity-building support programmes are donor-funded, different EIDM tools 
such as evidence maps are helpful in providing a more neutral adjudicating tool in a 
politically-contested policy space (DPME aand ACE, 2016). Furthermore, the question 
around the validity of the mandate of externally-funded programmes might also be 
offset by concerted efforts and discussions by government itself on how to embed 
evidence in decision making and capacity support within government structures, 
which was a discussion point at the stakeholder event that this paper draws on and 
subsequent meetings. Our work furthermore supports the notion that policymaking is 
an inherently political space in which evidence is only one element that is considered 
(Newman et al, 2013; Shaxson et al, 2016).
Each of these suggestions in the wider literature – that is, applying systems thinking, 
network analysis, focusing on organisational and more complex EIDM capacities, 
and the political economy of EIDM – appears complementary to our proposed three 
strategies to improve the acceptability and potential impact of EIDM capacity building. 
Future research might benefit from exploring the intersection and theoretical links 
between these different recent attempts to innovate capacity building to increase 
research use. 
Specifically, there is a case to be made, from both our own data and the political 
economy literature, for more locally-driven initiatives to build EIDM. The support we 
have seen for ‘made in Africa’ initiatives such as the Africa Evidence Network suggests 
that activities that originate within the region, which are inclusive and responsive to 
local stakeholders, are more likely to be successful. We know from other work that 
relationships are central to the success of EIDM activities, both between researchers 
and decision makers, and between programmes seeking to support decision making, 
and the government departments with which they are working (Stewart, 2007). This 
suggests that future involvement of external funders may need to shift to fund more 
general, responsive and supportive activities to enable EIDM, without prescription 
of outcomes or predetermined activities. A recent contribution to this line of work is 
the Beyond Context Matters framework, a practical approach developed by Weyrauch 
and peers (2016) to systematically unpack contextual factors at different levels of 
decision making that might influence evidence use. 
T o increase acceptability of capacity-building programmes by actors in the decision-
making infrastructure, it seems particularly worthwhile to further investigate whether 
it is appropriate to start from the assumption that decision makers always represent 
‘evidence users’ and thus the last link in the EIDM chain. As indicated above, we 
encountered some concerns among decision makers that such a conception can be 
perceived as reducing decision makers to passive recipients of EIDM capacities. While 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=14>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
254
a linear research push model of EIDM, focused on passive research supply that is then 
taken up by decision makers, has been debunked and found ineffective (for example, 
Nutley et al, 2007; Stewart and Oliver, 2012; Newman et al, 2012), the danger that 
EIDM capacity building might subscribe to a similar line of thought – that is, pushing 
EIDM skills onto decision makers – is not discussed as prominently. If a linear model 
of research provision is merely substituted with a linear model of EIDM capacity 
provision, endogenous demand within the decision-making infrastructure to use 
evidence is still overlooked. 
This raises important questions expressed by government decision makers at our 
stakeholder event: if EIDM capacities are promoted by organisations outside the 
decision-making infrastructure, is the inherent assumption that current decision 
making is evidence-uninformed due to a lack of capacities? An active outside 
‘promotion’ of EIDM and a language of building EIDM capacities might thus be 
counter-productive if it narrowly positions decision makers as passive users of evidence 
and does not acknowledge their prevailing efforts to arrive at the best possible policy 
decisions. Acceptability of capacity-building programmes thus seems to be linked to a 
conceptualisation of EIDM as an integral principle of decision making, in line with 
decision makers’ professional identity and work ethos. Adopting a language of EIDM 
capacity development or sharing might be of benefit in this regard (for example, Kislov 
et al, 2014). Positioning EIDM capacities as an integral part of the decision-making 
infrastructure, beyond individual or even organisational capacity, might also allow 
capacity-building programmes to bridge organisational silos and gain an opportunity 
for targeted cross-government work. If EIDM capacities are perceived more as an 
endogenous skillset inherent to the work of public servants and practitioners, it 
might be easier to transfer and apply these capacities across the decision-making 
infrastructure – driven by either internal actors (for example, government departments) 
or external actors (for example, capacity-building programmes). Furthermore, if EIDM 
capacities are extended beyond collection, appraisal and integration of research, to 
include understanding of social policy contexts and rigorous programme planning, 
civil servants are more likely to accept the value of those capacities and the role that 
research use plays. 
Conclusion
Whilst achieving the balance between insider and external roles is not simple, we 
propose that a constructive equilibrium can be achieved through investment in 
thoroughly understanding partners in government, through maintaining structural 
independence, and through transparency. Our overview of the literature suggests 
that our findings are consistent with wider research on applied systems thinking, 
on network analysis, on the need to focus on organisational and complex EIDM 
capacities, and on the political economy of EIDM.
We conclude that, as externally driven initiatives, donor-funded EIDM capacity-
building programmes have an important role to play in supporting the use of research 
evidence. They are none-the-less ‘visitors’ in an existing landscape, which is neither 
naive nor necessarily seeking input. In order to be accepted in that landscape, and 
to make a lasting impact, it is paramount that EIDM capacity-building programmes 
approach the challenge of understanding the landscape and negotiating access to it with 
humility and sensitivity. Through balancing the strategies of taking time to understand 
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
255
the environment, of making efforts to become an insider, and of maintaining some 
neutrality as an outsider, programmes can maximise their potential for success.
Acknowledgements
We owe thanks to all contributors to the landscape review and delegates at our stakeholder 
event. Colleagues from across academia and government have shown immense patience in 
helping us to understand the landscape and orient our programme in the most constructive 
way. We are grateful to our programme funders, the UK Department for International 
Development, and to our host institution, the University of Johannesburg. 
Notes
1 Defined as living below R355 ($22.15) per month. (Rand-Dollar exchange rate 6 
February 2016)
2 For example, the Building Capacity to Use Research Evidence Programme, and 
Development Research Uptake in Sub-Saharan Africa programme. 
3 Workshop participants were encouraged to share openly, were assured of their anonymity, 
and given opportunities to comment on drafts of our report the day before it was made 
public.
4 Workshop participants received a full draft of the event report rather than just the list 
of analytical themes. 
5 For a full discussion of the programme design, please see Stewart, 2015.
6 For example, being embedded within and accepted by government partners allowed 
us to extend our work from an initial three core departments to a total of ten partner 
departments within three years.
7 See for example Newman (2012) expressing a similar concern. 
8 In South Africa, this refers to provincial, municipality, and ward level.
9 Assuming the programme is effective.  
References
Abdullah, G, Rossy, D, Ploeg, J, Davies, B, Higuchi, K, Sikora, L, Stacey, D, 2014, 
Measuring the effectiveness of mentoring as a knowledge translation intervention 
for implementing empirical evidence: A systematic review, Worldviews on Evidence-
Based Nursing 11, 5, 284–300
Abrahams, MA, 2015, A review of the growth of monitoring and evaluation in South 
Africa: Monitoring and evaluation as a profession, an industry and a governance 
tool, African Evaluation Journal 3, 1, 142 
Best, A, Holmes, B, 2010, Systems thinking, knowledge and action: T owards better 
models and methods, Evidence & Policy 6, 2, 145–59
Bevc, CA, Retrum, J, Varda, D, 2015, New perspectives on the ‘silo effect’: Initial 
comparisons of network structures across public health collaboratives,  American 
Journal of Public Health 105, S2, 230–35
Champagne, F , Lemieux-Charles, L, Duranceau, MF , MacKean, G, Reay, T, 2014, 
Organizational impact of evidence-informed decision making training initiatives: 
A case study comparison of two approaches, Implementation Science 9, 1, 53
Cherney, A, Head, B, 2011, Supporting the knowledge-to-action process: A systems-
thinking approach, Evidence & Policy 7, 4, 471–88
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=16>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
256
Choge, I, Otieno, O, Erasmus, Y , Zaranyika, H, Langer, L, 2014, An overview of role 
players facilitating evidence-informed decision-making in South Africa: A landscape review, 
Johannesburg: UJ-BCURE, Centre for Anthropological Research, University of 
Johannesburg
Christoplos, I, Hedquist, AL, Engstrand, K, 2014, Capacity development literature 
review, Danida/Norad/SIda: Indevelop, https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?q=
Capacity+Development+Literature+Review++Christoplos&btnG=&hl=en&
as_sdt=0%2C5
Clar, C, Campbell, S, Lisa, D, Wendy, G, 2011, What are the effects of interventions to 
improve the uptake of evidence from health research into policy in low and middle-income 
countries? London: Department for International Development
Crewe, E, Y oung, MJ, 2002, Bridging research and policy: Context, evidence and links, 
London: Overseas Development Institute
Cronin, PG, Sadan, M, 2015, Use of evidence in policy making in South Africa: An 
exploratory study of attitudes of senior government officials, African Evaluation 
Journal 3, 1, 10
Davids, M, Samuels, ML, September, R, Moeng, TL, Richter, L, Mabogoane, TW , 
Buthelezi, T, 2015, The pilot evaluation for the National Evaluation System in South 
Africa: A diagnostic review of early childhood development,  African Evaluation 
Journal 3, 1, 7
Department for Planning Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) and the Africa Centre 
for Evidence at the University of Johannesburg (ACE), 2016, Policy relevant evidence 
maps – a departmental guidance note. Pretoria: DPME
Erasmus, Y , Zaranyika, H, Weideman, M, Choge, I, Otieno, O, Langer, L, Stewart, R, 
2014, An overview of role players outside government that are central to evidence-informed 
decision-making in Malawi: A landscape review, Johannesburg: UJBCURE, Centre for 
Anthropological Research, University of Johannesburg
Goldman, I, Ntakumba, S, Jacob, C, 2013, Reflections on the South African experience 
with evaluation and the use of evaluative evidence to orient public policy 
formulation, Paper presented at the 3rd International Conference on National 
Evaluation Capacities: Solutions to challenges linked to independence, credibility 
and use of evaluations, 29 September–2 October, São Paulo, Brazil
Goldman, I, Mathe, JE, Jacob, C, Hercules, A, Amisi, M, Buthelezi, T, 2015, Developing 
South Africa’s national evaluation policy and system: First lessons learned, African 
Evaluation Journal 3, 1, 107
Hawkes, S, Aulakh, BK, Jadeja, N, Jimenez, M, Buse, K, Anwar, I, Whitworth, J, 
2015, Strengthening capacity to apply health research evidence in policy making: 
Experience from four countries, Health Policy and Planning 31, 2, 161–70
Hodgkinson, GP , 2012, The politics of evidence-based decision-making, in 
Rousseau, DM (ed), Oxford handbook of evidence-based decision making, www.
oxfordhandbooks.com
Horsley, T, Hyde, C, Santesso, N, Parkes, J, Milne, R, Stewart, R, 2011, T eaching critical 
appraisal skills in healthcare settings, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 9, 11
Kislov, R, Waterman, H, Harvey, G, Boaden, R, 2014, Rethinking capacity building 
for knowledge mobilisation: Developing multilevel capabilities in healthcare 
organisations, Implementation Science 9, 166
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Building capacity for evidence-informed decision making
257
Lavis, JN, Robertson, D, Woodside, JM, McLeod, CB, Abelson, J, 2003, How can 
research organisations more effectively transfer knowledge to decision makers, 
Milbank Quarterly 81, 2, 221–48
Michie, S, van Stralen, MM, West, R, 2011, The behaviour change wheel: A new 
method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions, 
Implementation Science 6, 42
NSG (National School of Government), 2014, About Us, www.thensg.gov.za
Newman, K, 2012, Evidence to the rescue, https://kirstyevidence.wordpress.
com/2012/11/03/supply-and-demand-in-evidence-informed-policy-this-time-
with-pictures
Newman, K, Fisher, C, Shaxson, L, 2012, Stimu–lating demand for research evidence: 
What role for capacity-building?, Institute of Development Studies Bulletin 43, 5, 17–24
Newman, K, Capillo, A, Famurewa, A, Nath, C, Siyanbola, W , 2013, What is the 
evidence on evidence-informed policy-making? Lessons from the international conference on 
evidence-informed policy-making, Oxford: International Network for the Availability 
of Scientific Publications (INASP) 
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (NORAD),  2015, Evaluation of 
Norwegian support to capacity development, Report 10/2015, www.norad.no/
contentassets/fb8698c4e5b1449c81d0328a99c28813/evaluation-of-norwegian-
support-to-capacity-development.pdf 
Nutley, SM, Walter, I, Davies, HT, 2007, Using evidence: How research can inform public 
services, Bristol: Policy Press
Oliver, K, Innvar, S, Lorenc, T, Woodman, J, Thomas, J, 2014, A systematic review of 
barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence by policymakers,  BMC Health 
Services Research 14, 1, 1
Palinkas, LA, Holloway, IW , Rice, E, Fuentes, D, Wu, Q, Chamberlain, P , 2011, Social 
networks and implementation of evidence-based practices in public youth-serving 
systems: A mixed-methods study, Implementation Science 6, 113, 1–11
Peirson, L, Ciliska, D, Dobbins, M, Mowat, D, 2012, Building capacity for evidence 
informed decision making in public health: A case study of organizational 
change, BMC Public Health 12, 1, 1
Pritchett, L, 2013, The rebirth of education: Schooling ain’t learning, Washington, DC: 
CGD Books
RSA (Republic of South Africa), 2014, National Assembly: Questions for written 
reply, Question 1032, Mr AP van der Westhuizen (DA) to ask the Minister of Public 
Service and Administration, Cape T own: RSA
RSA, 2015, National Budget, www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20
budget/2015
Saldaña, J, 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, London: Sage
Schneider, C, Campbell, D, Milat, A, Haynes, A, Quinn, E, 2014, What are the key 
organisational capabilities that facilitate research use in public health policy, Public 
Health Research Practice 1, 1
Shaxson, L, Datta, A, Tshangela, M, Matomela, B, 2016, Understanding the organisational 
context for evidence-informed policymaking, Pretoria: Department of Environmental 
Affairs, and London: Overseas Development Institute
Shearer, JC, Dion, M, Lavis, JN, 2014, Exchanging and using research evidence in 
health policy networks: A statistical network analysis, Implementation Science 9, 1, 126
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC
<<<PAGE=18>>>
Ruth Stewart et al
258
Shepherd, JP , 2014, How to achieve more effective services: The evidence ecosystem, 
www.scie-socialcareonline.org.uk/how-to-achieve-more-effective-services-the-
evidence-ecosystem
Siron, S, Dagenais, C, Ridde, V , 2015, What research tells us about knowledge 
transfer strategies to improve public health in low-income countries: A scoping 
review, International Journal of Public Health 60, 7, 849–63
StatsSA, 2015, Poverty and inequality in South Africa, www.statssa.gov.za/?cat=22 
Stewart, R, 2007, Expertise and multi-disciplinary training for evidence-informed 
decision-making, [unpublished] PhD thesis, University of London 
Stewart, R, 2015, A theory of change for capacity building for the use of research 
evidence by decision makers in southern Africa, Evidence & Policy 11, 4, 547–57
Stewart, R, Oliver, S, 2012, Making a difference with systematic reviews, in Gough, 
D, Oliver S, Thomas, J, An introduction to systematic reviews, London: Sage, 227–44
Stewart, R, Wiggins, M, Thomas, J, Oliver, S, Brunton, G, Ellison, G, 2005, Exploring 
the evidence-practice gap: A workshop report on mixed and participatory training 
for HIV prevention in southern Africa, Education for Health 18, 2, 224–35
Weyrauch, V , Echt, L, Suliman, S, 2016, Knowledge into policy: Going beyond context 
matters, www.politicsandideas.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Going-beyond-
context-matters-Framework_PI.compressed.pdf
Y ousefi-Nooraie, R, Dobbins, M, Brouwers, M, Wakefield, P , 2012, Information 
seeking for making evidence-informed decisions: A social network analysis on the 
staff of a public health department in Canada, BMC Health Services Research 12, 1, 1
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/17/25 09:58 PM UTC