<<<PAGE=1>>>
P1 of 29
Enriching Individual Absorptive Capacity 
Introduction 
Absorptive capacity (AC hereafter) is conceptualized as a dynamic capability ( Lewin et al. , 
2011, Volberda et al. , 2010) enabling a firm to acquire, process, apply and exploit external 
knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990 ). Extending this dynamic nature further, Zahra and 
George’s (2002) seminal paper distinguishes AC exists as two separate but complementary 
subsets of potential (knowledge acquisition and assimilation) and realized AC (knowledge 
transformation and exploitation). Research has shown that AC contributes towards 
organizational learning processes and outcomes, such as knowledge transfer ( Minbaeva et al., 
2014), innovation and financial performance (Soo et al., 2002; Volberda et al., 2010; Zahra and 
George, 2002 ). Conceptually, although Cohen and Levinthal (1990, p. 131-135) explicitly 
argued that a firm’s AC has both individual and organizational antecedents,  empirical AC 
research has largely focused on aggregate collective-level relationships, such as country, inter- 
and intra-organizational levels of analysis (e.g., Lane et al. , 2006; Volberda et al. , 2010). To 
address the multilevel nature of AC, there has been a growing body of research calling for an 
improved understanding of the micro-foundations of AC (Foss, 2011; Lane et al., 2006; Lewin 
et al., 2011; Minbaeva et al., 2014; Volberda et al., 2010). For instance, Volberda et al. (2010, 
p. 944) stated that “the understanding of AC as a dependent variable, absent of a consideration
of the level of individuals and their action, may be inherently incomplete” . This is because a 
firm’s AC “depends on the individual absorptive capacities of the organization’s members”  
(Lane et al. , 2006, p. 838 ). In more recent years, scholars have examined the link between a 
firm’s AC and a number of individual-level behaviors or characteristics, including 
organizational citizenship behavior ( Hart et al. , 2016 ), individual learning orientation and 
behavior (Martinkenaite and Breunig, 2016; Yao and Chang, 2017), social interaction (Hotho 
et al., 2012; Tortoriello, 2015), and leadership (Flatten et al., 2015).  
Authors' version of an article published as: Tian, A. and Soo, C. 2018. Enriching individual absorptive capacity. Personnel Review. 47 (5): 
pp. 1116-1132.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
P2 of 29 
 
Despite calls for more attention to the role of individual -level antecedents to AC , this 
issue remains under-addressed (Hart et al. , 2016 ). To date, only a few studies have 
conceptualized and tested when and how individual level antecedents could be linked with firm 
AC (e.g., Flatten et al., 2015; Hotho et al., 2012; Yao and Chang, 2017). For example, adapting 
the bottom-up approach, Yao and Chang (2017) find that two individual -level characteristics, 
individual learning goal orientation and civic virtue, can contribute to the development of firm 
potential and realized AC . While these studies have advanced our understanding of how 
individual-level AC  can contribute to firm AC, however, the development of AC at the 
individual level remains unclear. This void is surprising  when we consider that scholars have 
long argued that, in order to understand firm AC, one must necessarily examine the AC of the 
employees in question (Jansen et al., 2005; Volberda et al., 2010; Zahra and George, 2002 ). 
Thus in this study, f ollowing calls for more empirical studies  on individual level AC (e.g., 
Volberda et al., 2010; Yao and Chang, 2017), and a better understanding of how it is developed 
(e.g., Flatten et al., 2015; Soo et al., 2016), we explore the antecedents and consequences of 
AC at the individual level.  
The key objectives of this study are two -fold. First,  we respond to calls for  a better 
understanding of AC development at  the individual level by examining two antecedents (i.e., 
intrinsic motivation and perceived organizational commitment to learning) of individual AC . 
Intrinsic motivation, which refers to doing something because it is inherently interesting or 
enjoyable (Ryan and Deci, 2000), has been shown to be a key motivational force that leads to 
learning, knowledge sharing  and creativity (Reinholt et al., 2011). Perceived organizational 
commitment to learning is defined as the degree to which an organization values and promotes 
learning (Sinkula et al. , 1997 ). Calantone et al.  (2002, p. 515)  suggest that the more an 
organization values learning, the more likely it is that its employees will be engaged in learning 
activities. While the concept of commitment to learning  has been typically studied at
<<<PAGE=3>>>
P3 of 29 
 
organizational level (Calantone et al., 2002; Kukenberger et al., 2015), we contend that, at the 
individual level, it is employees’ perception of organizational commitment to learning that has 
a close relationship with employees’ learning behaviors and outcomes. Taken together, we echo 
Minbaeva and colleagues’ argument that individuals are heterogeneous: they differ in various 
aspects of motivation and how they respond to external cues for learning and knowledge sharing 
– and that these differences reflect their respective AC  (Minbaeva et al. , 2012). Second, in 
addition to the antecedents of individual level AC, we also examine the outcomes of individual 
AC by examining its influence on employees’ creativity and job performance, as both represent 
important sources of organizational innovation and competitive advantage (Gong et al., 2013; 
Martinaityte and Sacramento, 2013 ; Zhou and Shalley, 2011). Furthermore, we examined the 
dual role of realized AC as a mediator in the employee potential AC –creativity relationship, 
and as a moderator on the creativity–job performance relationship. 
In summary, while AC has been largely studied at the collective-level as an independent 
variable, it has, by definition, a strong foundation at the individual level (Cohen and Levinthal, 
1990). As Lane et al. (2006) argued, a firm’s AC depends on the absorptive capacities of the 
organization’s members. Yet surprisingly little attention has been devoted to understanding 
how AC is developed at the individual level, and how individual AC can have a positive impact 
on employees’ creativity and job performance. Thus, drawing from the wealth of studies that 
have looked at AC from the collective level (i.e., business unit and/or organizational level), in 
this paper, utilizing matched employee-supervisor data at the individual level, we focus on the 
two antecedents (i.e., intrinsic motivation and perceived organizational commitment to 
learning) and consequences (i.e., employee creativity and job performance) of individual AC.  
 
Theoretical background and hypotheses development 
Absorptive capacity at the individual level
<<<PAGE=4>>>
P4 of 29 
 
According to the seminal work of Cohen and Levinthal, AC is defined as the “ability of 
the firm to recognize the value of new, external information, assimilate it, and apply it t o 
commercial ends” (1990, p. 128). The concept was extended by Zahra and George (2002), who 
distinguished four dimensions of AC, each playing different but complementary roles in 
explaining how AC influence s organizational performance. These dimensions are  acquisition 
(the ability to identify and acquire critical external knowledge) , assimilation (the ability to  
analyse, process, interpret and understand the obtained external knowledge) , transformation 
(the ability to modify and adapt external knowledge and combine new and existing knowledge 
to gain new insights and perspectives),  and exploitation (the ability to incorporate the newly 
acquired and transformed knowledge into the firm’s competitive advantage).  
Zahra and George (2002) propose that the first two dimensions form a firm’s potential 
AC, which makes a firm receptive to external knowledge flows, while the other two constitute 
a firm’s realized AC, which reflects the efficiency in leveraging externally absorbed knowledge 
and transforming it into performance outcomes. With regard to the o rganizational outcomes, 
research has stressed that potential AC can be seen as the ability to detect relevant knowledge 
and store it in the organizational memory ; thus it is not necessarily a direct driving force for 
organizational performance in itself. In contrast, realized AC involves capabilities of exploiting 
relevant knowledge and realizing commercial gains with it, and thus it is expected to enhance 
firm performance (Flatten et al., 2015; Zahra and George, 2002). The categorization of potential 
and realized AC is consistent with prior theory and empirical studies which suggest that they 
are theoretically and empirically distinguishable (e.g., Jansen et al., 2005; Camisón and Forés, 
2010). As t heir effect is complementary rather than mutually exclusive, they must exist 
simultaneously in order to achieve the optimal performance results (Zahra and George, 2002). 
The distinction is important because new knowledge has to be identified and assimilated first 
(i.e., potential AC) before it can be transformed and exploited (i.e., realized AC).
<<<PAGE=5>>>
P5 of 29 
 
In this study, we examine both potential and realized AC at the individual level. Staying 
close to the original definition by Cohen and Levinthal (1990), we define individual -level AC 
as the individual’s ability to identify external knowledge,  and to assimilate and uti lize it to 
generate performance benefits. In accordance with Zahra and George’s (2002) assertion, we 
posit that, at the individual level, the ability to acquire and assimilate knowledge (i.e., potential 
AC) may not necessarily imply better performance outc omes (i.e., creativity and task 
performance), unless it leads to higher levels of realized AC. We draw on theoretical insight 
from Ployhart and Moliterno’s (2011) emergence-enabling process of human capital resources, 
and suggest that firm AC is a human capital resource that is developed through the individual-
level AC of the employees who make up the firm. This is consistent with Foss’ (2007) argument 
that organizational knowledge processes “cannot be reached in lieu of a starting point in 
individuals” (p. 43). Thus, consistent with Ployhart and Moliterno’s (2011) proposition, we 
suggest that more attention should be paid to exploring antecedents and outcomes of AC at the 
individual level. We do not argue that firm AC should not be treated as an aggregation  of 
individual AC. Rather, we suggest that firm AC originates in its employees, and “is amplified 
by their interactions, and manifests as a higher-level, collective phenomenon” (Kozlowski and 
Klein, 2000, p. 55). Thus, more attention should be paid to the development and consequences 
of AC at the individual level of analysis. 
 
Antecedents and outcomes of individual AC 
Linking individual intrinsic motivation and potential AC 
We first posit that intrinsic motivation positively affects individual employees’ engagement in 
knowledge acquisition and assimilation (i.e., potential AC). Conceptually, researchers have 
suggested that firm AC has a foundation rooted in an understanding of individual motivation, 
cognition, action, and interaction (Volberda et al., 2010). Empirically studies have also tested
<<<PAGE=6>>>
P6 of 29 
 
the role of motivation in the knowledge creation and transfer process (e.g., Bock et al., 2005; 
Gagné, 2009; Minbaeva et al., 2003; Minbaeva et al., 2012; Reinholt et al., 2011). For example, 
Minbaeva et al. (2003 ) tested the role of overall motivation of a subsidiary’s employees on 
knowledge transfer. While the authors did not find a direct positive effect of motivation upon 
knowledge transfer, they found that the interaction between  a subsidiary’s overall motivation 
and ability had a strong positive impact on knowledge transfer.  
 We examine the role of  motivation by drawing on Self Determination Theory ( SDT), 
which states that individuals’ behavior var ies with respect to two broad types of motivation: 
intrinsic motivation, which comes from within the individual, and refers to doing something 
because it is inherently interesting or enjoyable; and extrinsic motivation, which refers to doing 
something because it leads to a separable outcome such as monetary rewards (Deci and Ryan, 
2012; Gagné and Deci, 2005; Ryan and Deci, 2000). Intrinsic motivation is often argued to lead 
to more persistent behavioral effort, which in turn results in more positive outcomes than does 
extrinsic motivation.  The motivation research shows that individuals who are intrinsically 
motivated to learn and to do their work are more likely to actively seek knowledge from others 
(e.g., Reinholt et al., 2011), and engage in knowledge sharing behavior (e.g., Foss et al., 2009; 
Minbaeva et al., 2012; Reinholt et al., 2011). The intrinsic value of personal knowledge growth 
is a strong motivator for individuals to acquire and assimilate knowledge (i.e., potential AC) 
irrespective of other forms of tangible rewards for knowledge application (Bock et al., 2005). 
While extrinsic motivation is also an important factor influencing individual’s engagement in 
knowledge seeking and sharing behavior, the empirical results are mixed. While some have 
found support for a positive extrinsic motivation and knowledge sharing/exchange relationship 
(e.g., Cabrera and Cabrera, 2005 ; Minbaeva et al. , 2012 ), others have reported a negative 
relationship (e.g., Bock et al., 2005; Foss et al., 2009). It is n oteworthy that, while research 
taking the SDT perspective has unambiguously argued that intrinsic motivation is superior to
<<<PAGE=7>>>
P7 of 29 
 
extrinsic motivation in influencing individuals outcomes such as knowledge sharing, task 
performance and creativity (e.g., Zhang and Bartol, 2010b ), few studies have included both 
types of motivation or empirically examined their differential effects.  
Addressing this gap, we investigated the role of intrinsic motivation on individuals’ 
potential AC, controlling for extrinsic motivation. Although no study has specifically 
investigated the role of motivation upon individual potential AC, existing empirical evidences 
provide the theoretical rationale for the link between intrinsic motivation and employees’ 
knowledge acquisition and assimilation  (i.e., potential AC) . In keeping with well-established 
motivation research (Deci and Ryan, 2000), we argue that intrinsically motivated individuals 
are more likely to engage in  knowledge acquisition and as similation behaviors because they 
will feel a sense of pleasure or satisfaction derived from these behaviors. More importantly, this 
positive effect should remain, even when the effect of extrinsic motivation is controlled.  
Hypothesis 1. The employee intrinsic motivation accounts for the prediction of employee 
potential AC, that is, above and beyond the effect of extrinsic motivation. 
 
Linking perceived organizational commitment to learning and potential AC 
In addition to individual-level antecedents, researchers have increasingly focused on how 
employees’ perception of organizational contextual factors influence their behavior, such as 
creativity and knowledge seeking and sharing (e.g., Hirst et al., 2011; Hirst et al., 2009). For 
example, Hirst et al. (2009) stated that individual behaviors are often enacted in organizational 
and team settings, and thus it is cr itical to understand how and to what exten t perceived 
contextual factors influence an employee’s behaviors.  This is consistent with the key premise 
underlying theories of person-situation interactions, such as social learning theory (Rosenthal 
and Zimmerman, 1978), in which individuals analyse, react to, and influence their environment 
according to their dispositions.  Drawing theoretical insights from these theories, we propose 
that the perception of organizational commitment to learn could be seen as “individual
<<<PAGE=8>>>
P8 of 29 
 
conditions of action” (Minbaeva et al. , 2012 ), which influences individual behaviors. 
According to Sinkula et al. (1997), organizational commitment to learning reflects the degree 
to which an organization values and promotes learning. For instance, Mavondo et al. (2005) 
asserted that organizational commitment to learning is the manifestation of the organization’s 
capacity and propensity to learn. A strong organizational commitment to learning is likely to 
foster an organizational climate that encourages organizational members to engage in  
knowledge creation and sharing activities (Baker and Sinkula, 1999; Li et al., 2010; Mavondo 
et al. , 2005 ; Sinkula et al. , 1997 ). At the individual level, organizational learning theory 
suggests that organizations with strong commitment to learning encourage and value employees’ 
continuous efforts to identify and acquire, share and utilize knowledge to improve performance 
(Baker and Sinkula, 1999 ; Sinkula et al. , 1997 ). Given that organizational commitment to 
learning is concerned with “the development of new knowledge in the organization” (Li et al., 
2010, p. 84 ), we therefore posit that an individual who perceives a greater level of 
organizational commitment to learning is more likely to behave in ways that are aligned with 
such norms and expectations (i.e., engage in knowledge acquisition and assimilation).  
To the best of our knowledge, there is no empirical work that has tested the relationship 
between perceived organizational commitmen t to learning and individual potential AC. A 
related study by  Minbaeva et al.  (2012) found that employee engagement in knowledge 
exchange is dependent upon the exten t to which the individual believes whether it is a valued 
activity as considered by his/her immediate group and/or the organization as a whole. Although 
that study focused on perceived organizational commitment for knowledge sharing rather than 
perceived organizational commitment for learning, it provides a strong theoretical rationale for 
a positive relationship between perceived organizational commitment to learning and individual 
AC. Thus, we believe that in a strong climate that is characterised by hig h commitment to
<<<PAGE=9>>>
P9 of 29 
 
continuous learning and development, individual employees are more encouraged to engage in 
knowledge acquisition and assimilation behaviors.  
Hypothesis 2: Individual employees’ perceived organizational commitment to learn  is 
positively related to individual employees’ potential AC. 
 
Integrating Potential AC, realized AC and creative performance 
With regard to the relationship between potential AC, realized AC and creativity, we build 
upon Zahra and George’s (2002) argument that, in order for firms to transform and exploit new 
knowledge (i.e., realized AC) to generate creativity , they must first have the capabilities to 
acquire and assimilate (i.e., potential AC) new knowledge. Zahra and George (2002) assert this 
distinction very clearly: “a high PACAP (potential AC) does not necessarily imply enhanced 
performance. RACAP (realized AC) involves transforming and exploiting the assimilated 
knowledge by incorporating it into the firm’s operations, thereby improving its performance…. 
Despite the importance of PACAP, RACAP is the primary source of performance 
improvements” (p. 191). At the organizational level, empirical research has also demonstrated 
that potential AC contributes to organizational innovation through the effect of realized AC 
(e.g., Soo et al., 2016).  
In this study, we adapt the potential  AC – realized AC  – organizational innovation 
relationship to the individual level of analysis, and argue that there is a positive relationship 
between potential and realized AC, and that individuals have to acquire knowledge first before 
they can exploit it to improve their creativity. Creativity refers to the production of novel and 
useful ideas concerning products, services, processes and procedures (Amabile, 1996 ). We 
focus on creativity as a critical individual p erformance outcome, because scholars have 
frequently argued that employee creativity is positively associated with work-related outcomes, 
such as individual job performance, and organizational survival and competitiveness (e.g., 
George and Zhou, 2002; Gong et al., 2013; Hirst et al., 2009; Zhang and Bartol, 2010a).
<<<PAGE=10>>>
P10 of 29 
 
With reg ard to the relationship between potential AC, realized AC and creative 
performance, we argue that, rather than a direct antecedent employee creative, the potential AC-
creativity relationship is mediated through realized AC (e.g., Jansen et al., 2005; Zahra and 
George, 2002). To the best of our knowledge, there is no published research that has tested the 
indirect relationship between individual potential AC, realized AC and creativity. To address 
this gap in the literature , we build on Zahra and George’ s (2002) arguments and hypothesize 
that individual employees’ ability to acquire and assimilate knowledge (i.e., potential AC) will 
not necessarily lead to  more creativity without the new knowledge being transformed and 
exploited (i.e., realized AC).  
Hypothesis 3: There is an indirect effect from individual employees’ potential AC to 
their creativity via individual employees’ realized AC.  
 
Integrating realized AC, employee creativity and job performance  
In more recent years, scholars have argued that, while much research has focused on the 
determinants of creativity (for recent r eviews, see Anderson et al., 2014; Zhou and Shalley, 
2011), significantly less attention has been paid to the outcomes of creativity (e.g., Gong et al., 
2009; Gong et al., 2013; Martinaityte and Sacramento, 2013 ; Zhang and Bartol, 2010a). This 
limited attention is surprising, given that a key assumption in the creativity literature is that 
employee creativity is beneficial for individual and organizational outcomes (Gilson, 2008 ; 
Zhou and Shalley, 2011 ). As Gong et al . (2009) put it, creativity is only “of value to 
organizations ... to the extent that it impacts employee job performance” (p. 765). To date, 
limited studies have investigated the  creativity and job performance relationship, and have 
mostly reported a  positive association (e.g., Gong et al. , 2009 ; Zhang and Bartol, 2010a ). 
However, very little is known about the conditions under which employee creativity is more or 
less likely to lead to job performance  at the individual level of analy sis. One exception is 
provided by Martinaityte and Sacramento (2013) , who  found that high quality of leader -
<<<PAGE=11>>>
P11 of 29 
 
member exchange enhanced the effect of employees’ creativity on sales effectiveness. Another 
firm-level example is provided by Gong et al. (2013). At the firm level, Gong et al. provide 
support to the notion that, rather than a direct relationship, the aggregated employee creativity 
and firm performance relationship was contingent upon the  aggregated measure of core 
knowledge employees’ ability to transform and exploit new knowledge (i.e., realized AC).  
Thus, in this study, we respond to research calling for further study to not only understand 
the connection between creativity and job performance, but , more importantly, to understand 
the boundary conditions under which employee creativity is more or less likely to lead to better 
job performance (e.g., Gong et al., 2013; Martinaityte and Sacramento, 2013 ). Specifically, 
inspired by Gong et al.’s (2013, p. 454) argument that , for creative ideas to be translated into 
improved performance, the capacity of “employees to transform and exploit creative ideas is 
critical”, we posit that individual employees’ creativity should interact with their realized AC 
to jointly affect job performance. Although Gong et al.’s study focused on firm-level measures, 
it is reasonable to believe that the moderating role of realized AC is equally importantly at the 
individual level of analysis. That is, employee creativity does not drive performance directly 
unless it is transformed and implement ed. By focusing on realized AC at the individual level, 
we test the critical moderating role of individuals’ realized AC in enhancing the positive 
creativity-job performance relationship.  
Hypothesis 4. Individual employees’ realized AC moderates the impact of employee 
creativity to job performance, such that the impact is stronger when realized AC is high  
and weaker when realized AC is low.  
 
Methods 
Sample and data collection procedures
<<<PAGE=12>>>
P12 of 29 
 
We draw our sample from employees working in a major Chinese automotive design firm 
where learning, creativity and innovation are considered important. In consultation with the 
organization’s human resource managers, we selected employees and their immediate 
supervisors from multiple departments in the organization. For data collection, w e conducted 
two-wave, multiple-source, on-site surveys at an average four-week interval. Specially, at Time 
1, employees reported their perception of organizational commitment to learn ing, intrinsic 
motivation, potential AC and control variables (e.g., demographic variables of age, education 
and organizational tenure, and anticipated extrinsic reward for knowledge seeking and sharing 
activities). At T ime 2, we asked employees to rate their realized AC, and we asked the 
supervisors to rate employee creativity and job performance. Each supervisor was asked to rate 
one follower’s creativity and job performance. A total of 125 (48% response rate) independent 
paired useable responses  were received. The sample consists mostly of employees aged 
between 20 and 29 (75.2 per cent), female (76.8 per cent), and highly educated (50.4 per cent 
held a diploma degree or above). 
 
Measures 
All materials were presented in Chinese. Questions were translated from English into 
Chinese by the author, who is fluent in both languages. To maximize translation equivalence, 
the final Chinese text was back-translated into English by a bilingual research assistant.  
Individual Absorptive Capacity. This was measured using an 18-item used by Soo et al. 
(2016). The four-item acquisition scale assessed an individual’s ability to identify and obtain 
new external knowledge. The five-item assimilation scale assessed an individual’s ability to 
develop processes and routines useful in analysing, interpreting and understanding ne wly 
acquired external knowledge. The five-item scale transformation measured how individuals 
were able to develop routines to facilitate the combination of existing knowledge with the newly
<<<PAGE=13>>>
P13 of 29 
 
acquired and assimilated knowledge to form new knowledge or insights. The four-item 
exploitation scale assessed how individuals were able to apply and exploit new external 
knowledge to improve the current work processes and procedures. Potential AC is measured by 
the acquisition and assimilation scale, while realized AC is measured by the transformation and 
exploitation scale. The Cronbach’s alpha was .79 for potential AC, and .89 for realized AC.  
Perceived Organizational Commitment to Learning. This was measured using a four-item 
scale adapted from Sinkula et al. (1997). A sample item is “The basic values of this organization 
include learning as key to improvement”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .87.  
Intrinsic Motivation . This was measured by a  four-item scale used by Reinholt et al.  
(2011). Following Reinholt et al .’s approach, respondents were asked “Why do you share 
knowledge?” and were given four possible answers. Sample items are “... b ecause I find it 
personally satisfying” and “... because I enjoy it”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .72. 
Creativity. This was measured using a nine-item scale adapted from Tierney et al. (1999). 
Supervisors were asked to rate  their subordinates’ creativity  a five-point scale ranging from 
“never” to “almost always”. A sample item is “This employee demonstrates originality in his/her 
work”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .93. 
Job Performance. This was measured with a seven -item scale from Williams and 
Anderson (1991). Supervisors were asked to rate their subordinates’ job performance on a five-
point scale ranging from “never” to “almost always ”. A s ample item  is “This employee 
adequately completes assigned duties”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .91. 
Control Variables. We controlled for the demographic variables of age, education and 
organizational tenure, as these variables have been found to influence performance. Following 
Bock et al.’s (2005) approach, we controlled for two forms of extrinsic reward for knowledge 
seeking and sharing activities: first is the anticipated extrinsic rewards, which include monetary 
incentives and expected promotion ; second is the anticipated reciprocal relationships, which
<<<PAGE=14>>>
P14 of 29 
 
capture employees ’ desires to maintain ongoing relationships with others, specifically with 
regard to knowledge provision and reception. Anticipated extrinsic reward is measured using 
four items which asking about whether employees will receive rewards or additional points for 
promotion in return for any knowledge sharing. A sample item is “I will receive monetary 
rewards in return for sharing knowledge in my company”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .79. 
Anticipated reciprocal benefits were measured using five items that are adapted from Bock et 
al. (2005). A sample item is “My knowledge sharing would strengthen the ties between existing 
members in the organization and myself”. The Cronbach’s alpha was .88. 
 
Results 
Descriptive statistics 
Descriptive statistics for the study variables are presented in Table 1. To detect potential 
issues of multicollinearity, w e conducted a multiple linear regression model to obtain the 
variance inflation factor (VIF) for all variables. While different critical VIF values have been 
used as rules of thumb to indicate excessive or serious multicollinearity, a common rule of 
thumb is that if VIF > 10, the multicollinearity is severe. The VIF values of independent 
variables ranged from 1.17 to 2.62, indicating that the independent variables do not have a 
severe multicollinearity problem. Therefore, all variables were retained. 
---------------------------------------- 
Insert Table 1 about here 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Hypothesis testing  
The results of the direct and the moderated hierarchical regression analyses associated 
with our hypotheses are summarized in Table 2 . Base d on Aiken and West (1991), all 
independent variables were mean -centered to reduce multicollinearity. To test Hypothes es 1 
and 2, we conducted hierarchical regression analyses with potential AC as the dependent
<<<PAGE=15>>>
P15 of 29 
 
variable, entering first all controls  (Model 1) , and then included intrinsic motivation and  
perceived organizational commitment to learning as predictors (Model 2). As shown in Table 
2, after controlling for extrinsic motivation, the coefficient for intrinsic motivation was 
significant (β = .24, p < .01). Thus, Hypothesis 1 was supported, as intrinsic motivation accounts 
for significant variations in employee potential AC . Furthermore, perceived organizational 
commitment to learning was significantly related to employee potential AC (β = .11, p < .05), 
thereby supporting Hypothesis 2. Thus, individuals who are more intrinsically motivated, and 
perceive high  levels of organizational commitment to learning, are more willingly actively 
acquire and assimilate new knowledge at work.  
Hypothesis 4 predicted that individuals’ creative was more positively related to job 
performance when they also pose a higher level of realized AC. Results from Table 2 (Model 
4) suggested that employee creative performance marginally predicted individuals ’ job 
performance (β = .13, p < .10). Before testing the interaction effects of realized AC, we centered 
the independent variables to increase the interpretability of the interaction variable (Aiken 
&West, 1991).  We tested this hypothesis by adding the interaction betw een creative 
performance and realized AC (model 6). The results show that this interaction was not 
significant (β = -.06, ns). Therefore, Hypothesis 4 was not supported.  
---------------------------------------- 
Insert Table 2 about here 
---------------------------------------- 
To test Hypothesis 3, we followed Baron and Kenny’s (1986) procedure, as well as the 
recommendation of Shrout and Bolger (2002) to test the indirect effect using a bias -corrected 
bootstrapping approach. First, we followed Baron and Kenny’s (1986) procedure to present the 
total, direct and indirect effect between potential AC and creativity.  In step 1, we regressed 
realized AC on employee creative. In step 2, we regressed employee creative on potential AC. 
In step 3, we regressed employee creative on potential AC and realized AC. In all of the above
<<<PAGE=16>>>
P16 of 29 
 
analyses, we controlled for age, gender, education level and organizational tenure. For ease of 
presentation, Table 3 summarizes the main results with the coefficient for c ontrol variables 
omitted. In steps 1 and 2, employee potential AC emerged as significant predictors of employee 
realized AC (β = .30, p < .001), and employee creative (β = .12, p < .01). When employee 
realized AC was added to the equation in step 3, employee potential AC was no longer 
significant at the conventional level, but employee realized AC remained significant (β = .44, 
p < .001). Thus supported Hypothesis 3.  
Although the Baron and Kenny’s (1986) test  showed significant mediating effect of 
realized AC, it is still important to test the significance of these effects in a more rigorous 
manner (Rucker et al., 2011). Specifically, we followed the recommendation of Shrout and 
Bolger (2002) to test the indirect effect using a bias-corrected bootstrapping approach with the 
aid of a SPSS macro developed by Preacher and Hayes (2008). Bootstrapping involves the 
repeated and randomised extraction of samples from the dataset, calculating the indirect effect 
for each re-sample. A confidence interval (CI) is investigated for each indirect path to determine 
significance levels (Shrout and Bolger, 2002). If zero is not included within the range the 
confidence internals, it indicates a significant effect (Rucker et al., 2011; Shrout and Bolger, 
2002). Accordingly, s upport was found for the relation of  potential AC and creativity as 
mediated by realized AC, the indirect effect was .13 (p < .001; 95% CI = .09 - .22). As the 
indirect effect was significant and the 95% CI around the bootstrapped indirect effect does not 
contain zero (.09 - .22), this again provide support to Hypothesis 3. 
---------------------------------------- 
Insert Table 3 about here 
---------------------------------------- 
Discussion 
Although previous research has considered AC as a main determinant of inter- and intra-
organizational knowledge transfer, research focus on the individual level remains limited. Thus,
<<<PAGE=17>>>
P17 of 29 
 
in this study, staying close to Cohen and Levinthal’s (1990) conceptualizations of AC, we focus 
on the individual level  in order to better understand  the antecedents and consequences of 
individual AC. In particular, we examined two direct relationships , including employees’ 
perceptions of organizational commitment to learning and intrinsic motivation as predictors of 
their potential AC. We also examined the dual role of realized AC as a mediator in the employee 
potential AC–creativity relationship, and a s a moderator on the creativity –job performance 
relationship. Our results lead to three main conclusions. First, employees’ perception of 
organizational commitment to learning and intrinsic motivation to knowledge sharing 
contributes positively to their potential AC, even when their extrinsic motivation was controlled 
for. Second, employees’ potential AC relate positively to their creative performance through 
their influence on employees’ realized AC. Third, although we did not hypothes ize a direct 
relationship between employee creativity and job performance, our results also pro vided 
support to this often -assumed but less -investigated relationship.  Fourth, contra ry to our 
hypotheses, we did not find support for the moderating role of realized AC upon the employee 
creativity–job performance relationship.  
 
Theoretical implications 
Our research makes three distinct theoretical contributions. First, we contribute to the AC 
literature by responding to the calls for more research focus at the individual level (e.g., 
Minbaeva et al., 2012 ; Volberda et al., 2010). An individual level of analysis is considered 
important and essential, because individuals are considered as primary actors in knowledge 
creation and key repositories of knowledge in organizations. Specifically, drawing upon SDT 
theory (Gagné and Deci, 2005 ; Ryan and Deci, 2000 ), we provide empirical support that 
individuals’ AC is influenced by their intrinsic motivation (over and above extrinsic motivation) 
and their perception organizational commitment to learning. In doing so, we provide a micro-
<<<PAGE=18>>>
P18 of 29 
 
level analysis that is complementary to the dominant macro-level analysis in the AC research 
(Minbaeva et al. , 2012 ). Taking the SDT perspective, much research has unambiguously 
assumed that intrinsic motivation is superior to extrinsic motivation in influencing individuals’ 
performance outcomes. In this study, we provide empirical evidence that individual intrinsic 
motivation provides meaningful variance in employees’ potential AC that is above and beyond 
that predicted by extrinsic  motivation. Our findings support recent research highlighting that  
individual behaviors are often enacted within unique organizational settings, and thus it is 
critical to understand how and to what extent contextual factors  (e.g., organizational 
commitment to learning) influence employees’ behaviors (e.g., Hirst et al., 2011).  
Second, taking a micro approach, we found that employee realized AC significantly 
mediated the relationship between their potential AC and creativity. This significant mediation 
result provides empirical support to the PAC-RAC-performance argument made by Zahra and 
George (2002) at the organizational level. Conceptually, they assert that “despite the importance 
of PACAP ( potential AC ), RACAP ( realized AC ) is the primary source of performance 
improvements” (Zahra and George, 2002, p. 191 ). Empirically, researchers such as Chang et 
al. (2013) posited that a high level of realized AC helps a firm leverage their current resources 
to transfer the valuable knowledge, which in turn leads to enhanced firm innovativeness. 
However, the authors did not find support for a mediation role of RAC. Therefore, this study 
takes an important step toward a better understanding of how the positive impact of potential 
AC on realized  AC ultimately influence s creativity. Our results provide  evidence for the 
importance of individual -level learning  in the process of kno wledge creation, sharing and 
utilization, a concept at the core of the knowledge-based view of the firm.  
Finally, it provides an empirical contribution to a promising direction for creativity 
research (Martinaityte and Sacramento, 2013 ; Zhang and Bartol, 2010a ; Zhou and Shalley, 
2011). Creativity research has thus far focused predominantly on understanding the antecedents
<<<PAGE=19>>>
P19 of 29 
 
of creativity, with very little a ttention given to understanding how it affects important work 
outcomes such as job performance.  While we did not specifically hypothesize a direct 
relationship between employee creativity and job performance, our  results provide empirical 
support to this less studied area. And although we did not find a significant moderating role of 
RAC in the creativ ity-job performance  relationship, this study takes a step towards 
understanding the boundary conditions under which creativity can be translated into superi or 
job performance. This is important because, as Martinaityte and Sacramento (2013) pointed out, 
“virtually nothing is known about the conditions under which employee creativity is more or 
less likely to lead to job effectiveness” (p. 974). 
 
Managerial implications 
This study offers several managerial implications. The first  is that our study  speaks 
directly to the question of how an organization can prepare and encourage its employees to 
absorb new knowledge. We show that an organization should not emphasize simply extrinsic 
rewards (i.e., salary incentives and  bonuses) as a primary knowledge sharing motivation, 
because these may only provide temporary incentives for knowledge sharing . Instead, 
organizations should design their HR policies and practices to focus on establishing a positive 
organizational climate for continuous learning and enhancing employees’ intrinsic motivation 
(Gagné, 2009), as they are some of the key drivers to enhance employees’ ability to acquire and 
to process newly acquired knowledge (i.e., potential AC). For example, with regard to 
perception of organizational commitment to learning, HR practices can be developed in areas 
such as selection, job design, training and development, performan ce management, 
compensation systems to facilitate the establishment and maintenance of a shared perception of 
organizational commitment to learning. In terms of selection, it is possible that organizations 
could be benefit by selecting employees to exhibit  a passion and leadership style that helps
<<<PAGE=20>>>
P20 of 29 
 
facilitates learning. For example, leaders are considered to be more transformational, 
empowering and supportive could help employees to focus on continuous learning. In terms of 
training, not only HR practices should continue to focus on utilize formal training programs to 
promote learning norms, but also other forms of learning programs (e.g., coaching, mentorship, 
on-demand training) should be highly encouraged. 
With regard to intrinsic motivation, HR practices can be developed in areas such as job 
design, training and development, performance management, compensation systems to promote 
intrinsic motivation. For example, in terms of performance appraisal, indicators of employees’ 
continuous learning and ability to absorb and apply new knowledge should be incorporated into 
performance appraisals with a developmental focus rather than an administrative focus (i.e., 
evaluative in nature). A developmental focus appraisal have been shown to enhance intrinsic 
motivation and employee commitment (Aguinis, 2013; Kuvaas, 2007).  
Second, we show that, while it is of critical importance for organizations to design HR 
policies and practices to enhance employees’ ability to identity and process knowledge, 
organizations should al so focus on how they can facilitate employees to leverage and utilize 
acquired knowledge  (i.e., realized AC) , which then drives  creativity. In many cases, 
organizations pay most attention to the search for new ideas and knowledge, but do not have 
enough focus on the need for knowledge utilization and exploitation within the organization. 
Organizations must take coherent action to pursue both of these abilities. For example, 
organizations can utilize training to develop employees’ confidence capabi lity to apply newly 
acquired knowledge, and managers’ capability to provide necessary support for new knowledge 
utilization. Also through training, organizations should focus on train managers to become 
transformational or participative leaders who can have a positive influence on employees’ sense 
of psychological safety by encouraging their active involvement and reducing the perceived 
risk of exploring and applying new knowledge at work (Newman et al., 2017). Furthermore,
<<<PAGE=21>>>
P21 of 29 
 
organizations should focus on job design strategies that create opportunities for employees to 
exchange and apply new knowledge within and beyond their current work areas, such as job 
rotation and cross-team/functional interfaces.  
 Finally, we show that employee creativity is likely to l ead to superior job performance, 
reinforcing the practical value of research examining the outcomes of employee creativity. This 
implies that organizations can reap the benefits of employee creativity by identifying and 
creating conditions to develop  creative individuals through relevant organizational practice 
(e.g., training and development and job design).  
 
Limitations and directions for future research 
There are several limitations to this study.  First, our data were collected within a single 
organization. Although this helped control for confounding variables across companies and 
industries, generalizations of our results must be made with caution. Future research could 
collect data from other organizations and industries, since organizational and industry factors 
can influence how employees respond to various forms of motivation. Nonetheless, our sample 
is a useful source for this study because of the typically heavy job demands and strong need for 
creativity. Second, similar to Gong et al. (2009) and Zhang and Bartol (2010), our data were 
collected in the Chinese context, we agree with these authors that future studies should replicate 
our findings in other cultures to ensure generalizability. In addition, we emphasize the need to 
pay more  attention to individual differences and its effect on knowledge processes.  Future 
research can examine how personal traits  may moderate the relationships between motivation 
factors and knowledge sharing activities. Finally, we collected supervisor rated c reativity and 
job performance at the same time point. While the use of other rated outcomes reduces the issue 
of common method bias, the use of the same source of both  outcome variables might have 
inflated the estimation of the relationship between the two . Future research needs to consider
<<<PAGE=22>>>
P22 of 29 
 
the use of time lagged  data and a combination subjective and objective performance data to 
allow for clearer conclusions concerning causality between creativity and job performance.  
 
Conclusion 
We proposed and empirically tested a model of individual level AC , investigating its 
antecedents and its impact on creativity and job performance. Our results highlight three central 
findings. First, we demonstrated that individual s’ intrinsic motivation (after controllin g for 
extrinsic motivation) and their perception of organizational commitment to learn influence their 
willingness in engaging in potential AC. Our results also confirmed, at the individual level, the 
potential AC-realized AC-performance relationship, as proposed by Zahra and George (2002) 
at the organizational lev el. In addition, we uncovered an important finding by demonstrating 
that high level s of RAC enable employees to better leverage their knowledge in the form of 
increased creativity. Third, we contribute to an important gap in the creativity literature by 
demonstrating the positive relationship between employee creativity and job performance.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
P23 of 29 
 
References 
Amabile, T. M. (1996), Creativity in Context: Update to "The Social Psychology of Creativity", 
Westview Press, Boulder, CO. 
Anderson, N., Potočnik, K. and Zhou, J. (2014), "Innovation and creativity in organizations a 
state-of-the-science review, prospective commentary, and guiding framework", Journal of 
Management, Vol. 40 No. 5, pp. 1297-1333. 
Aguinis, H. (2009). Performance Management. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall. 
Baker, W. E. and Sinkula, J. M. (1999), "The synergistic effect of market orientation and 
learning orientation on organizational performance", Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 411-427. 
Baron, R. M. and Kenny, D. A. (1986), “The moderator -mediator distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations”, Journal of  
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 51, pp. 1173–1182. 
Bock, G. W., Zmud, R. W., Kim, Y. G. and Lee, J. N. (2005), "Behavioral intention formation 
in knowledge sharing: Examining the roles of extrinsic motivators, social -psychological 
forces, and organizational climate", MIS Quarterly, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 87-111. 
Cabrera, E. F. and Cabrera, A. (2005), "Fostering knowledge sharing through people 
management practices", The International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 
16 No. 5, pp. 720-735. 
Calantone, R. J., Cavusgil, S. T. and Zhao, Y. (2002), "Learning orientation, firm innovation 
capability, and firm performance", Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 31 No. 6, pp. 
515-524. 
Chang, S., Gong, Y., Way, S. A. and Jia, L. (2013), "Flexibility -oriented HRM systems, 
absorptive capacity, and market responsiveness and firm innovativeness", Journal of 
Management, Vol. 39 No. 7, pp. 1924-1951. 
Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1990), "Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning 
and innovation", Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 128-152. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2012), “Self-determination theory”, in Van Lange, P. A. M. , 
Kruglanski, A. W. and Higgins E. T. (Eds.) Handbook of Theories of Social Psychology 
(Vol.1). Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 416-437. 
Flatten, T., Adams, D. and Brettel, M. (2015), "Fostering absorptive capacity through 
leadership: A cross-cultural analysis", Journal of World Business, Vol. 50 No. 3, pp. 519-
534. 
Foss, N. J. (2011), "Invited Editorial: Why  micro-foundations for resource-based theory are 
needed and what they may look like", Journal of Management, Vol. 37 No. 5, pp. 1413 -
1428. 
Foss, N. J., Minbaeva, D. B., Pedersen, T. and Reinholt, M. (2009), "Encouraging knowledge 
sharing among employees: How job design matters", Human Resource Management, Vol. 
48 No. 6, pp. 871-893. 
Gagné, M. (2009), "A model of knowledge ‐sharing motivation", Human Resource 
Management, Vol. 48 No. 4, pp. 571-589. 
Gagné, M. and Deci, E. L. (2005), "Self ‐determination theory and work motivation", Journal 
of Organizational behavior, Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 331-362. 
George, J. M. and Zhou, J. (2002), "Understanding when bad moods foster creativity and good 
ones don't: the role of context and clarity of feelings", Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 
87 No. 4, pp. 687-697.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
P24 of 29 
 
Gilson, L. L. (2008), "Why be creative: A review of the practical outcomes associated with 
creativity at the individual, group, and organizational levels", in Zhou, J. and Shalley, C. 
E. (Eds.) Handbook of Organizational Creativity, Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 303-322. 
Gong, Y., Huang, J.-C. and Farh, J.-L. (2009), "Employee learning orientation, transformational 
leadership, and employee creativity: The mediating role of employee creative self -
efficacy", Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 52 No. 4, pp. 765-778. 
Gong, Y., Zhou, J. and Chang, S. (2013), "Core knowledge employee creativity and firm 
performance: The moderating role of riskiness orientation, firm size, and realized 
absorptive capacity", Personnel Psychology, Vol. 66 No. 2, pp. 443-482. 
Hart, T. A., Gilstrap, J. B. and Bolino, M. C. (2016), "Organizational citizenship behavior and 
the enhancement of absorptive capacity", Journal of Business Research,  Vol. 69 No. 10, 
pp. 3981-3988. 
Hirst, G., Van Knippenberg, D.,  Chen, C. -h. and Sacramento, C. A. (2011), "How does 
bureaucracy impact individual creativity? A cross -level investigation of team contextual 
influences on goal orientation–creativity relationships", Academy of Management Journal, 
Vol. 54 No. 3, pp. 624-641. 
Hirst, G., Van Knippenberg, D. and Zhou, J. (2009), "A cross -level perspective on employee 
creativity: Goal orientation, team learning behavior, and individual creativity", Academy 
of Management Journal, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 280-293. 
Hotho, J. J., Becker ‐Ritterspach, F. and Saka ‐Helmhout, A. (2012), "Enriching absorptive 
capacity through social interaction", British Journal of Management,  Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 
383-401. 
Jansen, J. J. P., Van Den Bosch, F. A. J. and Volberda, H. W. (2005), "Managing potential and 
realized absorptive capacity: how do organizational antecedents matter?", The Academy of 
Management Journal, Vol. 48 No. 6, pp. 999-1015. 
Kozlowski, S. W. J. and Klein, K. J. (2000), "A multilevel approach to theory and research in 
organizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes", in Klein, K. J. and 
Kozlowski, S. W. J. (Eds.) Multilevel Theory, Research, and Methods in Organizations: 
Foundations, extensions, and new directions, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, pp. 3-90. 
Kukenberger, M. R., Mathieu, J. E. and Ruddy, T. (2015), "A cross-level test of empowerment 
and process influences on members’ informal learning and team commitment", Journal of 
Management, Vol. 41 No. 3, pp. 987-1016. 
Kuvaas, B. (2007), "Different relationships between perceptions of developmental performance 
appraisal and work performance", Personnel Review, Vol. 36 No. 3, pp. 378–397. 
Lane, P. J., Koka, B. R. and Pathak, S. (2006), "The reification of absorptive capacity: a critical 
review and rejuvenation of the construct", The Academy of Management Review,  Vol. 31 
No. 4, pp. 833-863. 
Lewin, A. Y., Massini, S. and Peeters, C. (2011), "Microfoundations of internal  and external 
absorptive capacity routines", Organization Science, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 81-98. 
Li, Y., Guo, H., Yi, Y. and Liu, Y. (2010), "Ownership concentration and product innovation 
in Chinese firms: The mediating role of learning orientation", Management and 
Organization Review, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 77-100. 
Martinaityte, I. and Sacramento, C. A. (2013), "When creativity enhances sales effectiveness: 
The moderating role of leader –member exchange", Journal of Organizational Behavior,  
Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 974-994. 
Martinkenaite, I. and Breunig, K. J. (2016), "The emergence of absorptive capacity through 
micro–macro level interactions", Journal of Business Research,  Vol. 69 No. 2, pp. 700 -
708.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
P25 of 29 
 
Mavondo, F. T., Chimhanzi, J. and Stewart, J. (2005), "Learning orient ation and market 
orientation: relationship with innovation, human resource practices and performance", 
European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 39 No. 11/12, pp. 1235-1263. 
Minbaeva, D., Pedersen, T., Björkman, I., Fey, C. F. and Park, H. J. (2003), "MNC knowledge 
transfer, subsidiary absorptive capacity, and HRM", Journal of International Business 
Studies, Vol. 34 No. 6, pp. 586-599. 
Minbaeva, D. B., Mäkelä, K. and Rabbiosi, L. (2012), "Linking HRM and knowledge transfer 
via individual‐level mechanisms", Human Resource Management, Vol. 51 No. 3, pp. 387-
405. 
Minbaeva, D. B., Pedersen, T., Björkman, I. and Fey, C. F. (2014), "A retrospective on: MNC 
knowledge transfer, subsidiary absorptive capacity, and HRM", Journal of International 
Business Studies, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 52-62. 
Newman, A., Donohue, R., and Eva, N. (2017), "Psychological safety: A systematic review of 
the literature", Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 521-535. 
Preacher, K. J. and Hayes, A. F. (2008), “Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing 
and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models”, Behavior Research Methods, 
Vol. 40, pp. 879–891. 
Reinholt, M., Pedersen, T. and Foss, N. J. (2011), "Why a central network position isn't enough: 
The role of motivation and ability for knowledge sharing in employee networks", Academy 
of Management Journal, Vol. 54 No. 6, pp. 1277-1297. 
Rosenthal, T. L., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2014). Social Learning and Cognition. Academic Press, 
New York, NY. 
Rucker, D. D., Preacher, K. J., Tormala, Z. L. and Petty, R. E. (2011), “Mediation analysis in 
social psychology: Current practices and recommendations”, Social and Personality 
Psychology Compass, Vol. 5/6, pp. 359-371. 
Ryan, R. M. and Deci, E. L. (2000), "Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and 
new directions", Contemporary Educational Psychology, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 54-67. 
Shrout, P. E. and  Bolger, N. (2002), “Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: 
New procedures and recommendations”, Psychological Methods, Vol. 7, pp. 422−445. 
Sinkula, J. M., Baker, W. E. and Noordewier, T. (1997), "A framework for market -based 
organizational learning: Linking values, knowledge, and behavior", Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 305-318. 
Soo, C., Devinney, T., Midgley, D. and Deering, A. (2002), "Knowledge management: 
philosophy, processes, and pi tfalls", California Management Review, Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 
129-150. 
Soo, C., Tian, A. W., Teo, S. T. and Cordery, J. (2016), "Intellectual capital –enhancing HR, 
absorptive capacity, and innovation", Human Resource Management . doi: 
10.1002/hrm.21783 
Tierney, P., Farmer, S. M. and Graen, G. B. (1999), "An examination of leadership and 
employee creativity: The relevance of traits and relationships", Personnel Psychology, Vol. 
52 No. 3, pp. 591-620. 
Tortoriello, M. (2015), "The social underpinnings of ab sorptive capacity: The moderating 
effects of structural holes on innovation generation based on external knowledge", 
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 586-597. 
Volberda, H. W., Foss, N. J. and Lyles, M. A. (2010), "Absorbing the concept of absorptive 
capacity: How to realize its potential in the organization field", Organization Science, Vol. 
21 No. 4, pp. 931-951. 
Williams, L. J., and Anderson, S. E. (1991), “Job satisfaction and organizational commitment 
as predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors,” Journal of 
Management, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 601-617.
<<<PAGE=26>>>
P26 of 29 
 
Yao, F. K. and Chang, S. (2017), "Do individual employees' learning goal orientation and civic 
virtue matter? A micro ‐foundations perspective on firm absorptive capacity", Strategic 
Management Journal. doi: 10.1002/smj.2636 
Zahra, S. A. and George, G. (2002), "Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and 
extension", The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 27 No. 2, pp. 185-203. 
Zhang, X. and Bartol, K. M. (2010a), " The influence of creative process engagement on 
employee creative performance and overall job performance: A curvilinear assessment", 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 95 No. 5, pp. 862-873. 
Zhang, X. and Bartol, K. M. (2010b), "Linking empowering leader ship and employee 
creativity: The influence of psychological empowerment, intrinsic motivation, and creative 
process engagement", Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 53 No. 1, pp. 107-128. 
Zhou, J. and Shalley, C. E. (2011), "Deepening our understanding of  creativity in the 
workplace: A review of different approaches to creativity research", in Zedeck, S. (Ed.) 
APA Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, APA, Washington, DC, pp. 
275-302.
<<<PAGE=27>>>
P27 of 29 
 
Table 1 
Descriptive statistics among research variablesa 
Variable Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
1. Gender 1.77 0.42               
2. Age 2.14 0.50 -.07              
3. Tenure 1.38 9.11 -.04 .04 (.88)            
4. Education 0.84 9.03 -.05 .05 .00            
5. Anticipated reciprocal benefits 3.73 0.55 .08 .14 -.01 -.06           
6. Anticipated extrinsic reward 3.08 0.67 -.02 .04 -.08 .12 .27** (.79)         
7. Proactive personality 5.15 0.97 -.04 .09 .02 .01 .32** .05 (.80)        
8. Self-efficacy 5.11 1.04 -.03 .13 .05 -.02 .24** .05 .74** (.89)       
9. Intrinsic motivation 5.57 0.76 -.03 .07 .03 .00 .28** .11 .43** .48** (.72)      
10. Organizational commitment to 
learning 5.28 1.08 -.03 -.01 -.05 .02 .22* .21* .23** .26** .42** (.87) 
    
11. PAC 4.67 0.80 -.04 .13 .07 -.02 .33** .11 .51** .53** .51** .39** (.79)    
12. RAC 3.67 0.49 -.05 .25 .05 .01 .41** .20* .39** .43** .28** .21* .51** (.89)   
13. Creativity 3.67 0.37 .08 .09 -.04 -.03 .50** .32** .29** .19* .25** .19* .27** .56** (.93)  
14. Job performance 5.24 0.90 .05 .16 .11 .00 .32** .00 .52** .57** .56** .33** .72** .55** .30** (.91) 
a Note: *p < .05, **p < .01, n= 125. 
Cronbach's coefficient alpha is provided along the diagonal in parentheses.
<<<PAGE=28>>>
P28 of 29 
 
Table 2 
Results of Hierarchical Regression Analysis for PAC and Job Performance 
Variables PAC Job performance 
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 
Control variables       
Gender -.07 -.04 .05 .05 .07 .07 
Age .07 .09 .06 .06 .01 .01 
Job tenure .004 .01 .07 .07 .06 .06 
Education -.001 -.001 .02 .03 .02 .02 
Proactive personality .16+ .14 .17 .14 .15 .15 
Self-efficacy .26** .17+ .36** .36*** .26** .26** 
Anticipated extrinsic reward .05 .003 -.07 -.10 -.10 -.10 
Anticipated reciprocal benefits .25* .17 .16* .11 .07 .07 
Independent variable       
Intrinsic motivation  .24**     
Organizational commitment to learn  .13*     
Creativity    .13+ -.10 .02 
Moderation       
RAC     .32*** .37*** 
RAC x Creativity      -.06 
       
R2 .35*** .44*** .39*** .41+ .48*** .48 
∆ R2  .09***  .02+ .07*** .00 
F for increment in R2  8.78***  2.93+ 15.16*** .01 
  Note: +p < .10, *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001
<<<PAGE=29>>>
P29 of 29 
 
Table 3 
Results of Hierarchical Regression Analysis for Mediation Analysis 
Variables β s.e. t p 
Step 1: RAC 
PAC .30 .05 6.14 < .001 
Step 2: Creativity 
PAC .12 .04 2.96 < .01 
Step 3: Creativity 
PAC -.01 .04 -.20 .84 
RAC .44 .07 6.52 < .001