<<<PAGE=1>>>
International Journal for Research in Vocational Education and Training (IJRVET)
Vol. 03, Issue 02, August 2016, 127-165
DOI: 10.13152/IJRVET.3.2.4
Determinants of Transfer of Training: A
Comprehensive Literature Review
Cornelia Tonh¨ auser∗and Laura B¨ uker
University of G¨ ottingen, Department of Business Administration, Chair of Business Education
with Focus on Educational Management
Platz der G¨ ottinger Sieben 5, 37073 G¨ ottingen, Germany
Received: 20.04.2016; Accepted: 01.08.2016; Published: 24.08.2016
Abstract: Investments in training measures can only be considered eﬀective if the
transfer of the learned contents to practical situations is continuously successful. In this
context the scientiﬁc and professional discourse regarding the eﬀectiveness of further
education, especially regarding transfer of training, has intensiﬁed considerably. This
analysis provides a systematic and comprehensive overview of the current state of inter-
national empirical research regarding major determinants of transfer of training in the
context of formalized further vocational training. Our review of literature diﬀerentiates
the most important determinants on the organizational level of the characteristics of
the work environment, the learning ﬁeld level of measure-speciﬁc characteristics, as well
as characteristics of participants on the individual level. Decades of transfer research
brings forth a wealth of information regarding determinants which inﬂuence the transfer
of training. The current analysis systematizes these results and clariﬁes that research
regarding the determinants of the process of transfer of training identiﬁes positive rela-
tionships at the three levels. In particular, the question of which determinants positively
inﬂuence the success of transfer of training is well-studied for the individual level. The
article shows that there is still a research deﬁcit concerning the determinants of transfer
of training at the learning ﬁeld and organizational level. There is particular need for
research regarding the dimensions of the determinants at the three levels. Finally, in
this context this article identiﬁes promising directions for future research.
Keywords: Transfer of Training, Training Evaluation, Literature Review, Formal
Training, VET, Vocational Education and Training
∗Corresponding author: cornelia.tonhaeuser@wiwi.uni-goettingen.de
ISSN: 2197-8646
http://www.ijrvet.net
<<<PAGE=2>>>
128 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
1 Determinants of Transfer of Training: A Comprehensive
Literature Review Introduction
The scientiﬁc and professional discourse regarding the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of fur-
ther vocational training, especially regarding transfer of training, has intensiﬁed consid-
erably. In the practical reality of further vocational training, the organizational form of
formalized and institutionalized training measures determines the oﬀ-the-job perception
of further education in the relevant organizations’ and companies Education Depart-
ments (v. Rosenbladt and Bilger, 2008; Schuchmann and Seufert, 2013). Therefore in
this article the focus will be directed exclusively to formalized further vocational mea-
sures. The reason for this is that, on the one hand, in further education, learning mostly
takes place in course or seminar form oﬀ-the-job. On the other hand, formally organized
learning settings represent the dominant design. In times of intense eﬃcacy debate, the
design of further vocational learning processes and their results and eﬀects in the con-
text of an optimal organization and eﬃcient governance of vocational training processes
is of great interest. In the context of high further vocational training expenditures by
companies, there now exists a high level of cost-awareness and strict result-orientation in
vocational and, particularly, in company training measures. The success of investments
in further vocational training can be considered from two perspectives. The educational
perspective on the one hand focuses primarily on enhancing individual competencies.
The economic point of view on the other considers especially to what extent this mea-
sure enables the transfer of the learned material from a learning environment to one of
practical application in the workplace. This positively inﬂuences the working process
and employee performance, producing better economic results. There are, however, con-
siderable uncertainties regarding the eﬀectiveness of further vocational training. Espe-
cially the eﬃcacy of conventional, formalized training measures in the shape of seminars,
classes or training is questioned regularly. Hitherto, in further vocational training, the
question of how the transfer of training problem applies both theoretically and practi-
cally has been resolved unsatisfactorily (e.g. Hutchins et al., 2010). The main problem
of transfer of training is considered to be that formalized training measures often see
participants acquire skills which they do or cannot apply appropriately in their work-
place. That is, it is assumed that said participants often fail to optimally transfer what
they have learned in training measures to their everyday work routine. Expert literature
often contains estimates regarding lower transfer rates. Several authors (Baldwin and
Ford, 1988; Georgenson, 1982; Kauﬀeld et al., 2008; Lemke, 1995; Solga, 2005) assume
that only 10-20% of lesson content is applied in the workplace. However, empirical ﬁnd-
ings of Saks and Belcourt (2006) conﬁrm higher transfer rates. According to this study,
immediately after a training, 62% of training content is applied in the workplace, falling
to 44% after six months and 34% after a year. Diﬀering results regarding transfer rates
can be attributed to modiﬁable personal and situational determinants. For this reason,
an analysis of the determinants of transfer of training is indispensable. They provide
evidence of which determinants signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the success of learning transfer,
be it positively or negatively. For a deeper understanding of determinants in their dif-
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 129
ferent dimensions, it is necessary to specify them in their facets and partial aspects.
The signiﬁcance of the identiﬁcation and analysis of determinants and their speciﬁcs is
emphasized by the results of the SCIL-trend studies (Diesner and Seufert, 2013, 2010;
Diesner et al., 2008). These show, that HR managers still consider the transfer-boosting
design of training measures as the leading challenge for companies. In this context, the
goal of the following analysis is to provide a systematic and comprehensive overview of
the current state of international research regarding determinants of transfer of train-
ing and their dimensions. Despite a long tradition of transfer research, there is still a
dearth of satisfactory explanations concerning determinants and their dimensions which
boost or hinder transfer of training. Therefore, we aim to answer the following research
questions: RQ1: To what extent has literature already explored empirically conﬁrmed
determinants of transfer of training and their dimensions on the individual, learning
ﬁeld and organizational levels in formalized further vocational training measures? RQ2:
Which areas provide potential directions for future research? The research objective of
this review of literature is to identify relevant determinants and their dimensions which
boost or hinder transfer of training and to analyze directions for further research. To
answer these research questions, we develop an overall research framework (see Figure
1).
Figure 1: Overall research framework.
As shown in ﬁgure 1, a diﬀerentiation is made between results- and process-oriented
research approaches. Result-oriented approaches focus on the eﬀectiveness of training
measures. In doing so, following Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006) a further diﬀer-
entiation is made between the steps of skill expansion (output), transfer of training
(persistence) and organizational success (outcome). Process-oriented approaches are
concerned with the determinants of the eﬀectiveness of a training measure. The de-
terminants can be assigned to the organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual levels.
This diﬀerentiation is based on the analysis of central models of transfer of training (see
Table 1). The levels are deﬁned as follows: At the organizational level, the determinants
<<<PAGE=4>>>
130 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
of the work environment in relation to transfer of training are analyzed. Examples for
this are social support, as well as structural and organizational circumstances in the
workplace. On the analysis level of the learning ﬁeld, the determinants of the training
measure are examined. Here, the focus is mainly on speciﬁc aspects of the training
design, such as practical relevance of contents and the didactic-methodological design.
On the individual level, the participant is the focus of observation. The inﬂuence of fur-
ther vocational training participant determinants, such as motivational, volitional and
personal factors, as well as cognitive abilities, on the transfer of training is examined.
The three levels reciprocally inﬂuence each other. Our research focus, shaded gray in
ﬁgure 1, is focused on the direct inﬂuence these three levels have on transfer of training.
In contrast to previous reviews (e.g., Baldwin et al., 2009; Cheng and Hampson, 2008;
Cheng and Ho, 2001; Grossman and Salas, 2011) this current literature review allows
a more comprehensive perspective on the current state of research regarding transfer
of training determinants in the context of formalized training. Several of the previous
literature reviews (e.g., Baldwin et al., 2009; Cheng and Hampson, 2008; Cheng and
Ho, 2001; Grossman and Salas, 2011) did not take into account all determinants on the
organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual level, and do not portray the content-related
dimensions of these determinants. Next to the determinants, this review has a particular
focus on the analysis of the dimensions. Therefore, this literature review systematizes
(for the organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual level) those previous empirical stud-
ies, which detect determinants directly inﬂuencing the transfer of training on the basis
of regression and structural equation analyses. Furthermore, this review includes both
studies which examine the direct inﬂuences on transfer of training, classiﬁed by three
levels namely the organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual level, in the context of
educational-psychological and management science oriented empirical transfer research.
2 Theoretical Background
2.1 The Notion of Transfer
In the relevant literature, the notion of transfer is not used in a uniform way. Generally,
both older and newer understandings assume that transfer takes place when something
learned in one situation is transferred to another. The understanding of the term ’trans-
fer’ diﬀers primarily in whether it is regarded as the application of the learned material in
a situation of application (e.g., Lemke, 1995; Solga, 2005) or as the transfer of the learned
material to the situation of application (e.g., Rank and Wakenhut, 1998). Baldwin and
Ford (1988) also point out the necessity of generalizing the learned material, something
which only becomes apparent through the scope of the application in the function ﬁeld.
Newer transfer research also speciﬁes that transfer occurs when a learning process takes
place in a certain context (source), such as a systematically planned training measure,
and the learner successfully applies the learned material in a second (changed) context
(target) such as a (new) task or problem in the ﬁeld of practice (Mandl et al., 1992).
In the context of further vocational training, transfer of training is understood to mean
the application and generalization of new knowledge and skills in the workplace, fol-
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 131
lowing Kauﬀeld, Lorenzo and Weisweiler (2012). But since this paper also considers
the pedagogical-psychological aspect of transfer of training, this deﬁnition is not precise
enough. It is therefore supplemented by the deﬁnition of transfer competence, according
to Seidel (2012). This places a stronger focus on the individual. According to Seidel
(2012), transfer competence is the employee’s individual speciﬁc disposition. This is a
prerequisite for a change in working behavior taking place in situations which are charac-
terized by new and/or changed work tasks. Transfer competence is signiﬁed by the work
environment in terms of context, and by training in terms of content. On the whole,
transfer of training therefore includes the organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual
levels. Furthermore, successful transfer of training is considered to be the mid- and
long-term eﬀects of a training measure, the timescale being crucial for the deﬁnition of
the term continuously successful.
2.2 Approaches to Evaluating the Eﬃcacy and Transfer of Training of
Formalized Further Vocational Training
The current economic and pedagogical-psychological research regarding the eﬃcacy of
further vocational training is shaped by two main research approaches, the results-
oriented and the process-oriented research approaches (Gessler, 2012). The results-
oriented research approach stems from the 1960s (e.g., Alliger et al., 1997; Barba Aragon
and Sanz Valle, 2012; Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick, 2006; Phillips, 1991; Phillips and
Phillips, 2001; Phillips et al., 2001) and focuses exclusively on the sphere of results.
This means it focuses on the detection of eﬀects in the sense of (intentional or uninten-
tional) inﬂuences on training measures which are observable, measurable and assessable
in the short as well as the long term. In the systematic result evaluation of training
measures both science and industry fall back mainly on the four-level-evaluation-model
of Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006). This model suggests conducting an evaluation
on the following four levels: During the ﬁrst level, Reaction, the reactions of train-
ing participants regarding their subjective satisfaction with the training measure are
recorded directly after its conclusion. During the second level, Learning, learning suc-
cess is measured in terms of the scope of changes in attitude, knowledge, and skills of
the participants. The next level, Behavior, examines the extent to which the behavior
of participants has been altered, thereby evaluating the transfer of training. Finally, at
the Results level, all eﬀects a measure has on company success are to be included in
the evaluation (Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick, 2006). The evaluation of results serves to
examine the eﬀectiveness of training measures and comprises the assessment of both ed-
ucational and economic eﬀects of educational processes directly after a training measures
conclusion, on three possibly levels of eﬀectiveness:
• Results regarding learning success in the sense of skill-expansion (output), which
are measurable in the short term,
• Transfer of training success, that means, mid and long term eﬀects on employee
performance (persistence),
<<<PAGE=6>>>
132 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
• Long term economic eﬀects concerning the organizations success, for example,
the Return on Investment (ROI) of a training measure, sinking rates of errors
and complaints, cost-reductions or revenue increases which have been achieved
(outcome).
Numerous current studies take the uniform position (e.g., Kabst et al., 2009; Saks and
Burke, 2012; Zurwehme, 2008), companies primarily examine the reactions of partic-
ipants as well as the gains they have made through learning. However, transfer of
training and the eﬀects training measures have on a companys success are rarely ex-
amined. The relationships and connections between the four evaluation levels described
above, assumed by Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006) in their model, have not been un-
ambiguously empirically conﬁrmed. Several papers (Alliger et al., 1997; Barba Aragon
and Sanz Valle, 2012; Festner, 2012; Liebermann and Hoﬀmann, 2008; Lim and Morris,
2006; Piezzi, 2002) have found no relationship between the participants satisfaction with
a training measure and/or knowledge acquisition as well as transfer of training success.
The paper of Saks and Burke (2012) on the other hand, conﬁrmed a link between the eval-
uation levels of a training measure in a company and transfer of training. A further study
conducted by Colquitt, LePine, and Noe (2000) was also able to substantiate a signiﬁ-
cant positive eﬀect of transfer of training on work performance. On the whole, however,
the ﬁndings have been very heterogeneous. Furthermore, the results-oriented research
approach neglects not just the input (i.e., the training measure and its methodological-
didactic conﬁguration), but also the process perspective (i.e., the process of transfer of
training and its positive support). Neither causes nor the determinants which boost or
hinder transfer of training are examined (Bates et al., 2000; Gessler, 2012; Kauﬀeld et al.,
2008). The question of how training can be conﬁgured and designed in a way that boosts
transfer of training remains disregarded by results-oriented approaches and studies, too
(Gessler, 2012). In results-oriented research regarding the eﬃcacy of further vocational
training which focuses primarily on learning eﬀectiveness, the meta-analysis of Arthur,
Bennett, Edens, and Bell (2003) must be highlighted. This investigation into the learn-
ing eﬀectiveness of training measures suggests an average eﬀectiveness of d = .60. This
indicates that formalized training measures signiﬁcantly contribute to the development
of competencies. Further studies (e.g., Kauﬀeld and Grote, 2000) also point out that
training substantially contributes to the development of employee competencies. These
gains in competence and learning, however, do not by themselves tell us anything about
the extent to which the newly acquired competencies are employed in the functional ﬁeld
of the workplace. The process-oriented research approaches developed in the late 1980s
(e.g., Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Bates et al., 2000; Holton et al., 2000) are more focused
on the sphere of the processes in the context of their nature. This means they focus
on the implementation and micro-didactic design of the training measures as well as
the transfer support (Gessler, 2012). Results- and process-oriented research approaches
therefore intend to gather either all possible results, or at least all exogenous determi-
nants (Gessler, 2012). Within the framework of process-oriented research concerning the
eﬃcacy of further vocational training, there now exist numerous research papers. The
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 133
main focal point amongst these are research papers which model and examine transfer
of training and the interaction of diﬀerent determinants (e.g., Baldwin and Ford, 1988;
Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Colquitt et al., 2000; Holton et al., 2000; Noe, 1986; Piezzi,
2002; Rank and Wakenhut, 1998; Seidel, 2012). In this review of literature we system-
atize the research results to the determinants for the transfer of learning, with the help of
the important transfer models presented here (see Table 1), into three main categories:
• Organizational level of the characteristics of the work environment,
• Learning ﬁeld level of the characteristics of the training measure,
• Individual level of the characteristics of participants.
Table 1 provides an overview of the main determinants already modeled in important
transfer models, and diﬀerentiated between by these three levels of characteristics.
Table 1: Overview of Modeled Transfer of Training Determinants in Important Trans-
fer of Training Models
Levels of
characteristics Determinants in Transfer of Training Models
Organizational Social support through superiors and colleagues
level (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Holton et al., 2000; Noe, 1986)
(characteristics of Possibility of application in the ﬁeld of function
the work (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Holton et al., 2000; Noe, 1986)
environment) Positive or negative consequences of non-application
(Holton et al., 2000)
Reconstruction and re-contextualization of the learning activity
(Piezzi, 2002)
Social climate within the ﬁeld of function (Noe, 1986)
and transfer climate (Holton et al., 2000)
Design of the working activity (Piezzi, 2002):
- work tasks and autonomy at work (Noe, 1986)
- working and transfer conditions (Piezzi, 2002)
Organizational and situational characteristics (Cannon-Bowers
et al., 1995):
- organizational structure (Rank and Wakenhut, 1998)
- incentive schemes (Piezzi, 2002)
<<<PAGE=8>>>
134 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Learning ﬁeld Contents:
level - and their signiﬁcance (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Dubs, 1994;
(characteristics of Rank and Wakenhut, 1998)
the training - application-orientation of the contents
measure) (Holton et al., 2000; Rank and Wakenhut, 1998)
- (individualized) aspiration level of the contents (Noe, 1986)
Training-design:
- didactic-methodological design (Rank and Wakenhut, 1998)
- order of contents (Baldwin and Ford, 1988)
- principles of learning (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Cannon-Bowers
et al., 1995)
- variety of methods (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Dubs, 1994)
- feedback (Noe, 1986)
- clarity of the measures target (Piezzi, 2002)
Individual level Cognitive skills (Noe, 1986; Seidel, 2012)
(characteristics of Prior knowledge (Piezzi, 2002)
participants) Individual transfer capacity (Holton et al., 2000)
Motivation:
- learning motivation (Noe, 1986)
- training motivation (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Colquitt et
al., 2000)
- transfer motivation (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Holton et al.,
2000; Noe, 1986; Piezzi, 2002; Seidel, 2012)
Volition:
- conviction of self-eﬃcacy (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Colquitt
et al., 2000; Noe, 1986; Seidel, 2012)
- controlling convictions (Noe, 1986; Seidel, 2012)
- self-control (Piezzi, 2002; Seidel, 2012)
Personal factors:
- personality traits (Baldwin and Ford, 1988; Colquitt et al.,
2000; Piezzi, 2002; Seidel, 2012)
- (work-related) attitudes (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Colquitt
et al., 2000; Noe, 1986; Piezzi, 2002; Rank and Wakenhut, 1998
- expectations (Noe, 1986; Rank and Wakenhut, 1998; Seidel, 2012)
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 135
As Table 1 elucidates, the analyzed key transfer models are uniform in identifying and
diﬀerentiating between the main characteristic levels of organizational, learning ﬁeld
and individual characteristics in order to explain transfer of training and the interaction
of its determinants. Hereinafter, a systematic and comprehensive overview of the cur-
rently existing essential empirical ﬁndings regarding transfer of training determinants
diﬀerentiated by organizational, learning ﬁeld and individual levels is provided.
3 Method
To identify the extent to which the body of research literature has already explored
the determinants of transfer of training, an extensive, topic-based literature review was
conducted following the principles of Webster and Watson (2002). In order to ade-
quately explore the literature base for identifying and examining empirical studies in
regard to most important transfer of training determinants, we included the follow-
ing databases: PSYNDEX, PsycINFO and Business Source Complete. The ﬁrst two
data bases were particularly useful for identifying empirical studies in the context of
educational-psychological transfer research. The last data base was added to enable the
identiﬁcation of empirical studies primarily in the ﬁeld of management science oriented
transfer research. These databases cover all important journals in transfer research. To
provide a comprehensive overview of the concept of transfer of training in transfer re-
search the following keywords were used: transfer of training, training transfer, transfer
of learning, learning transfer. These keywords are, on the whole, used synonymously
in research. The concepts transfer of learning and learning transfer, however, have
a strong pedagogical connotation, and are therefore frequently used in the context of
educationally-psychologically oriented empirical transfer research. The terms transfer of
training and training transfer, on the other hand, are discussed under the organizational
aspect. They are therefore primarily used in management science oriented empirical
transfer research. As previously explained, in this review, the deﬁnitions of Kauﬀeld et
al. (2012) are therefore supplemented by the construct of individual transfer competence
according to Seidel (2012). Hence, the organizational, learning ﬁeld and indiviual levels
are all incorporated in the construct of transfer of training. To make a comprehensive
review of literature possible, all constructs were considered with their respective conno-
tations. Furthermore, the analysis is restricted to the time span from 1990 until 2015,
since publications until 1990 have already been examined by Badwin and Ford (1988).
Additionally, the volume of publications on this topic rapidly increased over the last two
decades (Grossman and Salas, 2011). As a result, several literature reviews exist (e.g.,
Baldwin et al., 2009; Burke and Hutchins, 2007; Cheng and Hampson, 2008; Cheng and
Ho, 2001; Grossman and Salas, 2011; Zu Knyphausen-Aufse et al., 2009). However,
these studies do not take into account all determinants on the organizational level, the
learning ﬁeld level and the individual level, and do not portray recent ﬁndings in par-
ticular. In order to ensure research rigor, only empirical ﬁndings from studies published
in academic journals with a double-blind review process are included in this analysis.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
136 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Furthermore, this literature review systematizes previous empirical studies, which pro-
vide statistical results on the basis of regression and structural equation analyses. The
focus of this analysis is on empirical studies examining direct inﬂuences on transfer of
training. The collection of data followed a multistage process. In the ﬁrst step, the
consultation of databases was conducted. However, since we used multiple databases
and similar search strings, a number of results appeared more than once. Such identical
results were removed. In the second step, the titles and abstracts of the remaining ar-
ticles were analyzed to eliminate irrelevant results, resulting in the exclusion of articles
from further investigation for the following main reasons: First, publications that do not
deal with the concept of transfer of training in the context of professional training or
further educational training have been excluded from the review. For example, studies
in the context of knowledge and skill transfer in universities and schools (e.g., Cheng,
2000; Pham et al., 2013). Second, since the study focuses on transfer of training as
a process-oriented approach, studies that exclusively focus on the results-oriented ap-
proach, such as Barba Aragon and Sanz Valle (2012), were excluded. Third, all studies
which do not focus on formal learning were excluded, such as Lau and McLean (2013)
who studied the transfer of training of an outdoor management program. Lastly, the
analysis is restricted to quantitative studies. Therefore studies using qualitative research
methods (e.g., Clarke, 2002; Ellstr¨ om and Ellstr¨ om 2014; Lim and Johnson, 2002) have
also been eliminated since they do not allow for a comparison of results. In the next
step, the list of references of the articles was used to conduct a backward search, i.e.,
the references of articles found by the search were searched for further relevant articles,
following the same procedure, which led to more publications. Finally, the lists of ref-
erences of existing literature reviews (e.g., Baldwin et al., 2009; Cheng and Hampson,
2008; Cheng and Ho, 2001; Grossman and Salas, 2011) were analyzed. In the end 79
publications, including ﬁve meta-analyses, were identiﬁed for further investigation.
4 Results
4.1 Organizational Level of the Characteristics of the Work
Environment
The term transfer climate (Rouiller and Goldstein, 1993) has become widely established
for examinations of the impact that the working environment has on transfer of training.
According to Rouiller and Goldstein (1993), the transfer climate consists of situational
determinants such as social assistance and support through superiors, colleagues and
subordinates in aid of the transfer process, as well as task-related and structural circum-
stances related to the workplace and work tasks. Furthermore, Roullier and Goldstein
(1993) subsume consequences such as positive or negative feedback and sanction under
transfer climate. The authors have examined what inﬂuence the transfer climate and
learning success have on transfer success, and reached the conclusion that in the exam-
ined training measure, a combination of learning success and transfer climate explained
54% of the variation in transfer success (Rouiller and Goldstein, 1993). The most im-
portant institutional determinants which positively inﬂuence the transfer process have
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 137
been identiﬁed by empirical transfer research as being characteristics of social support
on the one hand, and structural and organizational circumstances in the workplace on
the other.
Social Support. The most important factor of the transfer climate within the organi-
zational level of work environment is social support (Grossman and Salas, 2011), which
has also been the most frequent object of examinations concerning transfer of training.
A signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence of support by colleagues on transfer success has been
conﬁrmed by several studies (Bates et al., 2000; Cromwell and Kolb, 2004; Facteau et
al., 1995; Festner, 2012; Hinrichs, 2014; Martin, 2010; Ng and Ahm, 2011; Ng, 2013).
There are diﬀerent research ﬁndings in regard to support by superiors. Some authors do
not ﬁnd support by superiors to have a signiﬁcant (Chiaburu and Marinova, 2005; Bates
et al., 2000; Homklin et al., 2014; Ng, 2013; Velada et al., 2007), or even a signiﬁcantly
negative inﬂuence on transfer of training (Facteau et al., 1995) in their studies. The
majority of studies, however, indicate a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence of this variable on
transfer of training (e.g., Cromwell and Kolb, 2004; Festner, 2012; Lee et al., 2014; Ng
and Ahm, 2011; Scaduto et al., 2008). Hinrichs (2014) diﬀerentiates between attitude-
related and action-related support from the superior. While the action-related transfer
support (the extend to which the superior discusses concrete possibilities of application)
could be identiﬁed as a predictor of transfer of training, the attitude-related support
(the extend to which the superior is interested in the application of the newly learned)
does not have a signiﬁcant direct inﬂuence on transfer of training. Furthermore, Blume
et al. (2010) determine support by superiors to have a greater impact than support by
colleagues on transfer of training in their meta-analysis, and conﬁrm that the support
of superiors is one of the strongest predictors for transfer of training. This highlights
a further need for research regarding the eﬀect support from superiors has within the
process of transfer, demanded, amongst others by Burke and Hutchins (2007) and Cheng
and Hampson (2008). Bhatti et al. (2013) speak out in favor of examining the diﬀerent
dimensions of social support through both superiors and colleagues more closely in fu-
ture empirical studies. The best-examined of these has been the use of feedback. It has
been substantiated that receiving feedback has a signiﬁcant positive impact on transfer
of training (e.g., Goodman et al., 2011; Van den Bossche et al., 2010; Velada et al., 2007).
The study conducted by Van den Bossche et al. (2010) also demonstrated that feedback
subjectively perceived to be helpful has a positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. The
frequency of feedback, however, has a signiﬁcant negative impact on transfer of training.
Structural and organizational circumstances in the workplace. The current
state of empirical research regarding the inﬂuence of certain structural circumstances
in the workplace can be systematized into three dimensions: Opportunities to imple-
ment the learned material, commitment, and organizational and learning cultures. The
construct implementation opportunity describes the extent to which the participants
are provided with all resources necessary to implement the learned material following a
training session (Bates et al., 2000). Here, studies concurrently demonstrate that posi-
<<<PAGE=12>>>
138 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
tive transfer can only take place in a limited fashion, if at all, if there is no opportunity
to implement the training contents at work (e.g., Cromwell and Kolb, 2004; Ford et
al., 1992; Seidel, 2012). Renta-Davids et al. (2014) have also substantiated that the
variability of work tasks has a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. The
variability of work tasks describes the degree to which a job entails a variety of diﬀerent
activities: activities changing over time, diﬀerent tasks to do (Renta-Davids et al., 2014,
p. 735). The authors explain that if training is related to work and work activities are
diverse, then participants would have more opportunities to implement the training con-
tents. In regard to the examination of the transfer of training determinant commitment,
that is, the extent to which a person identiﬁes with the company they work for, the
ﬁndings on hand are inconsistent. While numerous studies have examined commitment
as a predictor for learning and transfer motivation, its direct inﬂuence on the evaluation
level of transfer of training has been seldom analyzed. Cheng (2000) substantiated a
signiﬁcant negative impact of this variable on learning motivation, whereas other au-
thors (Facteau et al., 1995; Kontoghiorghes, 2002; 2004; Lee et al., 2014; Tannenbaum
et al., 1991; Tracey et al., 2001) have conﬁrmed a positive relationship between commit-
ment and learning motivation. A signiﬁcant positive eﬀect of commitment on perceived
transfer of training has also been veriﬁed (Facteau et al., 1995; Kontoghiorghes, 2004).
Furthermore, Pidd (2004) has determined that the inﬂuence of social support on transfer
of training is also inﬂuenced by the company-identiﬁcation of the participants. Individ-
ual studies have also examined the inﬂuence that organizational and/or learning cultures
within a company have on transfer of training. In her study, Simosi (2012) diﬀerentiates,
in accordance with Cooke and Rousseaus (1988) framework of organizational cultures,
between humanistic and achievement cultures. Humanistic organizations are marked
by being person-oriented, which means that members of an organization support and
help each other. The focus of members of an organization is teamwork, involvement
and empowerment. An achievement culture orientation, on the other hand, is marked
by standards of excellence. Members of an organization are expected to set themselves
targets, and to achieve these. The author substantiates that both have a signiﬁcant
positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. This also holds true for organizations in which
employees are intimately integrated into the company and have a ﬂat hierarchy (Kon-
toghiorghes, 2001). Furthermore, Kontoghiorghes (2004) demonstrates that both risk
taking an innovation driven culture as well as quality driven cultures in organizations
positively inﬂuence transfer of training. In their study, Lim and Morris (2006) have
substantiated a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence of the construct organizational climate on
transfer of training. According to Lim and Morris (2006) this construct contains or-
ganizational determinants such as reactions to change, learning support, opportunities
for transfer, and feedback from colleagues. Moreover, Martin (2010) has examined the
working climate, speciﬁed by the author as the managements attitude towards the train-
ing program. He was able to demonstrate that participants whose management has a
positive attitude towards the training program achieve a higher rate of transfer of train-
ing (Martin, 2010). Furthermore, the study conducted by Egan et al. (2004) conﬁrmed
that organizations with a learning culture, measured by the standards of the Dimensions
of Learning Organization Questionnaire (DLOQ; (Marsick and Watkins, 2003; Watkins
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 139
and Marsick, 1993), have a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on the job satisfaction, transfer
motivation and transfer intention of the participants. Piezzi (2002) examined the inte-
gration of training into company strategy. The author was able to conﬁrm a signiﬁcant
positive impact of this variable on transfer motivation (Piezzi, 2002). In conclusion,
social support is the most examined determinant in the context of transfer of training
on the organizational level. However, there is a need for further research regarding the
dimensions of social support. Studies that examine structural and organizational cir-
cumstances in the context of transfer of training are rather limited in terms of both
scope and focus. As a result, research failed to respond to the demand (e.g., Egan et al.,
2004; Piezzi, 2002) for further studies on the proposed relationship between the distinct
determinants, including opportunities to implement the learned material, commitment,
and organizational and learning cultures, and transfer of training. This is particularly
true for organizational and learning cultures as antecedents of transfer of training.
4.2 Learning Field Level of the Characteristics of the Training
Measure
The statistically signiﬁcant measure-speciﬁc determinants of the transfer of training
process that have been identiﬁed by empirical research and are to be subsumed on the
learning ﬁeld level, can be systematized according to transfer-boosting measures before,
during, and after a training measure following Rank and Wakenhuts (1998) transfer of
training model. Saks and Bulcourt (2006) have already determined that measures before,
during and after training all have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on transfer of training.
Pre-training measures. As part of an intervention study, Weissbein, Huang, Ford,
and Schmidt (2011) investigated the use of videos in inﬂuencing the attribution-style
of participants as a transfer-boosting pre-training measure. The video showed that
negotiating skills can be improved through ones own eﬀort and the use of negotiating
strategies which would be subject of the subsequent seminar. Said ﬁlms shown before the
training measure were also intended to boost the learning motivation of participants. The
study was able to substantiate that pre-training use of the videos had a strong positive
inﬂuence on controlling convictions, which in turn had a positive impact on learning
motivation. A direct, signiﬁcant positive impact of these speciﬁc intervention measures
on transfer of training was also empirically conﬁrmed (Weissbein et al., 2011).
Measures during training. Seidel (2012) substantiated in her study, that high prac-
tical relevance of training, for example by including real-world examples, practice-oriented
tasks or case studies, has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on transfer of training. The Bates et
al. (2000) study has demonstrated that the contents of a training measure should corre-
spond to the demands of the working environment in order to foster a positive transfer
of training. Furthermore, the study of Hinrichs (2014) showed that transfer orienta-
tion of the training, which reﬂects the extent to which the training resembles the real
work situation, has a positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. Van der Locht et al.
(2013) examined the role of identical elements between the learning situation and the
<<<PAGE=14>>>
140 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
implementation situation as part of the process of transfer of training, based on the
theory of identical elements according to Thorndike and Woodworth (1901). The study
was able to substantiate that similarities between training and everyday work situations
has a positive impact on both transfer motivation and transfer of training. Contrary
to expectations, however, the ﬁndings of Festner (2012) indicate that a learners ac-
tiveness during a seminar, measured in high participation rates during discussions and
self-suﬃcient problem-solving, has no positive impact on subjective transfer estimates
or transfer of training. This is largely consistent with ﬁndings from Hinrichs (2014).
Hinrichs (2014) also did not ﬁnd training and learning conditions like the methods, the
situatedness of learning environment and the competence support by the trainers as
predictors for transfer of training. This contradicts the ﬁndings of Weisweiler (2008),
who substantiated in an experimental control-group design that training designs with
a constructivist orientation which follow the principle of situated learning lead to a
higher transfer performance amongst participants. Several studies have examined the
connection between the setting of learning goals as an element of training and transfer
of training. These have shown the setting of learning goals to have a signiﬁcant positive
impact on transfer of training (Blume et al., 2010; Johnson et al., 2012; Richman-Hirsch,
2001; Werner et al., 1994). Blume et al. (2010), in their meta-analysis, were only able
to ascribe a moderate inﬂuence on transfer of training to the use of the goal-setting
approach. Lee and Pucel (1998) have also demonstrated that learning goals subjectively
perceived as more important resulted in a higher rate of transfer of training. In addition,
Brown (2005) diﬀerentiated between close and remote learning goals, and in the pro-
cess determined that close learning goals result in a signiﬁcantly higher rate of transfer
of training in comparison to remote goals. A number of further studies have focused
on the eﬀects specialized error management has on the process of transfer of training.
Error management promotes the transfer of training by allowing trainees to anticipate
potential issues, providing them with knowledge of how to handle such problems, and
highlighting the negative outcomes that can occur if training is not transferred (Gross-
man and Salas, 2011, p. 107). Gully, Payne, Koles, and Whiteman (2002) have examined
the eﬀectiveness of error-management-training. This revealed that learners who are of
greater cognitive ability and more open achieve better results on the evaluation levels
of learning and transfer of training. An experimental intervention study conducted by
Heimbeck, Frese, Sonnentag, and Keith (2003) conﬁrmed that participants who have
received explicit instructions concerning error management generate a greater close and
broad transfer than participants who were not subject to this intervention. Keith and
Frese (2008) in their meta-analysis also reach the conclusion that error-management-
training leads to better training results than training methods which oﬀer no support
in case of errors. The authors do, however, point out that there is a dearth of studies
concerned with the aspect of error-management, which also examine the implementation
of the learned material in the workplace after a set amount of time has passed (Keith
and Frese, 2008). Past studies of the impact of error-management restrict themselves
to the measurement of task completion directly after the training, so that the transfer
of training itself, and its persistence, have not yet been examined, resulting in a current
need for further research. There is a comprehensive body of research regarding the ex-
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 141
amination of training measure eﬀectiveness and behavior modeling (Behavior Modeling
Training [BMT]), which Taylor et al. (2005) have summarized in a meta-analysis. The
meta-analysis substantiates that the biggest eﬀects could be achieved on the level of
learning, but that BMT also had a positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. In regard
to the transfer of training eﬀect, the meta-analysis also conﬁrmed that it is at its great-
est if learners are provided with positive and negative models. The transfer of training
eﬀect is also boosted if tasks contain scenarios developed by the participants themselves,
speciﬁc learning goals are formulated, superiors participate in training, and rewards and
sanctions are part of the working environment (Taylor et al., 2005).
Post-training measures. Research concerning the use of the so-called relapse pre-
vention strategy following a training measure constitutes another focal point. The goal
of this strategy adapted from Marx (1982) is to prevent a relapse into old patterns of
behavior amongst participants after a training session, and thereby ease the transfer
of training contents. It does so by addressing the transfer problem after the seminar,
and providing participants with information regarding potentially hazardous situations
which may prevent implementation of the learned material. Raising awareness of the
potential for relapse intends to accelerate the transfer of contents. Furthermore, Tziner
et al. (1991) demonstrated that as well as signiﬁcantly higher rates of learning success
in comparison to the control group, this intervention also increased transfer of training,
because a stronger implementation of transfer strategies took place. Noe, Sears, and
Fullenkamp (1990), too, substantiated a high training eﬃcacy for this speciﬁc interven-
tion in comparison to a control group. Further studies concerning relapse prevention
strategy (e.g., Burke and Baldwin, 1999; Burke, 1997; Gaudine and Saks, 2004) were
unable to substantiate signiﬁcant eﬀects on transfer of training. In the context of this
heterogeneous state of research, further research concerning the eﬃcacy of post-training
intervention measures is necessary. On the whole, there is still a considerable need
for research regarding ﬁeld-of-learning-speciﬁc determinants which positively inﬂuence
the process of transfer of training (Hutchins and Burke, 2007; Van der Locht et al.,
2013). The majority of determinants during and after a training session considered to
be transfer-boosting in current models of transfer of training (cf. Table 1) has been
scarcely examined in terms of their impact on the process of transfer of training. In re-
gard to the methodological-didactic design of training measures, the impact of method
variability, transfer tasks, structure and cognitively activating contents on transfer of
training remains almost entirely unexplained. It has already been stated by Burke and
Hutchins (2007) that the demand for a more detailed examination of training design as
a key inﬂuencing factor on transfer of training has only been partially met.
4.3 Individual Level of the Characteristics of Participants
The major statistically signiﬁcant individual determinants of the learning process iden-
tiﬁed by empirical research at the individual level are learning, training and transfer
motivation, cognitive skills, the volitional dimensions conviction of self-eﬃcacy and con-
trolling convictions, personal characteristics, the expected utility as well the intended
<<<PAGE=16>>>
142 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
individual goal intention, which is associated with the participation of the training mea-
sure.
Learning, training and transfer motivation. Transfer research diﬀerentiates be-
tween learning, training and transfer motivation. Learning motivation can be deﬁned as
a speciﬁc desire of the trainee to learn the content of the training program (Noe, 1986,
p. 743). Training motivation refers to the intensity of ones commitment to performing
in learning situations (Tannenbaum and Yukl, 1992). However, it does become apparent
that these terms are not always used precisely and distinctly in existing studies. A num-
ber of them use the terms learning and training motivation synonymously, which means a
clear diﬀerentiation also becomes impossible at times in their analysis, below. According
to Noe (1986), transfer motivation can be deﬁned as the motivation of the participants
to apply their newly acquired competencies during their everyday work routine. There
is empirical evidence for a link between training/learning and transfer motivation (e.g.,
Chiaburu and Lindsay, 2008; Kontoghiorghes, 2002, 2004; Rowold, 2007). That both
learning and transfer motivation can have a signiﬁcant, positive impact on transfer has
been conﬁrmed in numerous studies (Axtell et al., 1997; Bhatti et al., 2013; Chiaburu
and Lindsay, 2008; Chiaburu et al., 2010; Facteau et al., 1995; Grohmann et al., 2014;
Hinrichs, 2014; Kontoghiorges, 2004; Lee et al., 2014; Liebermann and Hoﬀmann, 2008;
Quiones, 1995; Scaduto, Lindsay and Chiaburu, 2008; Tziner et al., 2007; Van den Boss-
che et al.,, 2010; Van der Locht et al., 2013). Naquin and Holton (2002) developed the
construct Motivation to improve work through learning (MTWIL), which lays claim to
covering both training and transfer motivation. The authors examined the predictors of
this construct and found that MTWIL is explained by positive aﬀectivity, commitment
and extraversion. Other papers have examined which variables inﬂuence training and
transfer motivation. Some conﬁrm the signiﬁcant inﬂuence of self-eﬃcacy expectations
(e.g., Colquitt et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2014; Machin and Fogarty, 2004; Qui˜ nones, 1995),
personality traits (e.g., Naquin and Holton, 2002; Rowold, 2007) and work environment
variables (Chiaburu et al., 2010; Facteau et al., 1995; Kontoghiorghes, 2002; Lee et al.,
2014; Liebermann and Hoﬀmann, 2008; Seyler et al., 1998) on training and/or transfer
motivation. Furthermore, several studies were able to establish that the transfer moti-
vation of the learner serves as a mediator variable between the diﬀerent input variables
and transfer of training. For example, transfer motivation mediates the statistical link
between diﬀerent determinants of transfer (willingness of the learner, support from col-
leagues and superiors, instrumentality) and transfer of training (Bhatti et al., 2013),
the training characteristics (perceived importance of the content and transfer design)
and transfer of training (Grohmann et al., 2014) as well as communication between
superiors and participants and transfer of training (Scaduto et al., 2008). Findings in
regard to transfer motivation as a mediator variable between the variables of learning
motivation and transfer of training vary. Unlike Van der Locht et al. (2013), Lee et
al. (2014) were able to substantiate that transfer motivation is not a mediator variable
between learning motivation and transfer of training. Regarding sources of motivation,
both intrinsic and extrinsic determinants which inﬂuence the transfer process can be
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 143
identiﬁed. However, the studies reﬂect an inconsistent body of evidence relating to
sources of motivation. For example, Facteau et al. (1995), in concurrence with Kon-
toghiorghes (2001) and Piezzi (2002), determined that intrinsic factors have a greater
inﬂuence on training motivation than extrinsic factors. The meta-analysis of Taylor,
Russ-Eft, and Chan (2005), on the other hand, shows better transfer results when the
participant was motivated extrinsically. Gegenfurtner, Veermans, and Vauras (2013)
has examined the multidimensionality of transfer motivation and statistically substan-
tiated the distinction between two dimensions of extrinsic transfer motivation, namely
autonomous and controlled transfer motivation, as well as transfer intention, by means
of factor analyses. Autonomous motivation to transfer can be deﬁned as an internalized
desire to transfer learning that is initiated and governed by the self (i.e., regulated by
identiﬁcation or by integration with ones values) (Gegenfurtner et al., 2009, p. 126).
The diﬀerence to intrinsic motivation is that, although both have an internal locus of
causality, autonomous motivation is purpose-oriented and leans towards certain con-
sequences. Controlled motivation, on the other hand, can be described as a desire to
transfer learning that is not initiated and governed by the self (i.e., regulated by external
rewards or sanctions) (Gegenfurtner et al., 2009, p. 126). The division into autonomous
and controlled transfer motivation is justiﬁed by the highly speciﬁc nature of work en-
vironments. It was possible to identify transfer intention as the mediator between the
autonomous and controlled transfer motivations and the trainings outcome variables.
Furthermore, it became apparent that autonomous transfer motivation has a stronger
inﬂuence on transfer intention than controlled transfer motivation (Gegenfurtner et al.,
2013). Renta-Davids, Jim´ enez-Gonz´ alez, Fandos-Garrido, and Gonz´ alez-Soto (2014) dif-
ferentiate between work-oriented and learning-oriented motivation in their study. The
authors were able to prove that work-oriented motivation had a positive inﬂuence on
transfer of training in their model. Learning-oriented motivation also serves as a me-
diator variable between the relevance of the transfer of training (Renta-Davids et al.,
2014). On the basis of the existing body of evidence, there is a consensus that the learn-
ing, training and transfer motivation is to be regarded as a key concept (Bhatti et al.,
2013; Egan et al., 2004; Hasselhorn and M¨ ahler, 2000) within transfer research. How-
ever, despite there being growing evidence of the positive relationship between transfer
motivation and transfer of training, the body of literature is still too narrow to draw a
comprehensive picture. In particular, both the mediating role of transfer motivation as
well as the diﬀerent sources of motivation are still under-explored. As a result, one must
concur with Gegenfurtner et al. (2009) that further research is required.
Cognitive skills. Numerous older studies have proven that people with greater cog-
nitive ability undergo the learning process of formalized vocational training measures
more successfully (e.g., Carter, 2002; Colquitt et al., 2000; Ree and Earles, 1991). Many
of these older studies, however, did not examine to what extent cognitive ability also
inﬂuences transfer of training. The direct inﬂuence of learners cognitive abilities on the
process of transfer of training has been examined in numerous studies. Bates and Holton
(2004), for example, examined to what extent training participants with diﬀerent levels
<<<PAGE=18>>>
144 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
of workplace-related reading and writing skills diﬀer in regard to their transfer of ma-
terial learned during the training measure to the workplace. The results indicate that
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in these skills play a substantial role within the transfer process.
Reading and writing skills boost transfer motivation and contribute to the eﬀectiveness
of training. Blume et al. (2010), demonstrated in a meta-analysis that of all known
variables, cognitive ability correlates the most strongly with transfer of training, even if
the causality of the link is merely moderate. Lee et al. (2014) examined the inﬂuence
of work performance before training on the relationship between variables of the work
environment and variables of the transfer process (learning motivation, transfer moti-
vation and transfer of training). The authors therefore deﬁne work performance as an
input variable of the transfer of training process. In doing so, they diﬀerentiate between
participants with high and low work performance, and it turns out that the two groups
diﬀer signiﬁcantly with regard to the relationships within the transfer of training pro-
cess. Only in the group of low-work-performance participants does learning motivations
have a signiﬁcant, positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. In the group of high-work-
performance participants, on the other hand, support from superiors was proven to have
a direct inﬂuence on transfer of training. So far, few studies indicate a tendency towards
a positive relationship between cognitive skills and transfer of training. However, as this
is a highly complex issue, which has not been examined in detail, ambiguity remains
concerning the diﬀerent diemensions of cognitive abilities in the transfer process. For
example, future studies should examine not just cognitive abilities, but also the hitherto
neglected inﬂuence of prior knowledge the participants have, to make the measurement
of the transfer eﬀects of a training measure as accurate and reliable as possible.
Volition. Volitional determinants, such as convictions of self-eﬃcacy, controlling con-
victions and self-control, describe the conscious and deliberate conversion of individual
goals and motives into results by purposeful action. The self-regulation processes linked
to this require an individual to overcome barriers to action through volition. The dimen-
sions of the determinant of volition in regard to its inﬂuence on transfer of training are
described hereafter. According to Bandura (1982), expectations of self-eﬃcacy can be
deﬁned as the opinion or conviction of a person that, due to their personal abilities, they
can successfully accomplish a certain task or action. On the whole, the body of evidence
produced by research in regard to these individual determinants of transfer of training
is consistent (Grossman and Salas, 2011). It is empirically evident, that expectations of
self-eﬃcacy are both a signiﬁcant positive predictor for transfer of training (Chiaburu et
al., 2010; Colquitt et al., 2000; Ford et al., 1998; Holladay and Qui˜ nones, 2003; Mathieu
et al., 1993; Simosi, 2012; Tziner et al., 2007; Velada et al., 2007), as well as for learning
and transfer motivation (Chiaburu and Lindsay, 2008; Chiaburu and Marinova, 2005;
Colquitt et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2014). The meta-analysis of Blume at al. (2010) also
conﬁrms the positive relationship between expectations of self-eﬃcacy and transfer of
training. Locus of control is the starting point of Noes (1986) model of motivational fac-
tors which inﬂuence training eﬀectiveness. This construct refers to the extent to which a
person believes that the occurrence of an event is dependent on their own behavior, that
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 145
is, controlling convictions are an individuals internal and external attribution of their
work results to themselves. Some studies (Cheng, 2000; Noe and Schmitt, 1986; Tziner
and Falbe, 1993) demonstrate no signiﬁcant inﬂuence of controlling convictions on the
transfer process. Tziner, Haccoun, and Kadish (1991), on the other hand, demonstrate
that controlling convictions have a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on transfer of training. The
meta-analysis of Colquitt et al. (2000), too, conﬁrms these ﬁndings on all four levels of
evaluation according to Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006), and also show that internal
controlling convictions have a stronger eﬀect of transfer than external ones. Another
meta-analysis (Blume et al., 2010), however, substantiates a small negative correlation
between controlling conviction variables and transfer of training. In sum, there are only
studies evaluating the relationship between controlling convictions and transfer of train-
ing. Evidence reported thus far is contradictory, since the direction of eﬀects varies.
Hence, empirical studies do not oﬀer consistent results and are limited in both scope
and detail. In particular, studies fail to examine the diﬀerentiation between internal
and external controlling convictions. Furthermore, future studies should also include
the inﬂuence of self-control, that is the internal control of ones own actions.
Personality traits. Diﬀerent authors (Blume et al., 2010; Colquitt and Simmering,
1998; Hinrichs, 2014; Machin and Fogarty, 2004; Rowold, 2007; Webster and Martocchio,
1993) examine the relationship between dimensions of the Big Five main dimensions of
personality, namely openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeable-
ness and neuroticism (Costa and McCrae, 1995), and the process of transfer on the re-
spectively selected levels of evaluation according to Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006).
The meta-analysis of Blume et al. (2010) reaches the conclusion that the Big Five main
dimensions have a small inﬂuence on the transfer of the learned material. Merely the di-
mension of conscientiousness can have moderate links with transfer of training ascribed
to it (Blume et al., 2010). The meta-analysis of Colquitt et al. (2000) substantiates
a moderate to strong inﬂuence of conscientiousness on transfer of training and work
performance. Contrary to expectations, however, this meta-analysis also demonstrates
signiﬁcant negative eﬀects of conscientiousness on the diﬀerent forms of learning as well
as participant reaction to training measures (Colquitt et al., 2000). Hinrichs (2014)
and Herold, Davis, Fedor, and Parsons (2002) were unable to substantiate any signif-
icant impact of conscientiousness on transfer of training or learning. Further papers
(Colquitt et al., 2000; Rowold, 2007) also show a negative, though not signiﬁcant, im-
pact of the dimension of conscientiousness on learning and transfer motivation. This
result is contradicted by the study of Colquitt and Simmering (1998), which substanti-
ates a signiﬁcant positive impact of conscientiousness on learning motivation, before and
after training. Altogether, the current body of evidence regarding the inﬂuence that the
personality factor conscientiousness has on transfer of training is heterogeneous. The
meta-analysis of Colquitt et al. (2000) does not, as expected, demonstrate a negative
impact of the factor of anxiety on transfer of training and work performance. In regard
to the dimension of neuroticism, the meta-analysis of Blume et al. (2010) also deﬁes ex-
pectations by demonstrating a positive connection with transfer of training. The study
<<<PAGE=20>>>
146 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
of Machin and Fogarty (2004), on the other hand, contradicts these ﬁndings with its
own, as it substantiates a signiﬁcant negative inﬂuence of a persons negative aﬀectivity
on transfer intention. Herold et al. (2002) also determine that emotional stability has
a signiﬁcantly positive eﬀect on learning. Negative relationships between the variables
anxiety and emotional instability and learning and transfer motivation, on the other
hand, are revealed by several studies (e.g., Colquitt et al., 2000; Rowold, 2007; Webster
and Martocchio, 1993). The meta-analysis of Blume et al. (2010) substantiates a posi-
tive relationship between the dimension of extraversion and transfer. Naquin and Holton
(2002) were unable to ﬁnd any link between these personality traits and the transfer mo-
tivation of participants. The study conducted by Rowold (2007), however, conﬁrms that
introversion has a strong negative inﬂuence on learning and transfer motivation. Em-
pirical ﬁndings are also inconsistent in regard to the factor of agreeableness. Whereas
Blume et al. (2010) highlight a negative relationship between the factor of agreeable-
ness and transfer of training, the study conducted by Rowold (2007) determines that
the dimension of agreeableness has a positive inﬂuence on both learning and transfer
motivation. However, Rowold (2007) questions any link between the personality trait
openness to experiences and transfer in his study, Herold et al. (2002) conﬁrm a positive
impact of this variable on learning, and Blume et al. (2010) even a positive inﬂuence on
transfer of training. On the whole, the studies regarding the inﬂuence of the ﬁve main
dimensions of personality on learning and transfer processes indicate an inconsistent and
partially diametrical body of evidence. Only few studies examine the inﬂuence of these
determinants on the transfer of training level of evaluation. As a result, more research is
necessary in order to obtain a suﬃcient and empirically validated understanding of the
relationship between the distinct personality traits and transfer of training.
Expected utility. Diﬀerent studies have determined a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence
of the individually expected utility of participation in a training measure on transfer of
training (Axtell et al., 1997; Bates et al., 2000; Lim and Morris, 2006; Renta-Davids et
al., 2014; Velada and Caetano, 2007) and/or transfer motivation (Ruona et al., 2002;
Van der Locht et al., 2013). The Renta-Davids et al. (2014) study has also demonstrated
that the perceived relevance of training functions as a mediator between the complexity
of the work task and transfer of training. In summary, both the determinants of the
expected individual beneﬁt as well as the determinant of the expected individual rele-
vance are under-explored. Nevertheless, the few existing studies display corresponding
results. However, future research should further examine the relationship between these
determinants in order to validate ﬁndings. In addition, future studies should focus on
more details, for example by incorporating mediating determinants like Renta-Davids et
al. (2014), in order to reveal interdependencies and further speciﬁcs of the underlying
process of transfer of training.
Individual goal intention. Smith, Jayasuriya, Caputi, and Hammer (2008) have
developed and empirically tested a model based on the expected-value-theory of Vroom
(1964) and the goal-theory (Gollwitzer, 1996). The results of this study show that goal
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 147
intentions are a strong signiﬁcant predictor for aﬀective reaction, perceived utility and
intention to transfer training. They show that these, in combination with the proximal
determinants of self-eﬃcacy, expectancy and valence positively inﬂuence the outcomes
on the examined levels of aﬀective reactions, utility reactions and transfer intentions.
Goal intentions are also a signiﬁcant mediator of the relationship between the variables
valence and reactions (both aﬀective and utility), but only a partial mediator between
valence and intention to transfer. The authors (Smith et al., 2008) interpret these ﬁnding
as a conﬁrmation of goal intentions having the same signiﬁcant mediatory role as the
construct of training motivation in the model of Colquitt et al. (2000).
4.4 Summary
Our comprehensive analysis clariﬁes, that the current state of research regarding major
determinants of the process of transfer of training indicates there are a lot of positive
relationships at the three levels. We identify a lot of determinants related to organiza-
tional, learning ﬁeld and individual level which have a positive consistent relationship
with transfer of training, as depicted in ﬁgure 2. However, it has too often not yet been
clariﬁed in detail, what speciﬁc dimensions of these complex constructs cause this posi-
tive inﬂuence. Here, further studies are necessary, which focus on the partial dimensions
in detail. In summary, Table 2 provides a comprehensive overview of the state of research
on empirically conﬁrmed statistically signiﬁcant determinants and their dimensions on
the respective characteristic levels. This table summarizes the identiﬁed signiﬁcant re-
sults and makes clear what really matters in regard to the support of transfer of training.
Overall, our analysis shows for the organizational level of the work environment, that
transfer of training indicates positive relationships. The two most important determi-
nants of the transfer within this level are social support and structural and organizational
circumstances in the workplace. The focus of previous research was on the determinant
of social support, however. Numerous studies conﬁrm the positive inﬂuence of social
support from colleagues and from supervisors, particularly in regard to the role played
by feedback. Only a single study indicates an inconsistency in research ﬁndings regard-
ing the determinant of support by supervisors. Further studies should investigate in
detail which speciﬁc dimensions of support, beyond feedback, cause this positive inﬂu-
ence. This also applies to the variables of structural and organizational circumstances
in the workplace, identiﬁed in previous research. Only a handful of studies have investi-
gated these, thus far. The dimensions of the determinant of organizational culture have
already been partially incorporated in research.
A comprehensive understanding regarding the inﬂuence of this determinant on transfer
of learning is still missing, however. For example, future studies should also examine in
greater detail which speciﬁcs dimensions of organizational commitment cause the pos-
itive eﬀect. Less well examined, is the inﬂuence of speciﬁc characteristics of training
measurers on transfer of training. Some research has been done on the learning ﬁeld
level inﬂuence of transfer-boosting measures during a training measure. Several studies
have concurrently shown that a high practical relevance of content, the biggest degree
of similarity between the learning and application situations possible, and a learning
<<<PAGE=22>>>
148 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Figure 2: Empirically conﬁrmed signiﬁcant positive determinants on the transfer of train-
ing and their dimensions.
environment with features of situated learning, as well as the speciﬁcation of learning
targets, have a positive inﬂuence on transfer of training. Often it has not yet been clar-
iﬁed in detail, what speciﬁc dimensions of these complex constructs cause this positive
inﬂuence, so further research is needed. In regard to the methodical-didactic design of
training measures, for example, the inﬂuences of method variation, transfer tasks, con-
tent structuring and cognitive activation have not been examined. Little research has
been done into the inﬂuence of speciﬁc transfer-boosting measures undertaken before or
after a training measure. Again, further research to this end should bring greater clarity,
for example regarding the inﬂuence of prior tasks, assignment clariﬁcation, critical inci-
dent surveys or follow-ups. What surprises about the presented analyses, is that, on the
learning ﬁeld level, there are currently no ﬁndings regarding the inﬂuence of personal
characteristics and the expertise of the trainer. As table 1 shows, however, an inﬂuence
of the didactic-methodological abilities is assumed by the central learning transfer mod-
els. A considerable deﬁcit of research exists in this regard. Overall, it must be observed
that further research should be more focused on a more detailed examination of training
design as a determinant on transfer of training.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 149
Table 2: Determinants on the Transfer of Training, their Dimensions and Results of
Meta-analysis.
<<<PAGE=24>>>
150 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
The analysis makes clear, that characteristics of participants play a central role in the
process of transfer of training. At the individual level a lot of studies indicate a positive
relationship between learning, training and transfer motivation, cognitive skills, and
volitional determinants and transfer of training. However, it has too often not yet been
clariﬁed in detail, what speciﬁc dimensions of these complex constructs cause this positive
inﬂuence. Less clear, however, are the results of the studies regarding the inﬂuence of
controlling convictions and personality traits. Here, the ﬁndings are not consistent. Also
the impact of individual goal intention of the participants on the transfer of training
is under-explored. In particular, future research should examine the determinants of
controlling convictions, personality traits and individual goal intention, to bring more
clarity about their inﬂuence on transfer of training.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 151
5 Discussion and Implications for Further Research
On the whole, analysis of the existing research literature concerning the determinants of
transfer of training presented herein shows that there are, by now, numerous empirical
studies concerned with speciﬁc partial aspects of transfer of training. Still, the analysis
makes clear that the current state of research regarding determinants of the process of
transfer of training shows a lot of positive and consistent relationships between diﬀerent
determinants at the three levels and the transfer of training. Particularly the individual
level has been examined comparatively frequently and well, with the research show the
learning, training and transfer motivation in particular to be a key concept of transfer of
training. In regard to the institutional and learning ﬁeld levels, numerous determinants
have been the subject of little or no research, making this another area in considerable
need of investigation. Many questions, particularly in regard to the dimensions of the
determinants remain unanswered. Here, further research is necessary, which investigates
partial dimensions in detail. Finally, in the context of the limitations of the review, per-
spectives for further research projects are highlighted. (1) Although this literature review
was able to identify numerous studies examining determinants which boost transfer of
training, the structural relationships of and between the latent and manifest variables
and interdependencies remain largely ignored. Despite comprehensive studies within the
framework of transfer research, the emerging picture is that even though the process of
transfer of training is inﬂuenced by input, process and output determinants on the orga-
nizational, learning ﬁeld and individual level, past studies have focused only on a very
speciﬁc partial aspect of transfer of training. There is, right now, no comprehensive, inte-
grative examination of transfer of training under consideration of training oﬀers (input),
the transfer process (process) and the results (output) as well as a systematic analysis of
which important determinants boost or hinder transfer. In order to do the actual com-
plexity of the transfer process justice, there should be a greater understanding of it as
a multidimensional process (Burke and Hutchins, 2007; Gessler, 2012). The predictors,
mediators, moderators and their relationships amongst each other, as well as underlying
processes are yet to be worked out (Weisweiler et al., 2013). Future examinations should
therefore attempt to assume a more comprehensive and integrative perspective when
determining transfer of training eﬀects and determinants thereof. This can be done by
examining not just results but also process determinants in order to give ample consid-
eration to the interaction between the ﬁelds of learning and function (Gessler, 2012).
Only by adopting such an integrated research approach can both the aspects of eﬃcacy
control and development of training measures under consideration of aspects of transfer
of training be done justice. This, in turn, would lead to a qualitative improvement of
transfer research. In order to so, theory-driven, interdisciplinary research is required
(Blume et al., 2010; Gruber, 2013; Weisweiler et al., 2013). The theoretical foundation
of the studies is based mostly on those models of transfer, which are based on the three
levels. In regard to the inﬂuence of the individual level, various psychological theories
are consulted. The competence debate highly relevant to this context has, however, also
been neglected by training research thus far. Only Seidel (2012) has deﬁned the con-
struct of transfer competence as an individual-speciﬁc disposition. In this context, this
<<<PAGE=26>>>
152 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
review was based on an expanded understanding of transfer (see p. 7). For the further
substantiation of the organizational level, greater use of organizational research theories
could be made. In regard to the learning ﬁeld level, the ﬁndings of pedagogical and psy-
chological teaching and learning research have thus far been mostly neglected. Hence,
future studies should refer more strongly to the theories of related disciplines. This would
contribute to the development of a holistic model for the explanation of learning trans-
fer. An interdisciplinary approach to theory and research would therefore be fruitful. (2)
The comparability of studies in regard to methodological aspects is limited. The studies
included are not distinguished by a consistent application of terminology. Hence, the
review assigned diﬀerent constructs to transfer of training. Typical examples for this are
the constructs perceived transfer of training versus transfer of training versus learning
transfer. The diﬃculties in the creation of a literature review arose mainly from con-
structs which are imprecisely explicated, or overlap semantically. Typical examples for
this are the constructs learning motivation versus training motivation and intention to
transfer versus transfer motivation. The authors constructed their own questionnaires,
employing diﬀerent scales. The psychometric quality of the employed instruments is
therefore to be viewed critically (Egan et al., 2004; Holton et al., 2000; Pham et al.,
2013). Until now, the only existing valid instrument containing transfer-relevant scales
is the LTSI (Holton et al., 2000). This intends to permit a multi-dimensional analysis of
the transfer process and the establishment of comparability between studies. (3) Only
quantitative research results were considered in the literature review. Weisweiler et al.
(2013) stated that the currently existing quantitative measuring instruments are in no
way suﬃcient to cope with the complexity of the transfer process. In the context of
the scope and limitations of the currently available statistical processes, the question is
raised in how far such complex relationships as the transfer process and its determinants
can be suﬃciently measured at all. Hence, it can be assumed that quantitative research
designs reach their limitations, particularly in regard to the dimensions of determinants.
Qualitative research may reach diﬀerentiated conclusions, in this regard. In future, it
should thus be examined what conclusions qualitative research designs reach regarding
determinants and their dimensions of transfer of training. (4) The focus of the litera-
ture review is entirely on formalized training measures. Baldwin et al. (2009), in the
context of the increasing importance and diversity of vocational training, point out the
need to include, for example, e-learning in future studies. In order to make a contribu-
tion to answering the extremely important question of which diﬀerences exist between
diﬀerent forms and types of training measure due to their respective setting of targets
and with regard to their short-, mid-, and long-term transfer of training eﬃcacy, and
which ﬁeld-of-learning-speciﬁc determinants inﬂuence them signiﬁcantly, future studies
should examine the eﬃcacy, as represented by the measured transfer of training, of
typical types of training measure (such as specialized versus interdisciplinary training
measures, or formalized versus workplace-related and job-related training measures).
Further empirically conﬁrmed knowledge concerning transfer of training eﬃcacy and its
determinants and their dimensions are, however, urgently required in order to improve
the eﬀectiveness of formalized training in practice (see p. 4). This permits the imme-
diate comparison of diﬀerent organizational forms of training in regard to their transfer
<<<PAGE=27>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 153
eﬃcacy and persistence. This, in turn, permits us to diﬀerentiate between more and
less eﬀective training measures, determine causes and determinants for transfer success
(or failure) and deduce recommendations for the systematic promotion of transfer of
training, on a solid empirical foundation.
<<<PAGE=28>>>
154 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
References
Alliger, G. M., Tannenbaum, S. I., Bennett, W., Traver, H., & Shotland, A. (1997). A
meta-analysis of the relations among training criteria. Personnel Psychology,
50, 341–358. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1997.tb00911.x
Arthur, W., Bennett, W., Edens, P. S., & Bell, S. T. (2003). Eﬀectiveness of training
in organizations: A meta-analysis of design and evaluation features. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 88, 234–245. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.2.234
Axtell, C. M., Maitlis, S., & Yearta, S. K. (1997). Predicting immediate and longer-
term transfer of training. Personnel Review, 26, 201–213.
doi:10.1108/00483489710161413
Baldwin, T. T., & Ford, J. K. (1988). Transfer of training: A review and directions
for future research. Personnel Psychology, 41, 63–105. doi:10.1111/j.1744-
6570.1988.tb00632.x
Baldwin, T. T., Ford, J. K., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Transfer of training 1988-2008:
An updated review and agenda for future research. International Review of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 24, 41–70.
doi:10.1002/9780470745267.ch2
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-eﬃcacy mechanism in human agency. American Psycholo-
gist, 37, 122–147. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.37.2.122
Barba Aragon, I., & Sanz Valle, R. (2012). Does training managers pay oﬀ? The
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24, 1–14.
doi:10.1080/09585192.2012.725064
Bates, R. A., & Holton, E. F. (2004). Linking workplace literacy skills and transfer
system perceptions. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 15, 153–170.
doi:10.1002/hrdq.1096
Bates, R. A., Holton, E. F., Seyler, D. L., & Carvalho, M. A. (2000). The role
of interpersonal factors in the application of computer-based training in an
industrial setting. Human Resource Development International, 3, 19–42. doi:
10.1080/136788600361920
Bhatti, M. A., Battour, M. M., Sundram, V. P. K., & Othman, A. A. (2013). Transfer
of training: does it truly happen?: An examination of support, instrumen-
tality, retention and learner readiness on the transfer motivation and transfer
of training. European Journal of Training and Development, 37, 273–297.
doi:10.1108/03090591311312741
Blume, B. D., Ford, J. K., Baldwin, T. T., & Huang, J. L. (2010). Transfer of
training: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Management, 36, 1065–1105.
doi:10.1177/0149206309352880
Brown, T. C. (2005). Eﬀectiveness of distal and proximal goals as transfer-of-training
interventions: A ﬁeld experiment. Human Resource Development Quarterly,
16, 369–387. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1144
Burke, L. A. (1997). Improving positive transfer: A test of relapse prevention training
on transfer outcomes. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 8, 115–128.
doi: 10.1002/hrdq.3920080204
<<<PAGE=29>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 155
Burke, L. A., & Baldwin, T. T. (1999). Workforce training transfer: A study of the
eﬀect of relapse prevention training and transfer climate. Human Resource
Management, 38, 227–242.
Burke, L. A., & Hutchins, H. M. (2007). Training transfer: An integrative literature
review. Human Resource Development Review, 6, 263–296.
doi:10.1177/1534484307303035
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Tannenbaum, S. I., & Mathieu, J. E. (1995). Toward theoret-
ically based principles of training eﬀectiveness: A model and initial empirical
investigation. Military Psychology, 7, 141–164.
doi:10.1207/s15327876mp0703 1
Carter, S. D. (2002). Matching training methods and factors of cognitive ability: A
means to improve training outcomes. Human Resource Development Quar-
terly, 13, 71–87. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1014
Cheng, E. W. L. (2000). Test of the MBA knowledge and skills transfer. The Inter-
national Journal of Human Resource Management, 1, 837–852.
doi:10.1080/09585190050075150
Cheng, E. W. L., & Hampson, I. (2008). Transfer of training: A review and new
insights. International Journal of Management Reviews, 10, 327–341. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-2370.2007.00230.x
Cheng, E. W. L., & Ho, D. C. K. (2001). A review of transfer of training studies in
the past decade. Personnel Review, 30, 102–118.
doi:10.1108/00483480110380163
Chiaburu, D. S., & Lindsay, D. R. (2008). Can do or will do? The importance of
selfeﬃcacy and instrumentality for training transfer. Human Resource Devel-
opment International, 11, 199–206. doi:10.1080/13678860801933004
Chiaburu, D. S., & Marinova, S. V. (2005). What predicts skill transfer? An ex-
ploratory study of goal orientation, training self-eﬃcacy and organizational
supports. International Journal of Training and Development, 9, 110–123.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2005.00225.x
Chiaburu, D. S., Van Dam, K., & Hutchins, H. M. (2010). Social support in the work-
place and training transfer: a longitudinal analysis. International Journal of
Selection and Assessment, 18, 187–200. doi:10.1111/j.146-2389.2010.00500.x
Clarke, N. (2002). Jobwork environment factors inﬂuencing training transfer within a
human service agency: Some indicative support for Baldwin and Fords' trans-
fer climate construct. International Journal of Training and Development, 6,
146–162. doi:10.1111/1468-2419.00156
Colquitt, J. A., LePine, J. A., & Noe, R. A. (2000). Toward an integrative theory
of training motivation: A meta-analytic path analysis of 20 years of research.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 678–707. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.85.5.678
Colquitt, J. A., & Simmering, M. J. (1998). Conscientiousness, goal orientation, and
motivation to learn during the learning process: A longitudinal study. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 83, 654–665. doi: 10.1037//0021-9010.83.4.654
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1995). Domains and facets: Hierarchical personality
assessment using the revised NEO personality inventory. Journal of Person-
<<<PAGE=30>>>
156 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
ality Assessment, 64, 21–50. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa6401 2
Cromwell, S. E., & Kolb, J. A. (2004). An examination of work-environment support
factors aﬀecting transfer of supervisory skills training to the workplace. Hu-
man Resource Development Quarterly, 15, 449–471. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1115
Diesner, I., & Seufert, S. (2010). Trendstudie 2010. Herausforderungen f¨ ur das Bil-
dungmanagement in Unternehmen [Trend study 2010. Challenges for the ed-
ucational management in companies]. St. Gallen, Switzerland: Swiss Centre
for Innovations in Learning.
Diesner, I., & Seufert, S. (2013). Trendstudie 2012. Herausforderungen f¨ ur das Bil-
dungmanagement in Unternehmen [Trend study 2012. Challenges for the ed-
ucational management in companies]. St. Gallen, Switzerland: Swiss Centre
for Innovations in Learning.
Diesner, I., Seufert, S., & Euler, D. (2008). Trendstudie 2008. Herausforderungen f¨ ur
das Bildungsmanagement in Unternehmen [Trend study 2008. Challenges for
the educational management in companies]. St. Gallen, Switzerland: Swiss
Centre for Innovations in Learning.
Dubs, R. (1994). Management-Ausbildung: ein altes Thema erneut betrachtet [Man-
agement training: an old topic new considered]. In R. Hasenb¨ ohler, R. Kiechel,
& J.-P. Thommen (Eds.), Zukunftsorientierte Management-Ausbildung
[Future-oriented management training ](pp.16–40).
Z¨ urich, Switzerland: Versus-Verlag.
Egan, T. M., Yang, B., & Bartlett, K. R. (2004). The eﬀects of organizational learning
culture and job satisfaction on motivation to transfer learning and turnover
intention. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 15, 279–301.
doi:10.1002/hrdq.1104
Ellstr¨ om, E., & Ellstr¨ om, P.-E. (2014). Learning outcomes of a work-based training
programme: The signiﬁcance of managerial support. European Journal of
Training and Development, 38, 180–197. doi:10.1108/EJTD-09-2013-0103
Facteau, J. D., Dobbins, G. H., Russell, J. E. A., Ladd, R. T., & Kudisch, J. D. (1995).
The inﬂuence of general perceptions of the training environment on pretrain-
ing motivation and perceived training transfer. Journal of Management, 21,
1–25. doi:10.1177/014920639502100101
Festner, D. (2012). Ver¨ anderbarkeit betrieblichen Handelns. Transfer unter Einﬂuss
von Merkmalen der Lernperson, der Lern- und Arbeitsumgebung [Changeabil-
ity of operative actions. The inﬂuence of learners characteristics, learning, and
working environment on transfer of training]. Frankfurt am Main, Germany:
Peter Lang.
Ford, J. K., Qui˜ nones, M. A., Sego, D. J., & Sorra, J. S. (1992). Factors aﬀecting the
opportunity to perform trained tasks on the job. Personnel Psychology, 45,
511–527. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1992.tb00858.x
Ford, J. K., Smith, E. M., Weissbein, D. A., Gully, S. M., & Salas, E. (1998). Relation-
ships of goal orientation, metacognitive activity, and practice strategies with
learning outcomes and transfer. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 218–233.
doi:10.1037//0021-9010.83.2.218
<<<PAGE=31>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 157
Gaudine, A. P., & Saks, A. M. (2004). A longitudinal quasi-experiment on the eﬀects of
posttraining transfer interventions. Human Resource Development Quarterly,
15, 57–76. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1087
Gegenfurtner, A., Festner, D., Gallenberger, W., Lehtinen, E., & Gruber, H. (2009).
Predicting autonomous and controlled motivation to transfer training. Inter-
national Journal of Training and Development, 13, 124–138.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2009.00322.x
Gegenfurtner, A., Veermans, K., & Vauras, M. (2013). Eﬀects of computer support,
collaboration, and time lag on performance selfeﬃcacy and transfer of train-
ing: A longitudinal meta-analysis. Educational Research Review, 8, 75–89.
doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2012.04.001
Georgenson, D. L. (1982). The problem of transfer calls for partnership. Training &
Development Journal. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1983-
04546-001
Gessler, M. (2012). Lerntransfer in der beruﬂichen Weiterbildung - empirische Pr¨ ufung
eines integrierten Rahmenmodells mittels Strukturgleichungsmodellierung
(Transfer of training of vocational training - empirical validation of an inte-
grated framework with structual equation modelling). Zeitschrift f¨ ur Berufs-
und Wirtschaftsp¨ adagogik, 108, 362–393.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). The volitional beneﬁts of planning. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J.
A. Bargh (Eds.), The Psychology of action. Linking cognition and motivation
to behavior (pp. 287–312). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Goodman, J. S., Wood, R. E., & Chen, Z. (2011). Feedback speciﬁcity, information
processing, and transfer of training. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 115, 253–267. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2011.01.001
Grohmann, A., Beller, J., & Kauﬀeld, S. (2014). Exploring the critical role of mo-
tivation to transfer in the training transfer process. International Journal of
Training and Development, 18, 84–103. doi:10.1111/ijtd.12030
Grossman, R., & Salas, E. (2011). The transfer of training: What really matters.
International Journal of Training and Development, 15, 103–120.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2011.00373.x
Gruber, H. (2013). Marathon running, accreditation of study programmes and profes-
sional development in consultancies: Are they all about the same? A cognitive
perspective on transfer of training. Educational Research Review, 8, 96–101.
doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2012.11.006
Gully, S. M., Payne, S. C., Koles, K. L. K., & Whiteman, J.-A. K. (2002). The
impact of error training and individual diﬀerences on training outcomes: An
attribute-treatment interaction perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
87, 143–155. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.87.1.143
<<<PAGE=32>>>
158 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Hasselhorn, M., & M¨ ahler, C. (2000). Transfer: Theorien, Technologien und em-
pirische Erfassung [Transfer: Theories, technologies, and empirical analysis].
In W. Hager, J.-L. Patry, & H. Brezing (Eds.), Evaluation psychologischer In-
terventionsmanahmen. Standards und Kriterien: Ein Handbuch [Evaluation
of psychological intervention measures. Standards and criteria: A manual]
(pp. 86–101). Bern, Switzerland: Huber.
Heimbeck, D., Frese, M., Sonnentag, S., & Keith, N. (2003). Integrating errors into the
training process: the function of error management instructions and the role
of goal orientation. Personnel Psychology, 56, 333–361. doi:10.1111/j.1744-
6570.2003.tb00153.x
Herold, D. M., Davis, W., Fedor, D. B., & Parsons, C. K. (2002). Dispositional
inﬂuences on transfer of learning in multistage training programs. Personnel
Psychology, 55, 851–869. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2002.tb00132.x
Hinrichs, A.-C. (2014). Predictors of collateral learning transfer in continuing voca-
tional training. International Journal for Research in Vocational Education
and Training, 1 (1), 35–56. doi:10.13152/IJRVET.1.1.3
Holladay, C. L., & Qui˜ nones, M. A. (2003). Practice variability and transfer of train-
ing: The role of self-eﬃcacy generality. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
1094–1103. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.6.1094
Holton, F. E., Bates, R. A., & Ruona, W. E. A. (2000). Development of a generalized
learning transfer system inventory. Human Resource Development Quarterly,
11, 333–360.
Homklin, T., Takahashi, Y., & Techakanont, K. (2014). The inﬂuence of social and
organizational support on transfer of training: evidence from Thailand. In-
ternational Journal of Training and Development, 18, 116–131.
doi:10.1111/ijtd.12031
Hutchins, H. M., & Burke, L. A. (2007). Identifying trainers ' knowledge of training
transfer research ﬁndings - closing the gap between research and practice.
International Journal of Training and Development, 11, 236–264.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2007.00288.x
Hutchins, H. M., Burke, L. A., & Berthelsen, A. M. (2010). A Missing Link In The
Transfer Problem? Examining How Trainers Learn About Training Transfer.
Human Resource Management, 49, 599–618. doi:10.1002/hrm
Johnson, S. K., Garrison, L. L., Hernez-Broome, G., Fleenor, J. W., & Steed, J. L.
(2012). Go for the goal(s): Relationship between goal setting and transfer of
training following leadership development. Academy of Management Learning
and Education, 11, 555–569. doi:10.5465/amle.2010.0149
Kabst, R., Giardini, A., & Wehner, M. C. (2009). International komparatives Per-
sonalmanagement. Evidenz, Methodik & Klassiker des “Cranﬁeld Projects on
International Human Resource Management” [International comparative
human resource management: Evidence, methodology & classics of the
'Cranﬁeld Projects on International Human Resource Management '].
M¨ unchen, Mering, Germany: Rainer Hampp.
<<<PAGE=33>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 159
Kauﬀeld, S., Bates, R., Holton III, E. F., & M¨ uller, A. C. (2008). Das deutsche
Lerntransfer-System-Inventar (GLTSI): psychometrische ¨Uberpr¨ ufung der
deutschsprachigen Version [The German version of the Learning Transfer Sys-
tems Inventory (GLTSI): Psychometric validation]. Zeitschrift f¨ ur Person-
alpsychologie, 7, 50–69. doi:10.1026/1617-6391.7.2.50
Kauﬀeld, S., & Grote. S. (2000). Weiterbildung - ein zerbrechender Mythos? [Fur-
ther education - a breaking myth?]. In E. Frieling, S. Kauﬀeld, S. Grote, & H.
Bernard (Eds.), Flexibilit¨ at und Kompetenz. Schaﬀen ﬂexible Unternehmen
ﬂexible und kompetente Mitarbeiter? [Flexibility and competence. Do ﬂex-
ible companies create ﬂexible and competent employees?] (pp. 163–186).
M¨ unster, Germany: Waxmann.
Kauﬀeld, S., Lorenzo, G., & Weisweiler, S. (2012).Wann wird Weiterbildung nach-
haltig? Erfolg und Erfolgsfaktoren bei Lerntransfer [When do further trainings
become sustainable? Success and factors of success in transfer of training].
Personal Quarterly, 64(2),10–15.
Keith, N., & Frese, M. (2008). Eﬀectiveness of error management training: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 59–69.
doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.93.1.59
Kirkpatrick, D. L., & Kirkpatrick, J. D. (2006). Evaluating training programs. The
four levels (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Kontoghiorghes, C. (2001). Factors aﬀecting training eﬀectiveness in the context of
the introduction of new technology - A US case study. International Journal
of Training and Development, 5, 248–260. doi:10.1111/1468-2419.00137
Kontoghiorghes, C. (2002). Predicting motivation to learn and motivation to transfer
learning back to the job in a service organization: A new systemic model for
training eﬀectiveness. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 15(3), 114–129.
doi:10.1111/j.1937-8327.2002.tb00259.x
Kontoghiorghes, C. (2004). Reconceptualizing the learning transfer conceptual frame-
work: empirical validation of a new systemic model. International Journal of
Training and Development, 8, 210–221.
doi:10.1111/j.1360-3736.2004.00209.x
Laker, D. R., & Powell, J. L. (2011). The diﬀerences between hard and soft skills and
their relative impact on training transfer. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 22, 111–122. doi:10.1002/hrdq.20063
Lau, P. Y. Y., & McLean, G. N. (2013). Factors inﬂuencing perceived learning transfer
of an outdoor management development programme in Malaysia. Human
Resource Development International, 16, 186–204.
doi:10.1080/13678868.2012.756157
Lee, C., Lee, H., Lee, J., & Park, J. (2014). A multiple group analysis of the training
transfer model: Exploring the diﬀerences between high and low performers in
a Korean insurance company. The International Journal of Human Resource
Management, 25, 2837–2857. doi:10.1080/09585192.2014.934887
Lee, K., & Pucel, D. J. (1998). The perceived impacts of supervisor reinforcement
and learning objective importance on transfer of training. Performance Im-
<<<PAGE=34>>>
160 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
provement Quarterly, 11(4), 51–61. doi: 10.1111/j.1937-8327.1998.tb00106.x
Lemke, S. (1995). Transfermanagement [Transfer management]. G¨ ottingen, Germany:
Verlag f¨ ur Angewandte Psychologie.
Liebermann, S., & Hoﬀmann, S. (2008). The impact of practical relevance on train-
ing transfer: Evidence from a service quality training program for German
bank clerks. International Journal of Training and Development, 12, 74–86.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2008.00296.x
Lim, D. H., & Johnson, S. D. (2002). Trainee perceptions of factors that inﬂuence
learning transfer. International Journal of Training and Development, 6, 36–
48. doi:10.1111/1468-2419.00148
Lim, D. H., & Morris, M. L. (2006). Inﬂuence of trainee characteristics, instructional
satisfaction, and organizational climate on perceived learning and training
transfer. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 17, 85–115.
doi:10.1002/hrdq.1162
Machin, M. A., & Fogarty, G. J. (2004). Assessing the antecedents of transfer inten-
tions in a training context. International Journal of Training and Develop-
ment, 8, 222–236. doi:10.1111/j.1360-3736.2004.00210.x
Mandl, H., Prenzel, M., & Gr¨ asel, C. (1992). Das Problem des Lerntransfers in
der betrieblichen Weiterbildung [The issue of transfer of training in further
education]. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 20(2), 126–143.
Marsick, V. J., & Watkins, K. E. (2003). Demonstrating the value of an organization's
learning culture: The dimensions of the Learning Organization Questionnaire.
Advances in Developing Human Resources, 5, 132–151.
doi:10.1177/1523422303005002002
Martin, H. J. (2010). Workplace climate and peer support as determinants of training
transfer. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 21, 87–104.
doi:10.1002/hrdq.20038
Marx, R. D. (1982). Relapse prevention for managerial training: a model for mainte-
nance of behavior change. The Academy of Management Review, 7, 433–441.
doi:10.5465/amr.1982.4285359
Mathieu, J. E., Martineau, J. W., & Tannenbaum, S. I. (1993). Individual and situa-
tional inﬂuences on the development of self-eﬃcacy: Implications for training
eﬀectiveness. Personnel Psychology, 46, 125–147.
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1993.tb00870.x
Naquin, S. S., & Holton, E. F. (2002). The eﬀects of personality, aﬀectivity, and
work commitment on motivation to improve work through learning. Human
Resource Development Quarterly, 13, 357–376. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1038
Ng, K. H. (2013). The inﬂuence of supervisory and peer support on the transfer of
training. Studies in Business and Economics, 8, 82–98.
Ng, K. H., & Ahm, R. (2011). The impact of the supervisor 's role in training pro-
grammes on the transfer of training: A case study in four east Malaysian local
governments. Research and Practice in Human Resource Management, 19,
24–42.
<<<PAGE=35>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 161
Noe, R. A. (1986). Trainees attributes and attitudes: Neglected inﬂuences on training
eﬀectiveness. Academy of Management Review, 11, 736–749.
doi:10.5465/amr.1986.4283922
Noe, R. A., & Schmitt, N. (1986). The inﬂuence of trainee attitudes on training
eﬀectiveness: Test of a model. Personnel Psychology, 39, 497–523.
doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1986.tb00950.x
Noe, R. A., Sears, J., & Fullenkamp, A. M. (1990). Relapse training: Does it inﬂuence
trainees' post training behavior and cognitive strategies? Journal of Business
and Psychology, 4, 317–328. doi:10.1007/bf01125242
Pham, N. T. P., Segers, M. S. R., & Gijselaers, W. H. (2013). Eﬀects of work envi-
ronment on transfer of training: Empirical evidence from Master of Business
Administration programs in Vietnam. International Journal of Training and
Development, 17, 1–19. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2012.00417.x
Phillips, J.J. (1991). Measuring the return on HRD. Employment Relations Today,
18, 329–342.
Phillips, J. J., & Phillips, P. P. (2001). The return on investment (ROI) process.
In L. L. Ukens (Ed.) What smart trainers know: The secrets of success
from the world foremost experts (pp. 133–159). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass/Pfeiﬀer.
Phillips, J. J., Stone, R. D., & Phillips, P. P. (2001). The human resources score-
card: Measuring the return on investment. Bosten, MASS.: Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Pidd, K. (2004). The impact of workplace support and identity on training trans-
fer: A case study of drug and alcohol safety training in Australia. Interna-
tional Journal of Training and Development, 8, 274–288. doi:10.1111/j.1360-
3736.2004.00214.x
Piezzi, D. (2002). Transferf¨ orderung in der betrieblichen Weiterbildung. Die Be-
deutung der Arbeitsumgebung und der Integration der Weiterbildung in die
Unternehmensf¨ uhrung [Supporting the transfer in further education. The in-
ﬂuence of work environments and of the integration of further training into
the management]. Paderborn, Germany: Eusl-Verlag.
Qui˜ nones, M. A. (1995). Pretraining context eﬀects: Training assignment as feedback.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 226–238. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.80.2.226
Rank, B., & Wakenhut, R. (1998). Ein Bedingungsmodell des Praxistransfers [A model
of practice transfer]. In B. Rank & O. Wakenhut (Eds.), Sicherung des Praxis-
transfers im F¨ uhrungskr¨ aftetraining [Ensuring practice transfer in leadership
training] (pp. 11–30). M¨ unchen, Mering, Germany: Rainer Hampp.
Ree, M. J., & Earles, J. A. (1991). Predicting training success: Not much more than g.
Personnel Psychology, 44, 321–332. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.1991.tb00961.x
Renta-Davids, A.-I., Jim´ enez-Gonz´ alez, J.-M., Fandos-Garrido, M., & Gonz´ alez-Soto,
´A.-P. (2014). Transfer of learning. Motivation, training design and learning
conducive work eﬀects. European Journal of Training and Development, 38,
728–744. doi:10.1108/EJTD-03-2014-0026
<<<PAGE=36>>>
162 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Richman-Hirsch, W. L. (2001). Posttraining interventions to enhance transfer: The
moderating eﬀects of work environments. Human Resource Development
Quarterly, 12, 105–120. doi:10.1002/hrdq.2.abs
Rouiller, J. Z., & Goldstein, I. L. (1993). The relationship between organizational
transfer climate and positive transfer of training. Human Resource Develop-
ment Quarterly, 4, 377–390. doi:10.1002/hrdq.3920040408
Rowold, J. (2007). The impact of personality on training-related aspects of motivation:
Test of a longitudinal model. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 18,
9–31. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1190
Ruona, W. E., Leimbach, M., Holton III, E. F., & Bates, R. A. (2002). The relation-
ship between learner utility reactions and predicted learning transfer among
trainees. International Journal of Training and Development, 6, 218–228.
doi:10.1111/1468-2419.00160
Saks, A. M., & Belcourt, M. (2006). An investigation of training activities and transfer
of training in organizations. Human Resource Management, 45, 629–648.
doi:10.1002/hrm.20135
Saks, A. M., & Burke, L. A. (2012). An investigation into the relationship between
training evaluation and the transfer of training. International Journal of
Training and Development, 16, 118–127.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2011.00397.x
Saks, A. M., & Burke-Smalley, L. A. (2014). Is transfer of training related to ﬁrm
performance? International Journal of Training and Development, 18, 104–
115. doi:10.1111/ijtd.12029
Scaduto, A., Lindsay, D., & Chiaburu, D. S. (2008). Leader inﬂuences on train-
ing eﬀectiveness: Motivation and outcome expectation processes. Interna-
tional Journal of Training and Development, 12, 158–170. doi:10.1111/j.1468-
2419.2008.00303.x
Schuchmann, D., & Seufert, S. (2013). Kompetenzentwicklung in Unternehmen.
Neuorientierung betrieblicher Weiterbildung - Wege aus der “K¨ ursli-Denke”?
[Developing competences in companies. Reorientation of further education -
Ways out of the “K¨ ursli-mentality”?]. In S. Seufert, & C. Metzger (Eds.),
Kompetenzentwicklung in unterschiedlichen Lernkulturen [Developing com-
petences in diﬀerent learning cultures] (pp. 421–442). Paderborn, Germany:
Eusl.
Seidel, J. (2012). Transferkompetenz und Transfer. Theoretische und empirische
Untersuchung zu den Wirksamkeitsbedingungen betrieblicher Weiterbildung
[Transfer competence and transfer. A theoretical and empirical analysis of
the conditions aﬀecting eﬀectiveness in further education]. Landau, Germany:
Verlag Empirische P¨ adagogik.
Seyler, D. L., Holton, E. F., Bates, R. A., Burnett, M. F., & Carvalho, M. A. (1998).
Factors aﬀecting motivation to transfer training. International Journal of
Training and Development, 2, 2–16. doi:10.1111/1468-2419.00031
Simosi, M. (2012). The moderating role of self-eﬃcacy in the organizational culture-
training transfer relationship. International Journal of Training and Develop-
<<<PAGE=37>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 163
ment, 16, 92–106. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2011.00396.x
Smith, R., Jayasuriya, R., Caputi, P., & Hammer, D. (2008). Exploring the role of
goal theory in understanding training motivation. International Journal of
Training and Development, 12, 54–72. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2007.00295.x
Solga, M. (2005). Management des Lerntransfers [Managing transfer of training].
In J. Ryschka, M. Solga, & A. Mattenklott (Eds.), Praxishandbuch Person-
alentwicklung. Instrumente, Konzepte, Beispiele [Manual of human resource
development: Instruments, concepts, examples] (pp. 269–291). Wiesbaden,
Germany: Gabler.
Tannenbaum, S. I., Mathieu, J. E., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (1991). Meet-
ing trainees ' expectations: The inﬂuence of training fulﬁllment on the de-
velopment of commitment, self-eﬃcacy, and motivation. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 76, 759–769. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.76.6.759
Tannenbaum, S. I., & Yukl, G. (1992). Training and development in work organiza-
tions. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 399–441.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ps.43.020192.002151
Taylor, P. J., Russ-Eft, D. F., & Chan, D. W. L. (2005). A meta-analytic review
of behavior modeling training. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 692–709.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.4.692
Thorndike, E. L., & Woodworth, R. S. (1901). The inﬂuence of improvement in one
mental function upon the eﬃciency of other functions. Psychological Review,
8(3), 247–261. doi:10.1037/h0074898
Tracey, J. B., Hinkin, T. R., Tannenbaum, S. I., & Mathieu, J. E. (2001). The
inﬂuence of individual characteristics and the work environment on varying
levels of training outcomes. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 12,
5–23. doi:10.5465/ambpp.1997.4981395
Tziner, A., & Falbe, C. M. (1993). Training-related variables, gender and training
outcomes: A ﬁeld investigation. International Journal of Psychology, 28, 203–
221. doi:10.1080/00207599308247185
Tziner, A., Fisher, M., Senior, T., & Weisberg, J. (2007). Eﬀects of trainee char-
acteristics on training eﬀectiveness. International Journal of Selection and
Assessment, 15(2), 167–174. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2389.2007.00378.x
Tziner, A., Haccoun, R. R., & Kadish, A. (1991). Personal and situational character-
istics inﬂuencing the eﬀectiveness of transfer of training improvement strate-
gies. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 64, 167–177. doi:10.1111/j.2044-
8325.1991.tb00551.x
Van den Bossche, P., Segers, M., & Jansen, N. (2010). Transfer of training: The role
of feedback in supportive social networks. International Journal of Training
and Development, 14, 81–94. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2010.00343.x
Van der Locht, M., Dam, K. Van, & Chiaburu, D. S. (2013). Getting the most of
management training: The role of identical elements for training transfer.
Personnel Review, 42, 422–439. doi:10.1108/PR-05-2011-0072
Von Rosenbladt, B., & Bilger, F. (2008). Weiterbildungsbeteiligung in Deutschland–
Eckdaten zum BSW-AES 2007 [Participation in further education in Germany–
<<<PAGE=38>>>
164 Tonh¨ auser, B¨ uker
Key ﬁgures of the BSW-AES 2007]. Bonn, Germany: BMBF.
Velada, R., & Caetano, A. (2007). Training transfer: The mediating role of per-
ception of learning. Journal of European Industrial Training, 31, 283–296.
doi:10.1108/03090590710746441
Velada, R., Caetano, A., Michel, J. W., Lyons, B. D., & Kavanagh, M. J. (2007). The
eﬀects of training design, individual characteristics and work environment on
transfer of training. International Journal of Training and Development, 11,
282–294. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2419.2007.00286.x
Vroom, V. H. (1964). Work and motivation. New York, NY: Wiley.
Watkins, K. E., & Marsick, V. J. (1993). Sculpting the learning organization. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Webster, J., & Martocchio, J. J. (1993). Turning work into play: Implications for
microcomputer software training. Journal of Management, 19, 127–146.
doi:10.1177/014920639301900109
Webster, J. & Watson, R. (2002). Analyzing the Past to Prepare for the Future:
Writing a Literature Review. Management Information Systems Quarterly
26(2), xiii–xxi. doi:10.2307/4132319
Weissbein, D. A., Huang, J. L., Ford, K. K., & Schmidt, A. M. (2011). Inﬂuencing
learning states to enhance trainee motivation and improve training transfer.
Journal of Business and Psychology, 26, 423–435. doi:10.1007/s10869-010-
9198-x
Weisweiler, S. (2008). Der Einﬂuss von Individuum, Trainingsmaßnahme und Umfeld–
eine Untersuchung zum Transferprozess in der Weiterbildung [The inﬂuence of
the individual, the training measure, and the environment–An examination of
the learning transfer process in further education] (Doctoral dissertation, Fac-
ulty of Psychology, Education and Sports Siences, University of Regensburg,
Germany).
Weisweiler, S., Nikitopoulos, A., Netzel, J., & Frey, D. (2013). Gaining insight to
transfer of training through the lens of social psychology. Educational Re-
search Review, 8, 14–27. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2012.05.006
Werner, J. M., O'Leary-Kelly, A. M., Baldwin, T. T., & Wexley, K. N. (1994). Aug-
menting behavior-modeling training: Testing the eﬀects of pre- and post-
training interventions. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 5, 169–183.
doi:10.1002/hrdq.3920050207
Zu Knyphausen-Aufseß, D., Smukalla, M., & Abt, M. (2009). Towards a new training
transfer portfolio: A review of training-related studies in the last decade.
Zeitschrift fur Personalforschung, 23, 288–311.
doi:10.1688/1862-0000 ZfP 2009 04 Knyphausen
Zurwehme, A. (2008). Management control in training institutions–Formation and re-
sults of an empirical study. Zeitschrift fur Planung & Unternehmenssteuerung,
18, 445–469. doi:10.1007/s00187-007-0034-z
<<<PAGE=39>>>
Determinants of Transfer of Training 165
Bibliographical notes
Dr. Cornelia Tonh¨ auser is Assistant Professor of Business Education with focus on
Educational Management at the University of G¨ ottingen, Germany. Her research areas
are educational management, eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of further vocational training,
professionalization of teachers and educational personnel and research on coaching topics.
Laura B¨ uker (M.Ed.) is research assistant and doctoral student at the Chair of Busi-
ness Education with focus on Educational Management at the University of G¨ ottingen,
Germany. Her research interests are eﬃcacy of further vocational training and profes-
sionalization and professional development of teachers in business education.