<<<PAGE=1>>>
Journal of Innovation & Knowledge 2 (2 0 1 7) 10–14
www.elsevier.es/jik
Journal of Innovation
& Knowledge
Empirical paper
The impact of experiential learning on managers’
strategic competencies and decision style
Pedro T orresa,∗, Mário Augusto b
a University of Coimbra, School of Economics, Av. Dias da Silva, 165, 3004-512 Coimbra, Portugal
b Institute of Systems and Robotics and University of Coimbra, School of Economics, Av. Dias da Silva, 165, 3004-512 Coimbra, Portugal
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received
 11 June 2016
Accepted 21 June 2016
Available online 16 July 2016
JEL classiﬁcation:
A23
M10
Keywords:
Decision-making
 styles
Strategic competencies
Experiential learning
Simulation-based method
a b s t r a c t
This research studies whether Executive MBA student’s participation in a business strategy
simulation
 course signiﬁcantly impacts on self-perceptions of their strategic competencies
and
 decision style, which involves crossing psychological and strategy ﬁelds, and aims to
contribute
 to the development of theoretical management and educational insights. The
obtained
 results
 on students’ self-perception of their improvement on strategic competen-
cies suggest that the simulation has a positive value for students and contributes both to
their
 engagement in the MBA program and to their knowledge. However, decision-making
styles
 do not change as a result of the simulation, with the exception of the analytical
component,
 which is reinforced. Thus, we concluded that although students’ knowledge
and
 strategic
 competencies could be expanded with a business strategy simulation, their
decision-making style is not signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by practice. Consequently, we suggest
that
 it is possible to antecipate one reaction to a future situation, when managers’ decision-
making
 style is known in advance, which in turn validates the statement that “nothing is so
theoretical
 as good practice”.
©
 2016 Journal of Innovation & Knowledge. Published by Elsevier Espa ˜na, S.L.U. This is an
open
 access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/).
El impacto del aprendizaje experiencial en las competencias estratégicas
y en el estilo de toma de decisiones de los directivos
Códigos JEL:
A23
M10
Palabras
 clave:
Estilos de toma de decisiones
Competencias estratégicas
r e s u m e n
Este estudio investiga si la participación de los alumnos de un programa de MBA para Ejec-
utivos
 en un curso de simulación estratégica de negocios tiene impactos signiﬁcativos en la
percepción
 propia de sus competencias estratégicas y en su estilo de toma de decisiones,
lo
 que implica combinar los dominios de la psicología y de la estrategia, intentando con-
tribuir
 en el desarrollo de nuevas ideas teóricas sobre la gestión y la educación. Los resul-
tados
 obtenidos sobre la autopercepción del alumno de sus mejorías en las competencias
estratégicas
 sugieren que la simulación ha tenido un valor positivo para los alumnos y
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail
 address: pedro.torres@uc.pt (P. Torres).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2016.06.001
2444-569X/© 2016 Journal of Innovation & Knowledge. Published by Elsevier Espa ˜na, S.L.U. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND
 license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
<<<PAGE=2>>>
j o u r n a l o f i n n o v a t i o n & k n o w l e d g e 2 (2 0 1 7) 10–14 11
Aprendizaje experimental
Método basado en la simulación
contribuye a mejorar su participación en el programa de MBA, así como su conocimiento.
Además,
 los estilos de toma de decisiones no cambian como resultado de la simulación, con
la
 excepción de la componente analítica, que es reforzada. De este modo, se concluye que
mientras
 el conocimiento y las competencias estratégicas de los alumnos puedan ampliarse
con
 una simulación estratégica de negocios, el estilo de toma de decisiones no es signi-
ﬁcativamente
 inﬂuenciado por su práctica. Consecuentemente, se sugiere que es posible
anticipar una reacción a una situación futura, cuando el estilo de toma de decisiones de los
directivos
 es ya conocido.
©
 2016 Journal of Innovation & Knowledge. Publicado por Elsevier Espa ˜na, S.L.U. Este es
un art´ıculo Open Access bajo la licencia CC BY-NC-ND (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Introduction
“A teoria não é senão uma teoria da prática, e a prática não
é
 senão a prática de uma teoria.”
(theory is nothing but a theory of practice, and practice is
nothing but the practice of theory)
Fernando Pessoa
The experiential learning theory (ELT) advocates that indi-
viduals learn – intentionally or not – from their experiences
(Kolb, 1984), and simulations help participants to learn from
their experiences
 (Russ & Drury-Grogan, 2013). The ELT posits
that the learning cycle includes four modes: experienc-
ing, reﬂecting, thinking, and acting, which corresponds to
a dynamic cycle that translates the value of being mindful
of one’s own direct, immediate experience, observing and
reﬂecting upon the experience and thinking and conceptual-
izing (Peterson, DeCato, & Kolb, 2015).
Running
 the business strategy
 simulation among Executive
MBA
 students is similar to realizing an experiment on the real-
life practice (behavior) of business managers. Moreover, this is
a kind of laboratory experiment that can be run to assessing
either student’s capacity to apply theoretical concepts in prac-
tice
 and the improvement in their understanding of the theory
and practice of business strategy.
During the ﬁnal trimester of the Executive MBA program of
the Faculty of Economics of the University of Coimbra a simu-
lation course is offered as an elective course, and the chosen
simulation is “The Business Strategy Game: Competing in a
Global
 Marketplace”, which will be referred hereafter as BSG.
In this context, the aim of this study is to analyze whether
Executive MBA student’s participation in a business strategy
simulation course signiﬁcantly impacts on self-perceptions of
their strategic competencies and decision style.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In the next
section we present the background. Then, we describe the
research design; the results are presented and discussed, and
ﬁnally, we summarize the main conclusions.
Background
Past research compared simulation-based methods with case-
based methods and concluded that the former produces
signiﬁcantly larger gains in student’s self-efﬁcacy (Tompson
&
 Dass, 2000), although both contribute to students’ under-
standing of real strategic challenges. Also, previous research
explored the role of simulation case studies in enterprise edu-
cation, their effectiveness, and their relationship to traditional
forms of classroom-based approaches to experiential learning
(Tunstall & Martin Lynch, 2010). In fact, the literature is exten-
sive in describing the effects that simulation-based methods
might have
 on motivation (e.g., Garris, Ahlers, & Driskell,
2002).
The literature describes strategy formulation as a com-
plex activity that involves scanning, sense making, and
decision-making (Narayanan, Zane, & Kemmerer, 2011). Based
on business strategy
 theory (e.g., Johnson & Scholes, 2013;
Wheelen,
 Hunger, Hoffman, & Bamford, 2015), we can consider
that strategy formulation involves detecting environmental
opportunities and threats, assessing organization capabilities,
establishing company objectives, determining a competitive
strategy, developing a strategic direction, preparing operat-
ing projections, and understanding the consequences of the
decisions made. Furthermore, it is important to stress that
the strategic decision-making process involves exchange of
information between the members, and the way in which
information is exchanged, processed and acted upon has a
pivotal role (Parayitam & Dooley, 2009).
Regarding
 the execution of the designed strategy one has to
organize the strategy implementation procedures, the struc-
ture of the organization, the systems of the organization,
conduct resource allocation, and understand functional inter-
action ﬂows (e.g., Johnson & Scholes, 2013; Wheelen et al.,
2015). Moreover, the strategy literature portrays that strategy
implementation is composed of sense giving, sense making,
and issue selling (Narayanan et al., 2011).
Furthermore, decision-making is a crucial activity for
managers and the existence of different decision-making
approaches has been recognized a long time ago (Martinsons
& Davison, 2007), and it is possible to predict how an individual
will react to different situations when knowing his or her deci-
sion style pattern (Rowe & Boulgarides, 1994). The typology
proposed by Rowe and Boulgarides (1994) includes four forces
(directive, analytical, conceptual, and behavioral) as presented
in Fig. 1.
In
 fact, cognitive psychology has examined an individual’s
ability to extract a number of dimensions from data or exam-
ined their ability to utilize different constructs to evaluate
information (Bouldgarides & Rowe, 1983). The decision style
model is based on how people think and what is important
to them, and a link between the decision styles and individual
needs can be established. In short: (i) directive decision makers
<<<PAGE=3>>>
12 j o u r n a l o f i n n o v a t i o n & k n o w l e d g e 2 (2 0 1 7) 10–14
Left brain hemisphere Right brain hemisphere
Analytic ConceptualHigh
Low Directive
Task oriented People oriented
Behavioral
Cognitive complexity
Fig. 1 – Decision style model.
Source: Adapted from Bouldgarides and Rowe (1983, p. 22)
are driven primary by the need for power; (ii) analytical deci-
sion makers look for
 new challenges in order to fulﬁll their
need
 for achievement; (iii) conceptual decision makers are
also looking for achievement, but they tend to value extrinsic
rewards, such as praise, recognition, and independence; and
(iv) behavioral decision makers focused mostly on fulﬁlling
their
 need for afﬁliation (Martinsons & Davison, 2007).
The integration of behavioral theory and cognitive psychol-
ogy on strategy process research has been growing (Thomas
& Ladwig, 2015). For example, past research suggested
that competence-based trust seems to be more important
than relationship-based trust in strategic decision-making
(Parayitam & Dooley, 2009). Thus, the cognitive dimensions of
the strategy process should not be forgotten to better under-
stand it.
Research design
The challenge
BSG is an online exercise performed in the classes where
students are asked to manage an athletic footwear com-
pany in competition against companies run by other class
members in a global marketplace. There are four markets
worldwide (North America, Europe-Africa, Asia-Paciﬁc, and
Latin America) and each region has three market segments
(internet segment, wholesale segment, and private-label seg-
ment). Each team (company) has to make decisions relating
to: (i) corporate social responsibility and citizenship, (ii) plant
capacity
 additions/sales/upgrades, (iii) production of branded
and private-label footwear, (iv) worker compensation and
training, (v) shipping and warehouse operations, (vi) pricing
and marketing, (vii) celebrity endorsement contracts, and (viii)
ﬁnancing of company operations.
The intent of the BSG is to involve participants in craft-
ing and executing a strategy for a virtual company and it was
created as a complement of the book “Crafting and Execut-
ing Strategy: The Quest for Competitive Advantage (Thompson
et al., 2013). Company co-managers are held accountable for
their decision-making, and they make as many as 53 types of
decisions
 each period. The company’s performance is scored
on the basis of earnings per share, return on equity invest-
ment, stock price, credit rating, and image rating. Thus, the
challenge for each company’s management is to formulate
T able 1 – Strategy competencies.
Strategy formulation
I
 detect environmental opportunities and threats
I assess organization capabilities
I
 establish company objectives
I determine a competitive strategy
I
 develop a strategic direction
I
 prepare operating projections
I understand the consequences of my strategic decisions
Strategy
 implementation
I organize the strategy implementation procedures
I
 organize the structure of my organization
I organize the systems of my organization
I
 conduct resource allocation
I understand functional interaction ﬂows
Critical analysis
I
 apply academic concepts and theories
I
 think critically
I strategically analyze challenges
and implement
 
a
 competitive strategy that produces good out-
comes on the ﬁve measures.
Sample and
 measurement instrument
A survey was applied to Executive MBA students of the
University of Coimbra, registered on the course of Strategic
Management Simulation in the academic year 2014/2015. The
data was gathered in the end of the simulation, on July 2015.
From the 37 questionnaires that were sent, we obtained 22
answers.
The
 measurement instrument included two parts, one
related to strategy competencies and another related to
the decision style. The items for the ﬁrst part were devel-
oped based on widely accepted strategy theory components,
considering both the strategy
 formulation and the strategy
implementation,
 which ﬁt the categories reﬂected on the BSG.
Additionally, we included a third construct, critical analysis,
and we use the scale proposed by Russ and Drury-Grogan
(2013), as shown in Table 1.
Regarding decision style, the scales used were based on the
decision style model presented by Martinsons and Davison
(2007), which was adapted from Rowe and Boulgarides (1994),
as shown in Table 2.
Students were asked to rate each item, before and after
the simulation, on a 7-point Likert type scale ranging from
1
 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Then, ANOVA tests
were
 conducted to assess statistically signiﬁcant differences
between their self-perceptions of the impact of the simulation.
Methodology
In the data analysis we used the analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The theoretical assumptions for its application were veriﬁed.
The ANOVA model used in the study is classiﬁed as a sin-
gle factor experiment (One-Way Anova), whose mathematical
representation, according to Hicks (1982), is the following:
Yij = /SYN + /FSj + εij
<<<PAGE=4>>>
j o u r n a l o f i n n o v a t i o n & k n o w l e d g e 2 (2 0 1 7) 10–14 13
T able 2 – Decision styles.
Analytic
I
 enjoy solving problems/puzzles
I use considerable data
I
 undertake careful analysis
Conceptual
I
 am creative and humanistic
I am broad and long-term focus
I
 seek independence
Directive
I
 am aggressive and autocratic
I act rapidly
I
 use rules and intuition
Behavioral
I
 am supportive and empathetic
I prefer communication/discussion
I
 use intuition rather than data
where
 Yij represents the ith observations (i = 1, 2, . . ., nj) on
the jth treatment (j = 1, 2 levels), /FSj represents the effect of jth
treatment, with j = 1, 2 (before and after Executive MBA stu-
dent’s participation in a business strategy simulation course),
/SYN is the common effect for the whole experiment, and εij rep-
resents the random error present in the ith observation on
the jth treatment, which is usually considered a normally and
independently distributed random effect whose mean value
is zero and whose variance is the same for all treatments or
levels.
The mathematically hypothesis to be tested are the follow-
ing:
H0 : /FSj = 0 with j = 1, 2
Ha : /FSj /= 0 with j = 1, 2
The statistic F will be used in this test for a 5% signiﬁcance
level. A signiﬁcant F statistic will indicate there are differ-
ences in strategic competencies/decision-making style before
and after Executive MBA students’ participation in a business
strategy simulation course, i.e. hypothesis to be tested can be
written as follows:
H1a.
 There are differences in students’ strategic formulation
competencies before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
H1b.
 There are differences in students’ strategic implemen-
tation competencies before and after the participation in the
BSG simulation.
H1c.
 There
 are differences in students’ critical analysis
competencies before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
H2a. There are differences in students’ analytical decision-
making style before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
T able 3 – ANOVA strategic competencies.
Sum of
squares
Mean
square
F Sig.
Strategic formulation
Between
 groups 11.148 11.148 12.670 .001
Within groups 34.316 .880
Total
 45.464
Strategic implementation
Between
 groups 13.091 13.091 12.944 .001
Within
 groups 42.476 1.011
Total 55.567
Critical
 analysis
Between groups 11.177 11.177 9.203 .004
Within
 groups 48.582 1.215
Total 59.759
H2b. There are differences in students’ conceptual decision-
making style before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
H2c.
 There are differences in students’ directive decision-
making style before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
H2d. There are differences in students’ behavioral decision-
making style before and after the participation in the BSG
simulation.
Results
The results
 of the ANOVA tests on each item of the strate-
gic competencies scale show that there was a signiﬁcant
improvement in all of them, meaning that students perceived
an improvement on their strategic skills as a result of the
simulation. However, our scale for the strategic competen-
cies consists of three components, so we also check their
unidimensionality and validate the proposed scales, which
constitutes another contribute of this research. Then, we
tested the differences in each component mean, as presented
in Table 3, and found statistically signiﬁcant differences in
all of them (the hypothesis H1a–H1c are conﬁrmed). More-
over, the results show that the most important differences
were perceived on the strategic implementation and strate-
gic formulation competencies, rather than on critical analysis
(Table 4). This result was expected since the focus of the sim-
ulation is business strategy.
Regarding the decision-making style, as shown in Table 5,
the results suggest that there are no signiﬁcant differences,
except in the analytical force (the hypothesis H2a is con-
ﬁrmed, but H2b–H2d are rejected). Therefore, we may conclude
that the simulation did not change each participant decision
style, but it reinforced the analytical component within their
decision-making style. Considering that decision-making is
inﬂuenced by values and cognitive perception, which in turn
could be explained by cultural factors (Martinsons & Davison,
2007), it is not surprising that we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differ-
ences in MBA students’ decision style. On the other hand, the
higher importance of the analytical component after the simu-
lation was expected, since the BSG encourages data collection
<<<PAGE=5>>>
14 j o u r n a l o f i n n o v a t i o n & k n o w l e d g e 2 (2 0 1 7) 10–14
T able 4 – Strategic competencies variation descriptive statistics.
N Minimum Maximum Mean Std. deviation
/Delta1Strategic formulation 20 −1.14 4.14 1.0714 1.01175
/Delta1Strategic implementation 22 −.20 3.40 1.0909 .86790
/Delta1Critical
 analysis 21 .33 3.67 1.0317 .93038
T able 5 – ANOVA decision-making style.
Sum of squares Mean square F Sig.
Analytical
Between
 groups 4.455 4.455 6.224 .017
Within groups 30.061 .716
Total
 34.515
Conceptual
Between
 groups 1.010 1.010 1.633 .208
Within groups 25.980 .619
Total
 26.990
Directive
Between
 groups 1.114 1.114 1.025 .317
Within 
groups 45.641 1.087
Total 46.755
Behavioral
Between
 groups .253 .253 .304 .585
Within
 groups 34.939 .832
Total 35.192
and processing, in order to enable systematically evaluation
of different courses of action.
Conclusion
The engagement of students into critical management stud-
ies is considered to be a challenge for management education
(Schwarz, 2013). On the other hand, working as a team may
expand one knowledge and some authors suggest that orga-
nizational learning is enhanced as more decisions are made
(Bettis-Outland, 2012). The BSG simulation requires partic-
ipants to conduct thorough analysis of their competitive
environment and strategic position to formulate and imple-
ment business strategies. Consequently, each team (company)
should make decisions on a multitude of variables, in order to
pursuit competitive advantage.
The obtained results on students’ self-perception of their
improvement on strategic competencies, suggest that the sim-
ulation has a positive value for students and contributes both
to their engament in the MBA program and to their knowl-
edge. Moreover, both the formulation and implemention skills
appear to be developed, which shows the inﬂuence of the prac-
tice on theory understanding and application in a changing
setting.
Furthermore, one important ﬁnding is that the decision-
making styles do not change as a result of the simulation,
with the exception of the analytical component, which is rein-
forced. Thus, we may conclude that although the students’
knowledge and strategic competencies could be expanded
with a business strategy simulation, the decision-making style
is not signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by practice, possibly because it
is driven by other forces, such as cultural factors and per-
sonality. In other words, in a business environment, it will
be possible to antecipate one reaction to a future situation,
if we
 already know his or her decision-making style. In our
view, this ﬁnding conﬁrms that “nothing is so theoretical as good
practice”.
r e f e r e n c e s
Bettis-Outland, H. (2012). Decision-making’s impact on
organizational
 learning and information overload. Journal of
Business
 Research, 65(6), 814–820.
Bouldgarides, J. D., & Rowe, A. J. (1983). Success patterns for
women
 managers. Business Forum, Spring, 22–24.
Garris, R., Ahlers, R., & Driskell, J. (2002). Games, motivation, and
learning:
 A research and practice model. Simulation and
Gaming,
 33(4), 441–467.
Hicks, C. R. (1982). Fundamental concepts in the design of experiments
(3rd
 ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Johnson, G., & Scholes, K. (2013). Exploring corporate strategy. New
York:
 Prentice Hall.
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of
learning
 and development.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Martinsons, M. G., & Davison, R. M. (2007). Strategic decision
making
 and support systems: Comparing American, Japanese
and
 Chinese management. Decision Support Systems, 43(1),
284–300.
Narayanan, V. K., Zane, L. J., & Kemmerer, B. (2011). The cognitive
perspective
 in strategy: An integrative review. Journal of
Management,
 37(1), 305–351.
Parayitam, S., & Dooley, R. S. (2009). The interplay between
cognitive-
 and affective conﬂict and cognition- and
affect-based
 trust in inﬂuencing decision outcomes. Journal of
Business
 Research, 62(8), 789–796.
Peterson, K., DeCato, L., & Kolb, D. (2015). Moving and learning:
Expanding
 style and increasing ﬂexibility. Journal of
Experiential
 Education, 38(3), 228–244.
Rowe, A. J., & Boulgarides, J. D. (1994). Managerial Decision Making.
Englewood
 Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Russ, T., & Drury-Grogan, M. (2013). Assessing the impact of a
business
 communication simulation on students’
self-perceptions.
 Communication Quarterly, 61(5), 584–595.
Schwarz, J. O. (2013). Business wargaming for teaching strategy
making.
 Futures, 51, 59–66.
Thomas, W., & Ladwig, T. (2015). Studying strategy formation in
small companies – A cognitive perspective. Journal of Strategy
and
 Management, 8(1.), 2–20.
Thompson, A. A., Peteraf, M. A., Gamble, J. E., Strickland, A. J.,
Janes,
 A., & Sutton, A. (2013). Crafting and executing strategy: The
quest
 for competitive advantage concepts and cases. Berkshire:
McGraw
 Hill.
Tompson, G. H., & Dass, P. (2000). Improving students’
self-efﬁcacy
 in strategic management: The relative impact of
cases
 and simulations. Simulation & Gaming, 31(1), 22–41.
Tunstall, R., & Martin Lynch, M. (2010). The role of simulation
case
 studies in enterprise education. Education + Training,
52(8/9),
 624–642.
Wheelen, T. L., Hunger, J. D., Hoffman, A. N., & Bamford, C. E.
(2015).
 Strategic management and business policy: Globalization,
innovation, and sustainability. Essex: Pearson.