<<<PAGE=1>>>
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258174144
‘Evidence Based Management’, or ‘Evidence Oriented
Organizing’? A critical realist perspective
Article  in   Organization · March 2013
DOI: 10.1177/1350508411435281
CITATIONS
66
READS
664
1 author:
Dennis Tourish
Royal Holloway University of London
104 PUBLICATIONS   4,640 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Dennis Tourish on 29 October 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
http://org.sagepub.com/
Organization
 http://org.sagepub.com/content/20/2/173
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1177/1350508411435281
 2013 20: 173 originally published online 23 January 2012Organization
Dennis Tourish
perspective
'Evidence Based Management', or 'Evidence Oriented Organizing'? A critical realist
 
 
Published by:
 http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:OrganizationAdditional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 http://org.sagepub.com/cgi/alertsEmail Alerts: 
 
 http://org.sagepub.com/subscriptionsSubscriptions:  
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.navReprints: 
 
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.navPermissions: 
 
 http://org.sagepub.com/content/20/2/173.refs.htmlCitations: 
 
 What is This?
 
- Jan 23, 2012OnlineFirst Version of Record 
 
- Feb 3, 2012OnlineFirst Version of Record 
 
- Mar 7, 2013Version of Record >> 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Organization
20(2) 173 –192
© The Author(s) 2012
Reprints and permission:  
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1350508411435281
org.sagepub.com
‘Evidence Based Management’, or 
‘Evidence Oriented Organizing’?  
A critical realist perspective
Dennis T ourish
University of London, UK
Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in what has been described as Evidence Based 
Management (henceforth, EBM). Its proponents assert that management practice should be 
based on a better appreciation of ‘what works’, as determined by the research evidence. This has 
attracted a varied critique, which suggests that the evidence base on most management issues is 
uncertain, and constrained by the interests of powerful organizational actors. EBM is depicted as 
an effort to marginalize more critical perspectives within the field. This article adopts a different 
approach. Drawing on a critical realist epistemology, it suggests that while research evidence is 
rarely conclusive it can aspire towards the progressive displacement of ignorance by knowledge. 
While some advocates of EBM would accept this, it is argued that such acceptance is more 
rhetorical than substantive, and is undermined by a standpoint which systematically downplays 
the power saturated organizational contexts in which evidence is assembled and employed in 
decision making. The key tenets of critical realism as applied to EBM are therefore considered. 
Critical realism acknowledges epistemological relativism, yet also accepts the need to construct 
robust causal explanations for social phenomena. Recognizing that organizations are co-created 
and co-defined by multiple actors, rather than only by managers, it is argued that we should replace 
the concept of ‘Evidence Based Management’ with the notion of ‘Evidence Oriented Organizing’.
Keywords
critical realism, evidence based management (EBM), evidence oriented organizing (EOO)
EBM has been defined by its key proponents as the systematic use of the best available evidence 
to improve management practice (e.g. Briner et al., 2009; Latham, 2007; Rousseau, 2006; Rousseau 
et al., 2008). Much of the writing on the subject invokes the precedent of ‘evidence based 
Corresponding author:
Dennis Tourish, School of Management, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX, UK.
Email: Dennis.Tourish@rhul.ac.uk
435281 2012ORG20210.1177/1350508411435281TourishOrganization
Article
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=4>>>
174 Organization 20(2)
medicine’, an approach ‘which draws on “science” and all its modernist trappings of truth and 
progress and is presented as rational and politically neutral’ (Hewison, 2004: 336). The last decade 
has witnessed an explosive growth of interest in the management version of this approach. Reay 
and colleagaues’ (2009) review identified 144 papers dealing with EBM since 1948, but only eight 
of these had appeared before 1995. Beyond the journal literature, several books from key figures 
have also been produced, aimed at both management and academic audiences (e.g. Latham, 2009; 
Locke, 2009; Pfeffer and Sutton, 2006).
1 Their overall intention is to have a transformative impact 
on both the theory and practice of management.
This article explores the strengths and weaknesses of the concept, and of the critiques that it has 
attracted. What counts as ‘evidence’ in the field has long been a contested issue, with scholars 
differing substantially in their assessments of the ontological status of organizations, and the con-
sequent implications for management theory and practice (e.g. Clegg et al., 2006; Pfeffer; 1993; 
Van Maanen, 1995). There have also been intense controversies over what qualifies as ‘rigorous’ 
research, and the extent to which anecdotes, case studies, journalistic accounts and qualitative 
work should be deployed when developing hypotheses, or testing and refining key theories, 
particularly in relation to research on goal setting (Guest, 2007; Latham and Locke, 2009; Locke 
and Latham, 2009; Ordonez et al., 2009a, 20099b). A critique of EBM has thus emerged that 
challenges its alleged privileging of a management voice above that of other organizational actors, 
and questions its commitment to the establishment of a coherent knowledge base from which 
allegedly ‘best’ practices can be identified. From this perspective, the search for EBM is at best 
misguided, and at worst possibly part of an attempt to strengthen managerial power at the expense 
of other organizational stakeholders, while also enforcing a positivist and functionalist paradigm 
within the field of organization studies (e.g. Learmonth, 2008, 2009).
This article argues that a critical realist perspective can facilitate a deeper exchange on these 
issues. In particular, critical realism proposes a series of insights by which we can seek to hypoth-
esize the causal or retroductive mechanisms underlying social processes, and by which we can at 
least aspire towards the gradual reduction of what is not known (Bhaskar, 1978, 1998a). This takes 
a more subtle account of the variegated interests which populate organizations than mainstream 
writers on EBM have yet recognized. Utilizing a critical realist frame of reference, I explore the 
core notions of the EBM movement, while illustrating how critical realism can offer a richer 
epistemological insight into the search for evidence, meaning, and theory in organization studies. 
This article therefore outlines the key propositions of the EBM movement, problematizes them, 
and outlines a critical realist framework that offers an alternative account of causality and theory 
building in organization studies. In so doing, I also suggest that we move on from the notion of 
Evidence Based Management, and reposition the discussion in terms of ‘Evidence Oriented 
Organizing’ (henceforth, EOO).
Evidence Based Management: its claims and intentions
The core argument in favour of EBM is stated succinctly by Rousseau et al. (2008: 476) as follows: 
‘Effective use of evidence ... means to assemble and interpret a body of primary studies relevant to 
a question of fact, and then take appropriate action based upon the conclusions drawn’. A sense of 
urgency pervades this literature, driven by a recognition that many organizational interventions 
occur despite a significant body of evidence suggesting that they will have either no positive ben-
efits, or prove harmful. While many practitioners are devoted to what they see as ‘best practice’, 
Lawler (2007: 1033) has noted that ‘In some cases, there is simply no evidence that validates what 
are thought to be best practices, while in other cases there is evidence to suggest that what are 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Tourish 175
thought to be best practices are inferior practices’. Notoriously, downsizing remains a popular 
palliative for organizational ailments despite abundant empirical evidence that it reduces trust, 
lowers morale, damages productivity and profitability and often results in the loss of knowledge 
that is vital for future organizational survival (e.g. Campion et al., 2011; Cascio, 2002; Morris 
et al., 1999; Tourish et al., 2004).
The solution, as Rousseau (2007: 1038) envisages it, is that scholars should ‘…provide, main -
tain, and update online, user-friendly, plain language summaries of the practice principles that 
the best available evidence supports, while sharing information regarding their effective use as 
well as their limitations’. Many have noted (e.g. Starkey and Madan, 2001) that a great deal of 
management practice is oriented around fads that are often derived from a proliferation of popu -
lar texts which owe little to research, rigorous or otherwise. However, they gain credence because 
management research is often perceived by managers as indifferent and/or irrelevant to their 
needs (Starkey et al., 2009). As envisaged by advocates of EBM, summaries of best practice that 
are derived from research can ease this problem, by providing managers with an empirically 
validated basis for more thoughtful, rational and effective action (Rousseau and McCarthy, 
2007). It follows that management syllabi within Universities should take account of the key 
principles guiding the EBM movement, and thereby ensure that managers receive greater encour -
agement to ‘embrace scientific evidence’ (Charlier et al., 2011: 223).
The case for EBM problematized
However, the advocates of integrative literature reviews and best practice guides themselves 
acknowledge that all is not well with the task of producing them. Rousseau et al. (2008: 476) noted 
that the evidence on many management issues is ‘seldom assembled or interpreted in the system -
atic fashion needed to permit their confident use’. There is a lack of coherent, systematic and 
agreed knowledge that can be transmitted to managers, either during their formal education in 
business schools or afterwards. Moreover, many attempted literature reviews have been criticized 
as being overly descriptive, for including writers based on the implicit biases of those compiling 
the reviews, and for a lack of critical evaluation (Tranfield et al., 2003). The consequence is that 
research is often misused or misunderstood, and that limited and inconclusive findings are over 
generalized. Rousseau et al. (2008) view the reluctance of academics to address these issues by 
producing the literature reviews that are deemed necessary as a quirk of the academy, suggesting 
that organizational theorists have come to value novelty over convergence (see also Pfeffer, 2005). 
This compels them to engage in ever more abstruse theoretical squabbles, in an effort to differenti-
ate themselves within what has become an increasingly crowded marketplace for ideas. The result 
is a neglect of practice that should be corrected, through a collective effort of will. This radical 
reorientation is a key goal of the EBM movement.
The assumption underpinning this is that the production of integrated studies is generally 
feasible. Even from within a purely EBM paradigm this is questionable. Rousseau et al (2008), 
in an otherwise strong advocacy of EBM, provide a key example of the difficulty, on the issue of 
incentive pay. Based on his survey of the evidence Pfeffer (1998) suggested that it does not 
motivate improved individual job performance. In contrast, an overview by Rynes et al. (2005) 
concluded the opposite, and proposed several mechanisms whereby it is claimed that improved 
job performance will result. While enthusiasts for EBM seem to believe that accumulating and 
summarizing more and more studies will produce ‘convergence’, despite the fact that many of 
them reach contradictory conclusions, this example suggest that the problem may be more deeply 
rooted than is imagined. There are inherent difficulties of study design, conflicting theoretical 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=6>>>
176 Organization 20(2)
paradigms, sample sizes, and multiple variables which means that on many important issues 
there is no research convergence merely awaiting discovery, and to be then reported in practi -
tioner friendly summaries. Rather, there is discord, conflict and deeply rooted vested interests that 
seem programmed to resist reconciliation. The urge to produce convergent studies fails to 
account for why some issues are studied and attract funding rather than others, or to offer a clear 
view of how research priorities should be determined. Managers, for example, might well be 
interested in studies into how downsizing can be ‘improved’, such as that of Campion et al. 
(2011). They are unlikely to be equally fascinated by studies into how resistance to downsizing 
can be made more effective, or inclined to offer access for case studies.
Accordingly, the research process which produces the evidence on which EBM bases itself 
cannot be value free and objective. As Weiner (2003) has noted, researchers sometimes report data 
selectively, choose informants for interviews that they believe will be particularly sympathetic to a 
given point of view and become cheerleaders for various interventions rather than dispassionate 
researchers into their effects. Ioannidis (2005) has argued that, for these and other associated 
reasons, most published research findings in most fields are in fact false. Proponents of EBM have 
yet to credibly indicate how studies which offer divergent findings, often caused by such factors, 
can be integrated so that they offer definitive (or close-to-definitive) conclusions on heavily 
contested issues.
Rather, the problem is evaded by rooting the case for EBM within an overtly positivist paradigm, 
despite occasional claims to a more pluralistic theoretical orientation. Thus, it is claimed that
Evidence is the essence of human knowledge. It deals with the regularities our senses and measuring tools 
can detect. Scientific evidence is knowledge derived through controlled test and observation  ... evidence-
based management is the complimentary (sic) use of scientific evidence and local business evidence. 
(Rousseau et al., 2008: 481)
Knowledge is depicted here as objective, value free and weighted in favour of methods such as 
experimentation that are overwhelmingly quantitative in nature. Certain forms of knowledge and 
research methods are favoured over others (Morrell, 2008). Similar problems have been identified 
in debates over the role of systematic review in educational research, with those advocating its use 
(e.g. Evans and Benefield, 2001) allegedly prioritizing both positivist research for inclusion in 
such reviews, and also applying positivist models to the job of producing the reviews themselves 
(Hammersley, 2001). I noted, at the outset of this article, that the EBM movement draws explicitly 
on the precedent of evidence based medicine. But even within healthcare there have been numer -
ous controversies on such issues as the quality of various types of evidence, and the relative weight 
that should be attached to some forms of evidence over others; the problems that have been found 
in attempts to change practice in the light of evidence; and how various professional groups 
respond, or ought to respond, to different forms of evidence (Hewison, 2004). While similar issues 
arise in the case of EBM, the challenges are mostly side-stepped by its advocates. An approach is 
adopted in which the world of management practice is simply ‘out there’, awaiting discovery. The 
issue of how to adjudicate between different truth claims is thus purely technical—we need to do 
more studies, until the issue in question is resolved. However, as one leading exponent of critical 
realism within management studies has expressed it,
‘There is no theory-neutral observation, description, interpretation, theorization, explanation, or whatever. 
There is, in other words, no unmediated access to the world: access is always mediated. Whenever we 
reflect upon an entity, our sense data is always mediated by a pre-existing stock of conceptual resources 
which we use to interpret, make sense of and understand what is, and take appropriate action’ (Fleetwood, 
2004: 30).
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Tourish 177
An additional problem, from the standpoint of determining what evidence should be used and 
of assessing its objectivity, is that precisely what is studied, and how it is studied, itself reflects 
powerful sectional interests. Managers are not merely waiting for research to facilitate subtle 
changes in course direction. Rather, they are committed to many of their practices, which reflect 
strongly held views of the world and are perceived as being in their own interests. Rousseau and 
McCarthy (2007) have themselves anticipated that managers may be resistant to possible research 
findings—such as any that suggests they should de-centralize decision making, and place less 
emphasis on powerful, charismatic visionary models of leadership.
This creates a twofold problem for EBM. Firstly, it places limits on the kind of research that is 
likely to be conducted. Funding increasingly follows lines of inquiry deemed practical, applied and 
‘relevant’ to current rather than hypothetical future business needs. Secondly, the assumption that 
summaries of research findings will be welcomed by managers, and that insight alone will be 
sufficient to reorient their practice, may be in error.
The evidence base for EBM 
A key paradox within the debate is that the evidence base on which EBM rests is itself question -
able. Reay and colleagues’ (2009) overview noted that 53.6% of the papers on EBM that they 
identified argued for or against it purely on the basis of the author’s opinion, rather than offering 
any empirical evidence in either direction. This may arise, in part, from the nature of the aca -
demic publication process, which militates against the steady accumulation of empirically 
informed wisdom on management practice. A study of papers in the Academy of Management 
Journal over five decades highlights a growing focus on theory development, and hence con -
struct proliferation, even when such constructs differ little from what existed before (Colquitt 
and Zapata-Phelan, 2007). Such practices hinder the accumulation of empirical information 
about issues for which no theory yet exists, however pressing a problem may be in the real world 
of management practice (Hambrick, 2007). In consequence, scholars enter into ever higher states 
of specialization. Few are therefore equipped to deal with rival truth claims, or are impartial 
enough to do so (Donaldson, 2009)—a challenge for those attempting to produce integrative 
literature reviews.
Consistent with this, as Rousseau et al (2008) noted, major academic journals are generally not 
interested in replication studies. Journal editors usually insist that articles must offer something 
‘new’, and tend to regard replication as a recycling process that lacks sufficient novelty (Madden 
et al., 1995). This discourages researchers from utilizing perfectly adequate existing theory to 
explain empirical observations, in a search for novelty that displaces the gradual accumulation of 
more and more relevant data. But the dearth of replication in organization studies means that rogue 
findings or poorly designed studies often go unchallenged, and can become conventional wisdom 
(Tsang and Kwan, 1999). Thus, Kacmar and Whitfield (2000) found that only 9% of the theoretical 
models in articles published in the Academy of Management Review  are ever tested. They con -
cluded that ‘ ... the vast majority of published ideas in management are submitted to no tests at all, 
a handful are submitted to one test, and only a minuscule few are tested over and over again or in 
multiple ways’ (p. 1350). The evidence base for many management ideas is thus weak. Even where 
evidence exists, it is often not as firm as its advocates maintain—a point acknowledged by one key 
advocate of its use in the field of healthcare (Stewart, 2002). Within management studies, for 
example, researchers may place too much emphasis on statistical significance (Starbuck, 2004) 
rather than effect sizes (Ziliak and McCloskey, 2008), thereby overstating the generalizability of 
their data. All this poses a problem for literature reviews that seek to produce actionable knowledge 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=8>>>
178 Organization 20(2)
based on robust evidence—there may not be enough of it to serve this purpose, nor much prospect 
of it emerging. While this remains the case, the potential to produce viable, compelling and agreed 
integrative literature reviews is limited.
Assumptions of rational decision making
A core assumption within the EBM movement appears to be that decision making is, should be or 
can be a wholly rational process, in which for example self-interest is subordinated to a calculation 
of a wider group or societal interest. Rynes et al. (2002) noted with some alarm that less than 1% 
of HR managers read the academic literature regularly. The proffered solution is that they should 
do so, thereby overcoming the problem that they are insufficiently educated in how ‘to know or use 
scientific evidence’ (Rousseau, 2006: 262).
‘Irrational’ management action—i.e. that which damages a wider organizational interest—is 
depicted here as flowing from a simple absence of knowledge, rather than self-interest, malign 
intent or wilful ignorance (Learmonth and Harding, 2006). Yet it is clear that action which damages 
a hypothetical collective organizational need may well be driven by self-interest, vested interest or 
disinterest in the full awareness that these wider considerations are being endangered. Hope’s 
(2004) study of the evidence gathered on an initiative to reduce burglary rates found that the policy 
implications were ignored when they conflicted with the preferred options of those making actual 
decisions, with even the analysis of the data presented in official reports differing markedly from 
that of those who conducted the research. Flyvbjerg’s (1998) detailed study of town planning in 
Denmark demonstrated that the greater the power held by individuals or groups the less they felt 
the need to assemble evidence or consider means-end justifications. Studies of Enron’s collapse 
suggest that the organization’s key leaders may have been well aware that their business model was 
unsustainable, but set this inconvenient truth aside in the interests of their own short term personal 
interests (Tourish and Vatcha, 2005). Beyond these factors, as Hodgkinson ( in press) points out, 
busy decision makers also frequently rely on intuition when making decisions, rather than more 
formal sources of evidence.
Moreover, it is not clear that even when evidence is accumulated, and considered, it will point 
unambiguously in a particular direction. For example, a study of health prioritization in New 
Zealand explored how a number of government agencies all gathered evidence on the issue, driven 
by the conviction that policy should be informed by better evidence. They then reached different 
policy conclusions, despite sharing a common evidence base (Tenbensel, 2004). Thus, when it is 
not obvious that data should be interpreted in only one way, extra information may generate doubts 
about action rather than clarity on the way forward (Learmonth, 2006; Weick, 2001). The result can 
be stasis—the opposite of the EBM movement’s intentions.
In short, studies from multiple perspectives demonstrate that action is driven by many impera -
tives that sometimes include rational reflection but which also often displace it. However, advo -
cates of EBM tend to assume that if managers simply realized that their actions were damaging, 
irrational, selfish or insufficiently rooted in an evidence base they would change their model of 
decision making. In violation of their own injunctions to utilize evidence in support of arguments, 
they offer no data to support this conclusion.
Privileging managerial definitions of reality and evidence
A further critical issue in the field is that the intended audience for management research envisaged 
by proponents of EBM is entirely composed of managers. Typically, the literature on EBM does 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Tourish 179
not acknowledge such issues as power, conflict and inequality (Learmonth and Harding, 2006). 
Rather, employee/ managerial interests are conflated in a manner that is even less credible after the 
recent economic recession. Thus, EBM advocates routinely equate managerial insight and action 
with the interests of employees (e.g. Bartunek, 2007). It is assumed, without any evidence, that the 
managerial voice articulates a universal interest, and that what preoccupies managers must also 
preoccupy other organizational actors, to the same degree and from the same perspective.
It follows that EBM should focus overwhelmingly on issues of concern to managers, and that 
the research agenda of management academics should be shaped accordingly. It therefore shares 
common ground with those who advocate that management research should be more ‘relevant’ to 
the needs of practitioners (e.g. Gulati, 2007; McGahan, 2007; Tushman and O’Reilly, 2007). 
Rousseau (2006: 256) makes the intent explicit: ‘Through evidence-based management, practicing 
managers develop into experts who make organizational decisions informed by social science and 
organizational research—part of the zeitgeist moving professional decisions away from personal 
preference and unsystematic experience toward those based on the best available scientific evi -
dence’. While Briner et al. (2009: 19) suggests that decision making informed by EBM should also 
consider ‘the perspectives of those people who might be affected by the decision’, they also affirm 
that ‘the start of the process is the practitioner’s or manager’s problem, question or issue’ (p. 23).
The general assumption is that managers are the ‘experts’ on the multiple issues that confront 
most workplaces, and thus are the ultimate arbiters of what matters. This forced correlation between 
the assumed expertise of managers on the one hand, and ‘science’ and ‘evidence’ on the other, sug-
gests that managerial decisions can be placed beyond dispute (Learmonth, 2011). It is equally 
plausible to suggest that expertise may be more widely distributed than such hierarchical models 
acknowledge. Failing to recognize this, some EBM advocates blur the line between research and 
consulting. For example, Cascio (2007: 1012) urges academics to design their empirical studies 
with the possibility of implementation to the fore, suggesting that such research ‘will find a ready 
market of available buyers in the marketplace for ideas’. This, clearly, has implications for the kind 
of research likely to be done, and which will find eventual inclusion in integrative literature 
reviews.
The argument has therefore been made that the future of business schools would be more secure 
if academics were to adopt a greater focus on the practical problems faced by managers (e.g. 
Bartunek, 2007). If managers and employees shared identical interests this might not matter. But if 
this symmetry is absent the interests of particular stakeholders will become privileged above those 
of others, with implications for what kind of questions get asked, what research gets done, what 
kind of knowledge is accumulated and hence summarized in practitioner friendly summaries, and 
what its eventual impact on practice is likely to be. This trend is already well advanced. As 
Collinson (2002: 42) has noted, it is now difficult ‘to undertake qualitative, critical empirical 
research  ... Where research is funded, it is increasingly managerialist and prescriptive and tends to 
be sub-contracted to research assistants’ (emphasis in original). While Hopwood (2009: 517) has 
complained that critical scholarship puts ‘less and less effort ... into really probing fieldwork’, the 
political, institutional and social context in which such research occurs suggests that the problem 
cannot be remedied merely by an act of will. Rather, the growth of managerial controls, assessment 
exercises, audits and associated demands for accountability implies that the tendency towards 
favouring certain easily quantifiable kinds of research above others will intensify (Bell, 2011; 
Learmonth et al., in press). The privileging of a managerial voice above others, routine in the EBM 
oriented literature, further compounds the problem. Integrative literature reviews will therefore 
draw on data that is inherently biased towards the priorities of powerful interest groups, and on 
findings which reflect sectional rather than unitarist interests.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=10>>>
180 Organization 20(2)
Critical realist perspectives, in common with other critically oriented paradigms, attach more 
significance to what have been described as ‘the institutionalized frameworks of power relations 
that constitute the ‘structures of domninancy’ within which specific governance mechanisms, 
programmes and practices emerge and are, eventually, legitimated as stabilized regulative orders’ 
(Newton et al., 2011: 14). It is such processes of legitimization, reification and naturalization that 
the EBM movement seems to ignore, and which I argue limits the theoretical utility of the notion 
of EBM as a means of understanding the uses and abuses of ‘evidence’ within the broad field of 
organization studies. The issue is whether a reappraisal of its core tenets from a critical realist per-
spective can offer a more fruitful means of engaging with the need to address the social problems 
that afflict the world, without attaching excessive priority to sectional interests in the manner which 
advocates of EBM seem prone to do.
A critical realist perspective
Critical realism offers several inter-related presumptions about the nature of the social world that 
have the potential to transform the present debate about EBM. In particular, it offers ‘A commit -
ment to a realist ontology, i.e. to the existence of causal mechanisms whose interactions generate 
the events and occurrences of the world. These mechanisms may be unobservable directly (e.g. 
social structures or ideas and categories) yet we can accept their existence because of their causal 
efficacy. This undermines the empiricist illusion of the primacy of empirical data (the actualist 
fallacy)’ (Syed et al., 2009). But critical realists also acknowledge what Lawson (2003: 162) 
has described as ‘epistemological relativism’: that is, they recognize that any depiction of social 
reality is to some degree affected by the social conditions that give rise to its production. This 
position is, of course, shared by social constructionists (e.g. Pfohl, 2008). However, critical realists 
emphasize, to a greater extent than most constructionist accounts, that social reality ‘consist of 
much more than the linguistic, symbolic, and discursive resources and practices through which 
we come to describe, understand and reflect on it’ (Reed, 2009a: 434). While acknowledging that 
our knowledge about the world is relative and socially constrained, critical realism affirms a dis -
tinction between the transitive or subject dependent aspects of knowledge and the intransitive or 
actually existing and real objects of our knowledge (Bhaskar, 1998b). Of course, this distinction 
is not so hard and fast in the social sciences, since the social world is itself socially constructed 
and includes knowledge within it (Sayer, 2000). As Al-Amoudi and Willmott (2011: 31) summa -
rize it, ‘…the transitive is nested in the intransitive and agents’ concepts are constitutive, though 
not exhaustive, of the social’.
The objective of inquiry therefore remains to increase what is known and reduce what is not 
known. This also compels a recognition that the positivistic split between facts and values is falla-
cious, since all social theories are evaluative as well as descriptive (Mingers, 2009). Management 
straddles the domain between the objective and the subjective, and while aspiring to achieve 
greater knowledge about the world must recognize that elements of both ignorance and subjectivity 
will always remain. To suggest that improvements in research techniques will somehow yield 
‘better’ end products and thus overcome this problem is to miss the point (Fox, 2003). Rather, there 
is space for both knowledge production and a contest about values, ethics, meaning, interpretation, 
significance and importance.
In particular, critical realists seek to explore the underlying causal factors or mechanisms that 
produce observable events (Reed, 2005a). This involves crafting hypotheses through a process of 
conceptualization described as ‘retroduction’. Possible causal mechanisms are proposed from 
observable events, and further research seeks to test their efficacy. Theoretical abstraction and 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=11>>>
Tourish 181
model building is central to this process (Reed, 2009b). Knowledge is therefore always provi -
sional. As Al-Amoudi and Willmott (2011: 30) express it, ‘Retroductive judgements provide pos-
sible but historically contingent explanations of certain states of affairs’. Thus, it is argued that 
‘some representations constitute better knowledge of the world than others’ (Fairclough, 2005: 
922). The social world exists independently of our perceptions of it, requiring us to distinguish 
between ontology—what is—and epistemology—how we know it. While linguistic systems per -
mit a theoretically infinite variety of accounts of any given social situation, in actual practice the 
range of accounts offered is socially limited by the manner in which language systems and other 
aspects of social structure interact with each other (Fairclough, 2005). This version of realism is 
critical in that it recognizes the limits human perception and social relations place on our apprecia-
tion of reality, and that our perceptions of the social world are inherently value laden (Syed et al., 
2009). But it also acknowledges the limits on relativism, stresses the regularities of human behav-
iour as well as its discontinuities, and explores what is known as well as what is unknown. Each 
such account of reality is therefore constrained, pinched and tenuous—but seeks to move us ever 
closer to a more reliable depiction of the world as it is.
Hesketh and Fleetwood (2006) illustrate the management implications in terms of the debate 
about the relationship between particular bundles of Human Resource Management practices 
and organizational performance. As they note, statistical associations do not constitute an expla -
nation. If an association between such practices and performance is shown to exist, we still need 
to know why such an impact has arisen. For critical realists statistical significance is a point of 
departure for the deeper exploration of complex causal connections and the production of more 
robust explanations for observable events. This further implies that what is sought is the progres-
sive erosion of ignorance in favour of greater knowledge, and the creation of spaces where ethi -
cal and other issues can find a greater purchase in the research process than traditional positivist 
approaches normally allow.
While some advocates of critical realism in management studies may err on the side of suggest-
ing that foundational truth claims are more accessible, possible and certain than is consistent with 
a due acknowledgement of epistemological relativism (see Al-Amoudi and Willmott, 2011, for full 
discussion), this article utilizes a critical realist perspective to assert that we can seek to reduce 
what is unknown, without imagining that the task will ever be finally completed. Thus, in contra -
distinction to a purely positivistic perspective, the socially constructed nature of our knowledge 
about the world is acknowledged. There is no ‘absolute and universal guarantor for anything’ 
(Reed, 2005b:1665). As Czarniawska (1997: 55) puts it, ‘the construction of meaning  is always 
social’. Facts aren’t just out there, awaiting impersonal discovery. But critical realists emphasize 
that not all knowledge claims are equal. Some interpretations of the world—including the social 
world—are closer to an accurate depiction of causality than others, and are subject to empirical 
tests which may be imperfect but which aspire towards the gradual reduction in what is unknown.
EBM and critical realism: the paradox of inconsistent application
Rousseau et al (2008), in particular, has made some attempt to locate EBM within a perspective 
informed by critical realism, urging the use of multiple methods and triangulation to probe various 
causal accounts of organizational phenomena. However, this application of critical realism seems 
limited to a somewhat formal acknowledgement of methodological pluralism that is, in practice 
(and as discussed above) subordinated to the greater priority placed on positivistic approaches. 
Moreover, Rousseau (2006: 267) also asserts that evidence ‘affords higher-quality managerial 
decisions that are better implemented, and …yields outcomes more in line with organizational 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=12>>>
182 Organization 20(2)
goals’. Organizations are thus reified and hierarchy naturalized, with the foregrounded assumption 
that goals determined by senior managers capture a unitarist organizational interest. This privileg-
ing of a managerial voice above others is inconsistent with the critical realist understanding that 
social reality is not uniformly perceived. While ‘observation, interpretation and explanation are 
mediated by theory’ (Al-Amoudi and Willmott, 2011: 34), they are also mediated by stratified 
social relationships and discordant interests. Organizational actors form their own perceptions of 
phenomena that are more or less accurate and which enter into conflict with accounts produced by 
others. Accounts of social reality can of course be subject to testing. But the critical perspective 
which critical realism brings to bear suggests that complete coherence and agreement is unlikely to 
be achieved. This means that the stress which EBM puts on the value of integrative literature 
reviews, to establish a consensus which management practitioners will find useful, is misplaced. 
The invocation of critical realism in the context of EBM is, therefore, a limited and contradictory 
use of the theoretical possibilities that critical realism affords on the issue.
The question thus is: can a more consistent critical realist orientation inform a more fruitful 
agenda on the issue of EBM, particularly in terms of the notion of Evidence Oriented Organizing 
(henceforth, EOO)?
T owards the notion of Evidence Oriented Organizing
The notion of EBM presupposes that organizations have a unitarist interest, and that managers are 
the prime arbiters of what matters. But, from the critical realist perspective articulated in this arti-
cle, organizations can be viewed as simultaneously differentiated and integrated, on a number of 
dimensions. I therefore suggest that the notion of ‘evidence based organizing’ is more likely to 
acknowledge the variegated interests that populate organizations, lead to research agendas which 
are more inclusive in nature, and suggest a more pluralistic approach to what counts as evidence. 
A different view of organization is intrinsic to this approach.
As Cooren et al (2006: 2–3) express it:
organization emerges in the interplay of two interrelated spaces: the textual-conceptual world of ideas and 
interpretations and the practical world of an object-oriented conversation directed to action ... The resulting 
image of organizational interaction is of an essentially fluid and open-ended process of organizing, in 
which inherited positions of strength are exploited creatively by the participants.
The recognition that sensemaking, agency and the processes whereby co-orientation between 
organizational actors is mediated through language means to acknowledge that organizing is ‘an 
act of juggling between co-evolutionary loops of discursive phenomena’ (Guney, 2006: 34). 
Organizations therefore struggle to create shared meanings between organizational actors. Thus, 
the privileging of a management voice in determining the importance of issues to be researched or 
the utility of research outcomes, as is routine in the EBM oriented literature, reifies power relations 
in a way that is explicitly challenged by critical perspectives (e.g. Clegg, 2009). As Hodgkinson 
(in press) expresses it: ‘the idea that social science can be applied in the workplace in an apolitical 
and interest-free fashion is a fundamentally untenable position’.
The notion of EOO is thus consistent with challenges to the view of organizations as having 
a taken for granted existence as material entitles, separate and apart from their discursive  
constructions (Gergen, 2000; Westwood and Linstead, 2001). Rather, the organizational world 
can be depicted as a plenum of agencies. Their intersection is what constitutes reality. Thus:
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=13>>>
Tourish 183
According to this approach, we never leave the terra firma of interaction, but we then need to acknowledge 
the interplay and contribution of human and nonhuman doings. In other words, the socioconstructionists 
are right to start from interaction, but they need to widen the extension (and intension) of this concept to 
recognize that nonhumans also do things. As for the materialists, they are right to recognize that humans 
are acted on as much as they act, but they need to recognize that using analytical shortcuts like ‘structures, 
‘power’, or ‘ideology’ to account for what influences human action and discourse does not do justice to the 
complexity of the phenomena they are studying. (Cooren, 2006: 82)
But, simultaneously, it is also recognized that ‘real world material conditions and social 
relations ... constrain and shape the discursive construction of organizational reality in any particu-
lar socio-historical situation’ (Reed, 2005a: 629). Agents and structures are mutually constitutive. 
Thus, advocates of EBM afford a privileged epistemological status to managerial accounts of 
organizational life, with their priorities, perspectives and prescriptions viewed as articulating a 
reality that simply ‘is’, and which therefore lies beyond interrogation. This kind of discourse can 
be employed, as Willmott (1993) argues, to impose a uniform definition of reality on organizational 
actors which, although couched in timeless and universalist terms, may actually be more consistent 
with particular sectional interests than it acknowledges.
However, it is possible to view organization as dealing with how ‘socially constructed institu -
tions are reproduced and transformed by the accounting activities of people in interdependent 
(joint) action as they make sense of what they do together’ (Varey, 2006: 191). Organization, ulti-
mately, emerges as a phenomenon that is co-produced and co-reproduced (within certain limits) by 
the discursive interactions between organizational actors. This does not exclude causal analysis. 
Rather, and consistent with process perspectives on organization theory, causality is seen as rooted 
within a ceaseless chain of preceding and succeeding events (Langley, 2009). Organizational 
phenomena are regarded ‘as (re)created through interacting agents embedded in sociomaterial 
practices, whose actions are mediated by institutional, linguistic, and objectual artefacts’ (Langley 
and Tsoukas, 2010: 9). Flowing from this, and informed by critical realism, an EOO perspective 
suggests the need to acknowledge that all organizational actors have a stake in determining what 
are important research topics, rather than just managers. It also means that research on these topics 
has to encompass a plurality of voices and accord them due weight in accounts of organizational 
phenomena, as well as in identifying courses of action that may seem to be suggested by research 
investigations.
The issue of appraisal demonstrates the theoretical and practical implications that arise. 
Rotundo (2009), in a text devoted to showcasing the implications of EBM in the field of organi -
zational behaviour, produces a guide for managers that purports to indicate how performance 
appraisal can be used ‘to improve individual and firm performance’. Managers’ position of 
power over others is taken for granted throughout, alongside other familiar domain assumptions 
such as the unproblematic nature of defining individual and firm performance. Employee per -
spectives are marginalized. The practice of management is thus reified and naturalized—that is, 
socially created entities produced by power relations are treated as purely natural and hence 
enduring artefacts. This approach also avoids any consideration of the relationship between 
means and ends, and so constitutes an example of a performative agenda that purports to serve 
unitary ends while actually advancing sectional interests. Consistent with the work of Townley 
(2003), an EOO perspective would challenge the possibility of managers acquiring objective 
knowledge about employee performance, and foreground the question of who controls the labour 
process at work—and how this control is exercised. It would problematize the issue of the infor -
mation that is available to appraisers, locating its availability in the context of surveillance 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=14>>>
184 Organization 20(2)
mechanisms and power interests (Sewell and Barker, 2006). In short, it would suggest that such 
issues as performance, goals and accountability are co-created constructs and that evidence on 
any aspect of them needs to address the perspectives of the many organizational actors that are 
involved rather than restrict its imagined audience to a managerial elite.
This issue has a parallel in ‘evidence based medicine’, which as discussed above has directly 
inspired the EBM movement. Oakley (1984) notes a tendency within the collection of databases 
and evidence summaries in medicine provided by the Cochrane Collaboration and various other 
organizations to prioritize the views and perspectives of professionals. Her work suggests that radi-
cally different research questions could be raised in the field of maternal care by drawing on the 
perspectives of mothers rather than doctors. Since then, particularly in social care, greater care has 
been taken to involve service users, whose perspective adds a richer layer of insight to discussions 
of policy-research links (Young et al., 2002). The notion of EOO applies a similar approach to the 
field of organization.
It may not always point to easily actionable conclusions, as imagined by advocates of EBM—
e.g. ‘The manager should recognize employees for goal attainment and explain how the goal 
helps the group, the firm and the individual’s career development’ (Rotundo, 2009: 94). Such 
depictions of employees as the relatively passive recipients of wisdom handed down by impar -
tial and objective managers, in pursuit of a unitary interest, are incompatible with the co-creation 
of organizational action and the view of organizations as a plenum of agencies. Rather, an EOO 
perspective would make use of a wider range of perspectives in shaping a research agenda, 
deriving data, evaluating its significance and determining its applied implications. It therefore 
redefines the notion of ‘relevance’ and implications for practice in terms of a much wider organi -
zational constituency.
‘Evidence Based Management’ or ‘Evidence Oriented 
Organizing’?––Six key propositions
The previous discussion suggests that the notion of EOO can have a transformative impact on the 
discussion of EBM in six key respects:
1 Advocates of EBM have suggested that integrative literature reviews should provide man-
agers with definitive insights into ‘what works’. It follows that managers will be able to 
take particular courses of action—on such issues as performance appraisal interviews—
with a high degree of confidence that they will have predictable effects (e.g. Rotundo, 
2009). On the other hand, critics have argued that the evidence base behind management 
‘science’ is so affected by the interpretive tropes used by humans to process information 
that high degrees of ambiguity and contestation will remain. A critical realist epistemology 
would suggest that literature reviews should aspire to the more modest goal of the progres-
sive reduction of ignorance. Evidence is emergent, fluid, multifaceted, contested and open, 
rather than definitive, solid, unproblematic and closed. As Bhaskar (1998b: 14) expressed 
it: ‘reality is a potentially infinite totality, of which we know something but not how much’. 
But while total knowledge about anything is impossible to achieve, some causal explana -
tions approximate more closely to reality than others. Literature reviews and other forms of 
knowledge production should therefore aim to acknowledge both what is known and what 
is unknown about important organizational phenomena. For example, such reviews should 
clearly discuss what light the evidence base sheds on those causal theories that have been 
debated within the research community, and where we can be more or less sure that they are 
incorrect.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=15>>>
Tourish 185
2 Integrative literature reviews should make critical use of a wide range of evidence  
types—including qualitative and quantitative research, case studies, journalistic accounts 
and anecdotes. Such forms of evidence are useful for the process of retroduction and can 
inform the development of theories that will lead to continuously improved forms of 
empirical research in due course. Research should therefore avoid privileging particular 
methods of data collection and analysis above others (Ackroyd, 2004). Choices of method 
ought to be appropriate to the object of study (Lawson, 1997), difficult as this sometimes 
is to determine. Thus, in opposition to purely positivistic and functionalist theoretical 
paradigms, the goal of social science is viewed as being to generate plausible rather than 
definitive hypotheses about causal relationships and from which fresh streams of research 
can be developed. Both quantitative and qualitative methods have strengths and limita-
tions, including the difficulty of generalizing from inherently limited data sets. But if 
they are properly utilized they may still serve the aim of reducing ignorance, increasing 
knowledge and generating insight. Thus, causal accounts are embedded in deeper process 
studies of preceding and succeeding events, mediated through linguistic and non-linguistic 
artefacts.
3 A  critical realist perspective recognizes that our perceptions of the social world are con -
structed by disparate interest groups, and that the interpretations of the world held by these 
interest groups often reflect competing rather than harmonious material interests. It follows 
that the discussion of the role of evidence in management practice should not privilege the 
interests or the insights of one organizational grouping above others in its attempt to pro -
duce actionable knowledge. Too often, in discussions of either EBM or the ‘relevance’ of 
management research, it is assumed that what is socially useful and academically rigorous 
equates to an agenda that will be deemed useful above all by managers (e.g. Hughes et al., 
2011). The notion of ‘user involvement’ in the research process is restricted to managers. 
But, as Grey (2001: S30) has pointedly asked, ‘by what fiat are the users of management 
research held to be the corporations and the managers?’ Consistent with Ferlie, McGivern 
and Moraes’s (2010) recommendation that business schools should embrace a ‘public 
interest’ school of management, which rejects the primacy of shareholder value and the 
view that only a managerial interest should be served by business schools, a critical realist 
perspective would assert a role for management research that prioritizes the wider public 
interest. Recent events demonstrate afresh that the fate of business concerns not only 
managers, but society as a whole. It follows that integrative literature reviews, or other 
forms of knowledge production, would seek to reach beyond a management audience. 
Rather, evidence should be synthesized and addressed to the wide variety of audiences who 
have a vested interest in business practices—including employees, customers, trade unions 
and Government. Accordingly, and in a project of greater inclusivity, it may be more fruit-
ful to recast the field as one concerned with ‘Evidence Oriented Organizing’ in place of 
‘Evidence Based Management’.
4 Issues of ethics and values should have a central place in management research. These can-
not be reduced to ‘what works’ or to what managers decree as having immediate, practical 
significance. It means that ethical principles should guide the selection of research topics as 
well as the practice of empirical research, and be informed by a wider consideration than 
immediate business success, to a far greater extent than is normally acknowledged in the 
EBM literature. The bald invocation of ‘what works’ often masks deeper issues of 
entrenched power relationships, and is rarely designed to liberate the voices of actors 
perceived as being marginal in various social forums. However, as Sue Clegg (2005: 415) 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=16>>>
186 Organization 20(2)
has argued, ‘One of the underlying themes in critical realism is that of critique and 
emancipation, and evidence properly understood aligned to clear theoretical argumentation 
is part of this project’. In terms of EBM, the question ‘what works’ can therefore be 
reframed as ‘what works for who? Why? For how long? In whose interests?’ Such a realist 
synthesis, as Pawson (2002) argued, also helps us to delineate under what circumstances 
this will apply. This requires the open acknowledgement of the limitations on any knowl -
edge that is generated.
5 A  weakness of some positions associated with Critical Management Studies is that they 
appear to be concerned more with critique than positive engagement (Spicer et al, 2009; 
Thompson, 2004; Tourish and Barge, 2010). Positivist perspectives, on the other hand, are 
relatively insensitive to ambiguity and under-estimate the challenges of constructing 
accounts of reality that reflect the perceptions of differentiated organizational actors. But, 
from a critical realist perspective, these tensions do not preclude the space for engagement 
with real world issues and business challenges. Critical realism recognizes ambiguity and 
indeterminacy, but also embraces the challenge of identifying what actions, policies and 
solutions are more or less likely to have a positive impact on organizational practices 
and wider social well-being. It therefore moves towards a positive engagement with the 
multiple stresses facing the world we inhabit. This means recognizing and seeking to 
explain the power saturated organizational contexts in which management theory seeks to 
find traction. But it also acknowledges those aspects of organizational reality other than 
power and domination which must be addressed.
6 Critical realism recognizes that human action is impelled by many factors, in addition to 
and sometimes in place of rational reflection. It follows that merely making evidence avail-
able may not be sufficient to change the behaviour of managers or other organizational 
actors. While rational action should remain a key goal, it should also be recognized that 
social action flows from socially constructed perceptions of reality that are in part created 
by the working out of conflicts between vested interests located within organizational 
structures. As with the notion of progressively reducing what is not known, an approach to 
these issues informed by critical realism would suggest that we embrace the goal of 
progressively reducing irrationality and increasing the space for rational thought and 
action, without imagining that this process can ever be completed.
Conclusion
Consistent with the notion of increasing knowledge that is advocated here there is no suggestion 
that critical realism offers a perfect boilerplate for management research or can completely 
overcome many of the difficulties described in this article. For example, I am not suggesting that 
it can be ‘the’ solution to the problem of how power impacts on our approach to either generating 
or utilizing evidence. Power interests are at work within the academy just as they are within ‘the 
real world’ of organizational practice, and often distort the academic effort, including when that 
effort is undertaken by either constructionist or critically realist minded scholars.
I also recognize that, while not all truth claims are equally valid, we have no infallible or gen -
erally agreed means of adjudicating between them. While we can with reasonable confidence 
divest ourselves of some truth claims (e.g. ‘the world is flat’), we must be much more tentative 
when we look at claims for the social world, particularly when the claims are of a causal nature. 
In addition, ‘critiques of social phenomena are enormously contentious because it is difficult to 
establish agreement about what constitutes problems, solutions or improvements, and whether the 
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Tourish 187
latter are feasible’ (Sayer, 2000: 158). It follows that ethical issues are fraught with challenges of 
defining power, norms and values, and that few definitions are likely to offer a universal appeal. 
But I have also argued that, if we acknowledge the importance of improving the world in which 
we live, it is vital that we grapple with these issues theoretically and empirically. Rather than 
discourse around the notion of ‘Evidence Based Management’, I have therefore advocated that we 
recast the discussion around the notion of ‘Evidence Oriented Organizing’. The debate between 
advocates of EBM and its critics has thus far tended towards a dichotomous clash between ‘believers’ 
and ‘heretics’ (Morrell, in press). I am suggesting that utilizing a critical realist perspective more 
thoroughly than has been done so far has the potential to ease some of these tensions, even if it 
can never fully overcome them.
Thus, the idea of EOO envisages a process that gradually reduces ignorance, and embraces the 
admittedly complex challenge of establishing some evidentiary criteria for adjudicating between 
rival truth claims. It is important for organization theorists to engage with the complexities of the 
world, and progress occurs when we explore possible solutions to our ailments (Starbuck, 2003). 
I argue that the progressive reduction of what is not known is a worthwhile goal for organization 
research, despite the imperfections that attend to any such effort. A state of absolute knowledge 
will never be reached: the goal remains more or less beyond our grasp, however much progress 
towards it is attained. But the multiplicity of problems that beset society suggests that the effort 
to make such progress is one that scholars should be eager to embrace.
Notes
I wish to acknowledge the feedback received from the Editor and Acting Editor on this article, and the many 
invaluable comments from the three anonymous reviewers. I also acknowledge the generous input of numer-
ous colleagues who have sat through research seminars by me on this topic, particularly at Exeter, King’s 
College London and Royal Holloway.
1 Pfef fer and Sutton also maintain an EBM blog, one of a growing number devoted to the issue. See http://
www.evidence-basedmanagement.com/
References
Ackroyd, S. (2004) ‘Some Implications of Critical Realism’, in S. Fleetwood and S. Ackroyd (eds) Critical 
Realist Applications in Organization and Management Studies, pp. 137–63. London: Routledge.
Al-Amoudi, I. and Willmott, H. (2011) ‘Where Constructionism and Critical Realism Converge: Interrogating 
the Domain of Epistemological Relativism’, Organization Studies 32: 27–46.
Bartunek, J. (2007) ‘Academic-Practitioner Collaboration Need Not Require Joint or Relevant Research: 
Toward a Relational Scholarship of Integration’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 1323–33.
Bell, E. (2011) ‘Managerialism and Management Research: Would Melville Dalton Get a Job Today?’, in  
C. Cassell and B. Lee (eds) Challenges and Controversies in Management Research, pp. 122–37. 
London: Routledge.
Bhaskar, R. (1978) A Realist Theory of Science. Brighton: The Harvester Press.
Bhaskar, R. (1998a) ‘General Introduction’, in M. Archer, R. Bhaskar, A. Collier, T. Lawson and A. Norrie 
(eds) Critical Realism: Essential Readings, pp, ix–xxiv. London: Routledge.
Bhaskar, R. (1998b) ‘Philosophy and Scientific Realism’, in M. Archer, R. Bhaskar, A. Collier, T. Lawson 
and A. Norrie (eds) Critical Realism: Essential Readings, pp.16–47. London: Routledge.
Briner, R., Denyer, D. and Rousseau, D. (2009) ‘Evidence-Based Management: Concept Cleanup Time?’, 
Academy of Management Perspectives 23: 19–32.
Campion, M., Guerrero, L. and Posthuma, R. (2011) ‘Reasonable Human Resource Practices for Making 
Employee Downsizing Decisions’, Organizational Dynamics 40: 174–80.
Cascio, W. (2002) Responsible Restructuring. New York, NY: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=18>>>
188 Organization 20(2)
Cascio, W. (2007) ‘Evidence-Based Management and the Marketplace for Ideas’, Academy of Management 
Journal 50: 1009–12.
Charlier, S., Brown, K. and Rynes, S. (2011) ‘Teaching Evidence-Based-Management in MBA Programs: 
What Evidence is There?’, Academy of Management Learning and Education 10: 222–36.
Clegg, S. (2009) ‘Managing Power in Organizations: The Hidden History of its Constitution’, in S. Clegg and 
M. Hauggaard (eds) The Sage Handbook of Power, pp. 310–31. London: Sage.
Clegg, S., Hardy, C., Lawrence, T. and Nord, W., eds (2006) The Sage Handbook of Organization Studies  
(2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Clegg, S. (2005) ‘Evidence-Based Practice in Educational Research: A Critical Realist Critique of Systematic 
Review’, British Journal of Sociology of Education 26: 415–28.
Collinson, D. (2002) ‘A Response to Wray-Bliss: Revisiting the Shopfloor’, Organization 9: 41–50.
Colquitt, J. and Zapata-Phelan, C. (2007) ‘Trends in Theory Building and Theory Testing: A Five Decade 
Study of the Academy of Management Journal’, 50: 1281–303.
Cooren, F. (2006) ‘The Organizational World as a Plenum of Agencies’, in F. Cooren, J. Taylor and E. Van 
Every (eds) Communication as Organizing: Empirical and Theoretical Explorations in the Dynamic of 
Text and Conversation, pp. 81–100. London: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cooren, F., Taylor, J. and Van Every, E. (2006) ‘Introduction’, in F. Cooren, J. Taylor and E. Van Every 
(eds) Communication as Organizing: Empirical and Theoretical Explorations in the Dynamic of Text and 
Conversation, pp. 1–18. London: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Czarniawska, B. (1997) Narrating the Organization: Dramas of Institutional Identity. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Donaldson, L. (2009) ‘Where is the Jury? The Failures in the Scientific Evaluation Processes in Organiza -
tional Science’, Journal of Management Inquiry 18: 97–100.
Evans, J. and Benefield, P. (2001) ‘Systematic Reviews of Educational Research: Does the Medical Model 
Fit? British Educational Research Journal 27: 527–41.
Fairclough, N. (2005) ‘Discourse Analysis in Organization Studies: The Case for Critical Realism’, 
Organization Studies 26: 915–39.
Ferlie, E., McGivern, G. and Moraes, A. (2010) ‘Developing a Public Interest School of Management’, 
British Journal of Management 20(Special Issue): S60–70.
Fleetwood, S. (2004) ‘An Ontology for Organisation and Management Studies’, in S. Ackroyd and  
S. Fleetwood (eds) Critical Realist Applications in Organization and Management Studies , pp.27–54. 
London: Routledge.
Flyvbjerg, B. (1998) Rationality and Power: Democracy in Practice . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Fox, N. (2003) Practice-Based Evidence: Towards Collaborative and Transgressive Research’, Sociology 37: 
81–102.
Gergen, K. (2000) Invitation to Social Constructionism. London: Sage.
Grey, C. (2001) ‘Re-Imaging Relevance: A Response to Starkey and Madan’, British Journal of Management 
12 (Special Issue): S27–S32. 
Guest, D. (2007) ‘Don’t Shoot the Messenger: A Wake-Up Call for Academics’, Academy of Management 
Journal 50: 1020–26.
Gulati, R. (2007) ‘Tent Poles, Tribalism, and Boundary Spanning: The Rigor-Relevance Debate in Manage-
ment Research’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 775–82.
Guney, S. (2006) ‘Making Sense of Conflict as the (Missing) Link Between Organizational Actors’, in  
F. Cooren, J. Taylor and E. Van Every (eds) Communication as Organizing: Empirical and Theoretical 
Explorations in the Dynamic of Text and Conversation, pp. 19–36. London: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hambrick, D. (2007) ‘The Field of Management’s Devotion to Theory: Too Much of a Good Thing?’, Academy 
of Management Journal 50: 1346–52.
Hammersley, M. (2001) ‘On “Systematic” Reviews of Research Literatures: A “Narrative” Response to 
Evans and Benefield’, British Educational Research Journal 27: 544–54.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=19>>>
Tourish 189
Hesketh, A. and Fleetwood, S. (2006) ‘Beyond Measuring the Human Resources Management-Organizational 
Performance Link: Applying Critical Realist Meta-Theory, Organization 13: 677–99.
Hewison, A. (2004) ‘Evidence-Based Management in the NHS: Is it Possible?’, Journal of Health Organization 
and Management 18: 336–48.
Hodgkinson, G. (in press) ‘The Politics of Evidence-Based Decision Making’, in Rousseau, D. M.  (ed.) The 
Oxford Handbook of Evidence-Based Management. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hope, T. (2004) ‘Pretend it Works: Evidence and Governance in the Evaluation of the Reducing Burglary 
Initiative’, Criminal Justice 4: 287–308.
Hopwood, A. (2009) ‘On Striving to Give a Critical Edge to Critical Management Studies’, in M. Alvesson, 
T. Bridgman and H. Willmott (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Critical Management Studies , pp.515–24. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hughes, T., Bence, D., Grisoni, L., O’Regan, N. and Wornham, D. (2011) ‘Scholarship that Matters: 
Academic-Practitioner Engagement in Business and Management’, Academy of Management Learning 
and Education 10: 40–57.
Ioannidis, J. (2005) ‘Why Most Published Research Findings are False’, PLoS Medicine 2: 0696–0701.
Kacmar, K. and Whitfield, J. (2000) ‘An Additional Rating Method for Journal Articles in the Field of 
Management’, Organizational Research Methods 3: 392–406.
Langley, A. (2009) ‘Studying Processes In and Around Organizations’, in D. Buchanan and A. Bryman (eds) 
The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods, pp. 409–29. London: Sage. 
Langley, A. and Tsoukas, H. (2010) ‘Introducing “Perspectives on Process Organization Studies”’, in  
T. Hernes and S. Maitlis (eds) Process, Sensemaking, and Organizing , pp. 1–26. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Latham, G. (2007) ‘A Speculative Perspective on the Transfer of Behavioral Science Findings to the 
Workplace: “The Times They Are A-Changin”’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 1027–32.
Latham, G. (2009) Becoming The Evidence Based Manager: Making The Science Of Management Work For 
You. London: Nicholas Brealey.
Latham, G., and Locke, E. (2009) ‘Science and Ethics: What Should Count as Evidence Against the Use of 
Goal Setting?’, Academy of Management Perspectives 23: 88–91.
Lawler, E. (2007) ‘Why HR Practices are not Evidence-Based’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 
1033–36.
Lawson, T. (1997) Economics and Reality. London: Routledge.
Lawson, T. (2003) ‘Theorising Ontology’, Feminist Economics 9: 161–69.
Learmonth, M., Lockett, A. and Dowd, K. (in press) ‘Promoting Scholarship That Matters: The Uselessness 
of Useful Research and the Usefulness of Useless Research’, British Journal of Management.
Learmonth, M. (2006) ‘Dialogue: “Is There Such A Thing As Evidence-Based Management?”: A Commen -
tary on Rousseau’s 2005 Presidential Address’, Academy of Management Review 31: 1089–93.
Learmonth, M. (2008) ‘Evidence-Based Management: A Backlash Against Pluralism in Organizational 
Studies’, Organization 15: 283–91.
Learmonth, M. (2009) ‘Rhetoric and Evidence: The Case of Evidence Based Management’, in D. Buchanan 
and A. Bryman (eds) The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods , pp. 93–107. London: 
Sage.
Learmonth, M. (2011) ‘Where Social Science and Philosophy Meet: One Explication of the Relationship 
Between Evidence and Theory in Management Research’, in C. Cassell and B. Lee (eds) Challenges and 
Controversies in Management Research, pp. 212–24. London: Routledge.
Learmonth, M. and Harding, N. (2006) ‘Evidence-Based Management: The Very Idea’, Public Administration 
84: 245–66.
Locke, E., ed. (2009) Handbook of Principles of Organizational Behavior: Indispensable Knowledge for 
Evidence-Based Management. London: Wiley.
Locke, E., and Latham, G. (2009) ‘Has Goal Setting Gone Wild, or Have its Attackers Abandoned Good 
Scholarship?’, Academy of Management Perspectives, 23: 17–23.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=20>>>
190 Organization 20(2)
Madden, C., Easley, R. and Dunn, M. (1995) ‘How Journal Editors View Replication Research’, Journal of 
Advertising 24: 77–87.
McGahan, A. (2007) ‘Academic Research That Matters to Managers: On Zebras, Dogs, Lemmings, Hammers 
and Turnips’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 748–53.
Mingers, J. (2009) ‘Discourse Ethics and Critical Realist Ethics: An Evaluation in the Context of Business 
Ethics’, Journal of Critical Realism 8: 172–201.
Morrell, K. (in press) ‘Evidence-Based Dialectics’, Organization.
Morrell, K. (2008) ‘The Narrative of “Evidence Based” Management: A Polemic’, Journal of Management 
Studies 45: 613–35.
Morris, J., Cascio, W. and Young, C. (Winter, 1999) ‘Downsizing After All These Years: Questions and 
Answers About Who Did It, How Many Did It, and Who Benefited From It’, Organizational Dynamics 
78–87.
Newton, T., Deetz, S. and Reed, M. (2011) ‘Responses to Social Constructionism and Critical Realism in 
Organization Studies’, Organization Studies 32: 7–26.
Oakley, A. (1984) The Captured Womb: A History Of The Medical Care Of Pregnant Women. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Ordonez, L., Schweitzer, M., Galinsky, A. and Bazerman, M. (2009a) ‘Goals Gone Wild: The Systematic 
Side Effects of Overprescribing Goal Setting’, Academy of Management Perspectives 23: 6–16.
Ordonez, L., Schweitzer, M., Galinsky, A. and Bazerman, M. (2009b) ‘On Good Scholarship, Goal Setting 
and Scholars Gone Wild’, Academy of Management Perspectives 23: 82–87.
Pawson, R. (2002) ‘Evidence-Based Policy: The Promise of “Realist Synthesis”’, Evaluation 8: 340–58.
Pfeffer, J. (1993) ‘Barriers to the Advance of Organizational Science: Paradigm Development as a Dependent 
Variable’, Academy of Management Review 18: 599–620.
Pfeffer, J. (1998) ‘Six Dangerous Myths about Pay’, Harvard Business Review 76: 108–19. 
Pfeffer, J. (2005) ‘Developing Resource Dependence Theory: How Theory is Affected by its Environ -
ment’, in K. Smith and M. Hitt (eds) Great Minds in Management: The Process of Theory Development,  
pp. 436–59. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Pfeffer, J. and Sutton, R. (2006) Hard Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths and Total Nonsense: Profiting from 
Evidence-Based Management Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Pfohl, S. (2008) ‘The Reality of Social Constructions’, in J. Holstein and J. Gubrium (eds) Handbook of 
Constructionist Research, pp. 645–68. London: The Guilford Press. 
Reay, T., Berta, W. and Kohn, K. (2009) ‘What’s the Evidence on Evidence-Based Management?’, Academy 
of Management Perspectives 23: 5–18.
Reed, M. (2005a) ‘Reflections on the “Realist Turn” in Organization and Management Studies’, Journal of 
Management Studies 42: 1621–44.
Reed, M. (2005b) ‘Doing the Loco-Motion: Response to Contu and Willmott’s Commentary on “The Realist 
Turn in Organization and Management Studies”’, Journal of Management Studies 42: 1663–673.
Reed, M. (2009a) ‘Critical Realism: Philosophy, Method, or Philosophy in Search of a Method?’, in  
D. Buchanan and A. Bryman (eds) The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods ,  
pp. 430–448. London: Sage.
Reed, M. (2009b) ‘Critical Realism in Critical Management Studies’. in M. Alvesson, T. Bridgman and 
H. Willmott (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Critical Management Studies , pp.52–75. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Rotundo, M. (2009) ‘Conduct Performance Appraisal’, in E. Locke (ed.) Handbook of Principles of 
Organizational Behavior (2nd ed.), pp. 85-104. New York, NY: Wiley.
Rousseau, D. (2006) ‘Is There Such a Thing as “Evidence-Based Management”?’, Academy of Management 
Review 31: 256–69.
Rousseau, D. (2007) ‘A Sticky, Leveraging, and Scalable Strategy for High-Quality Connections Between 
Organizational Practice and Science’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 1037–42.
Rousseau, D, and McCarthy, S. (2007) ‘Educating Managers from an Evidence-Based Perspective’, Academy 
of Management Learning and Education 6: 84–101.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Tourish 191
Rousseau, D., Manning, J. and Denyer, D. (2008) ‘Evidence in Management and Organization Science: 
Assembling the Field’s Full Weight of Scientific Knowledge Through Syntheses’, The Academy of 
Management Annals 2, 475–515.
Rynes, S., Colbert, A. and Brown, K. (2002) ‘HR Professionals’ Beliefs About Effective Human Resource 
Practices: Correspondence Between Research and Practice’, Human Resource Management 41: 149–74.
Rynes, S., Gerhart, B. and Parks, L. (2005) ‘Personnel Psychology: Performance Evaluation and Pay-
for-Performance’, in S. Fiske, D. L. Schacter and A. Kasdin (eds) Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 
571–600. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Sayer, A. (2000) Realism and Social Science. London: Sage.
Sewell, G. and Barker, J. (2006) ‘Coercion versus Care: Using Irony to Make Sense of Organizational 
Surveillance’, Academy of Management Review 31: 934–61.
Spicer, A., Alvesson, M. and Karreman, D. (2009) ‘Critical Performativity: The Unfinished Business of 
Critical Management Studies’, Human Relations 62: 537–60.
Starbuck, W. (2003) ‘Shouldn’t Organization Theory Emerge from Adolescence’, Organization 10: 439–52.
Starbuck, W., (2004) ‘Why I Stopped Trying to Understand the Real World’, Organization Studies 25: 1233–54.
Starkey, K. and Madan, P. (2001) Bridging the Relevance Gap, British Journal of Management, 12 (Special 
Issue), S3–S26.
Starkey, K., Hatchuel, A. and Tempest, S. (2009) ‘Management Research and the New Logics of Discovery 
and Engagement’, Journal of Management Studies 46: 547–58.
Stewart, R. (2002) Evidence-based Management: A Practical Guide for Health Professionals . Oxford: 
Radcliffe Medical Press.
Syed, J., Mingers, J. and Murray, P. (2009) ‘Beyond Rigour and Relevance: A Critical Realist Approach to 
Business Education’, Management Learning 41: 71-85.
Tenbensel, T. (2004) ‘Does More Evidence Lead to Better Policy? The Implications of Explicit-Priority 
Setting in New Zealand’s Health Policy for Evidence-Based Policy’, Policy Studies 25: 189–207.
Thompson, P. (2004) ‘Brands, Boundaries and Bandwagons: A Critical Reflection on Critical Manage -
ment Studies’, in S. Fleetwood and S. Ackroyd (eds) Critical Realist Applications in Organization and 
Management Studies, pp. 54–70. London: Routledge.
Tourish, D. and Barge, K. (2010) ‘An Exchange of Letters: What Can A Specifically Social Constructionist 
Perspective Bring to Bear on What Must Be One of the Most Studied Subjects in Human History?’, 
Management Communication Quarterly, 24, 322–347.
Tourish, D. and Vatcha, N. (2005) ‘Charismatic Leadership and Corporate Cultism at Enron: The Elimination 
of Dissent, the Promotion of Conformity and Organizational Collapse’, Leadership 1: 455–80.
Tourish, D., Paulsen, N., Hobman, E. and Bordia, P. (2004) ‘The Downsides of Downsizing: Communication 
Processes and Information Needs in the Aftermath of a Workforce Reduction Strategy’, Management 
Communication Quarterly 17: 485–516.
Townley, B. (1993) ‘Performance Appraisal and the Emergence of Management’, Journal of Management 
Studies 30: 221–38.
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003) ‘Towards a Methodology for Developing Evidence-Informed 
Management Knowledge by Means of Systematic Review’, British Journal of Management 14: 207–22.
Tsang, E. and Kwan, K. (1999) ‘Replication and Theory Development in Organisational Science: A Critical 
Realist Perspective’, Academy of Management Review 24: 759–80.
Tushman, M. and O’Reilly, C. (2007) ‘Research and Relevance: Implications of Pasteur’s Quadrant for 
Doctoral Programs and Faculty Development’, Academy of Management Journal 50: 769–74.
Van Maanen, J. (1995) ‘Style as Theory’, Organization Science 6: 133–43.
Varey, R. (2006) ‘Accounts in Interactions: Implications of Accounting Practices for Managing’, in F. Cooren, 
J. Taylor and E. Van Every (eds) Communication as Organizing: Empirical and Theoretical Explorations 
in the Dynamic of Text and Conversation, pp. 181–96. London: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Weick, K. (2001) ‘Gapping the Relevance Bridge: Fashion Meets Fundamentals in Management Research’, 
British Journal of Management 12(Special Issue): s71–s75.
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from
<<<PAGE=22>>>
192 Organization 20(2)
Weiner, L. (2003) ‘Research or “Cheerleading?” Scholarship on Community School District 2, New York 
City’, Education Policy Analysis Archives 11: 1–20.
Westwood, R. and Linstead, S. (2001) ‘Language/Organization: Introduction’, in R. Westwood and S. Linstead 
(eds) The Language of Organization, pp. 1–19. London: Sage. 
Willmott, H. (1993) ‘Strength is Ignorance: Slavery is Freedom: Managing Culture in Modern Organisations’, 
Journal of Management Studies 30: 515–52.
Young, K., Ashby, D., Boaz, A, and Grayson, L. (2002) ‘Social Science and the Evidence Based Policy 
Movement’, Social Policy and Society 1: 215–24. 
Ziliak, S. and McCloskey, D. (2008) The Cult of Statistical Significance: How the Standard Error Costs Us 
Jobs, Justice, and Lives. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Biography
Dennis T ourish is Professor of Leadership and Organization Studies at Royal Holloway, University 
of London. He is the co-author or co-editor of seven books on leadership and organizational com-
munication. His work has appeared in such journals as Human Relations, Journal of Management 
Studies, British Journal of Management, Long Range Planning, Organizational Dynamics and 
Leadership. Address: School of Management, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, 
Surrey, TW20 0EX, UK. Email: Dennis.Tourish@rhul.ac.uk
 at Royal Holloway, University of London on March 8, 2013org.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
View publication stats