<<<PAGE=1>>>
01
Using M&E to improve 
government performance 
and accountability
Introduction
The Twende Mbele programme strives to 
support African governments in their endeavours 
to improve their performance, as well as 
accountability and transparency towards their 
citizens, by strengthening their monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) systems and practices.
The core members of the programme are Benin, Uganda, and 
South Africa, as well as the Centre for Learning on Evaluation and 
Results for Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) and the Independent 
Development Evaluation unit at the African Development Bank. 
Photo credit: Doris Kembabazi
Twende Mbele works with these and other African countries, 
building on global experience and growing the range of effective 
M&E mechanisms. 
The programme aims to support peer-learning between existing 
and new partners in order to tackle common M&E challenges and 
provide a platform for countries to learn from each other. Although 
Twende Mbele only formally started in early 2016, some valuable 
lessons are already beginning to emerge, drawing from scoping 
studies in the three core member countries, as well as in Ghana, 
Kenya and Niger, a country consultation workshop held in March 
2017, and a validation workshop on the evaluation of the South 
African National Evaluation System (NES) which took place in July 
2017. While the countries are all at different stages of developing 
national M&E systems, these lessons can be adapted for each one’s 
specific context.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
02
Emerging lessons
Leadership and linkages
Political champion
Technical champion
Dedicated national department
To build demand and support for national M&E systems, and 
ensure their successful implementation, countries need to have 
high level political and technical champions for M&E. Linking 
it throughout government and with stakeholders outside of 
government is also critical. In addition, a dedicated national 
department is needed, with the capacity to drive M&E. This is 
made easier if the department has status in government. In most 
countries this is the case, but in Ghana, for example, while there is 
a strong national technical champion in the form of the National 
Development Planning Commission, political will is emergent with 
a new untested ministry established after the recent elections. 
Niger, on the other hand, has a political champion in the Ministry 
of Planning and a parliamentary network for good governance, 
but has no technical champion and is the only country which does 
not have an M&E department in the office of the Prime Minister or 
Presidency.
Experience in all countries therefore shows that strong political will, 
dedicated technical and financial partners, and wide participation 
across all spheres of government, as well as donors, advisory 
and control bodies, and civil society is essential for embedding 
government-wide M&E.
Institutionalisation
Legislation
National policy
Active VOPE
Institutionalising M&E is undoubtedly important, but is legislation 
necessary, or is a policy enough? In Kenya, for example, there 
is a burgeoning legal framework and, although the long-term 
development plan is a legal basis for the National Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (NIMES), it is more administrative. Ghana has 
no overall policy framework and evaluations are donor-driven. 
The evaluations are not freely available and there is no central 
repository. Niger also lacks a national evaluation policy (the draft 
document prepared in 2010-2011 has not yet been adopted) 
and a harmonised, institutional and regulatory M&E framework. 
Institutional instability poses the problem of institutional anchoring 
of evaluation as well. 
In South Africa, while there is no M&E policy, there is a national 
evaluation policy, and evaluation is becoming institutionalised. This 
policy was enough to get the evaluation system established, but 
to ensure sustainability and implementation across government, 
the decision has been taken to pass legislation, and drafting is 
underway. Uganda has set up a Government Evaluation Facility 
to evaluate public policies and major public investments, and its 
national M&E policy addresses gaps in existing legislation and 
administrative practices in terms of tracking the performance and 
evaluation of public policies and investments. This entrenches 
discipline and results-oriented performance. 
These examples demonstrate systems that have been developed 
without policy or legislation, but where there has been a move to 
formalise, or, as in the case of Ghana, where plans are to develop a 
policy prior to establishing a system. 
A significant challenge facing countries currently in terms of 
institutionalisation is the fact that while Voluntary Organisations of 
Professional Evaluations (VOPEs) have been recognised at county 
level, they are not yet operational. As a result, getting broad-based 
buy-in is difficult and there is a culture of compliance, rather than 
one of improvement and learning.
Capacity
Formalised capacity development 
framework/plan
All countries identified that there is a gap in technical capacity, 
which needs to be addressed. This includes resourcing for training 
and tool development, as well as improving the link between 
M&E and planning. Uganda highlighted that improvements in 
evaluation require strong skills and experience in quantitative and 
qualitative methods, while Kenya demonstrated that capacity 
shortfalls remain a challenge for many aspects of M&E, from 
planning, management and execution, to financial resources and 
building a strong VOPE. In Ghana, while there is M&E and data 
capacity within some units in all ministries, departments and 
agencies and metropolitan, municipal and district assemblies, 
these units are small and their capacity is limited, particularly in 
evaluation. Staff are usually not trained in M&E, except for one 
or two short courses, despite the presence of well-established 
evaluation consultants. 
Benin Ghana Kenya Niger South Africa Uganda
Benin Ghana Kenya Niger South Africa Uganda
6/6
5/6
5/6
2/6
5/6
Benin Ghana Kenya Niger South Africa Uganda
3/6
2/6
<<<PAGE=3>>>
03
Benin and Niger also lack sufficient staff dedicated to evaluation, 
and in the latter case, the absence of a budget dedicated to the 
promotion of M&E in the National Budget is problematic. Likewise, 
in South Africa, there is an inadequate supply of skilled evaluators, 
and Twende Mbele is now supporting a diagnostic in the three 
countries around evaluator supply and demand.
A few ways capacity could be improved across all countries is 
through developing new evaluation tools for the provision of rapid 
and inexpensive evaluation exercises, developing technical courses 
around M&E, and strengthening the methodology of evaluations 
by trying different approaches.
Addressing weak planning is also important, and it has a direct 
impact on the effectiveness of M&E systems. Standards to drive 
change need to be developed and more training is needed. 
Reporting mechanisms also need to be improved, particularly 
for the submission of evaluations and improvement plans, which 
are often delayed and have knock-on effects for the whole M&E 
process. One way to improve this particular aspect is through 
incentives and disincentives. In the experience of both Kenya and 
South Africa, a combination of both has proven very effective. 
Examples of incentives include part-funding the evaluations, 
providing training, providing an opportunity to participate in 
evaluation technical working groups (ETWG), and recognition, 
such as awards for best evaluation and being chosen to present at 
conferences. Disincentives include a requirement for departments 
to follow the system once an evaluation is selected, evaluation 
results being sent to Cabinet, Parliamentary Portfolio Committees 
and being made public, management of the evaluation being 
undertaken by steering committees, rather than departments, and 
funding being dependent on compliance and performance. 
Quality and use of evidence 
and evaluations
Currently doing national evaluations
National Monitoring system
A common theme throughout is that quality is critical. Poor 
quality evidence could lead to wrong, or even destructive, 
recommendations, or discredit research evidence in general. 
Because M&E should be used to improve performance and 
accountability, and not just as a compliancy exercise, it is important 
to undertake to do things differently as a result of the findings and 
lessons which surface, and funding and project plans should be 
flexible enough to respond to opportunities that arise.
Benin points out that the quality of evaluations is key in the use of 
evaluation results, and can be measured in terms of the relevance 
of the evaluation recommendations. The quality of the evaluation 
of public policy and its ownership by the actors responsible for 
implementation is closely linked to their level of involvement in 
the evaluation process. Stakeholder involvement and participation 
at all stages of the evaluation process is needed to maximise the 
likelihood of the use of evaluation results. In Benin, ownership of 
recommendations has led to significant efforts by departments 
for the use of evaluation results and recommendations in the 
improvement of public service. Similarly, the focus in South Africa 
on utilisation of evaluation results means that a great deal of effort 
has been made to ensure that a learning approach to evaluation is 
implemented, as well as maximising ownership of results. However, 
there is tension with ensuring that departments respond to the 
findings and recommendations. 
This example also shows how valuable sharing results 
and evidence in a user-friendly way is, and highlights that 
communication needs to be strengthened, for example, through 
seminars or community workshops. There is also a need to find 
other ways to communicate key messages to stakeholders, such 
as through the media and the publication of articles in referred 
academic journals, something that Twende Mbele can play a 
significant role in helping to achieve.
In South Africa, there has been an increased understanding about 
evaluation within the government system, which has in turn bred 
a stronger evaluation culture. One success has been the use of 
theories of change in evaluations, resulting in acceptance of these 
as a key component of effective planning. 
Meanwhile, data quality remains a challenge for many countries. 
In Ghana, for example, while there are well-established monitoring 
systems and strong links nationally and in sectors, resulting in direct 
data input that is immediately available, there is also a disconnect 
between data collection systems and current plans and data needs, 
and data collection tools can be in short supply. The importance of 
routine, robust data collection and analysis is shown by five of the 
six countries that have invested in a national monitoring system. 
However, despite the existence of a system, all countries note the 
need for higher quality and timely access to data.
Photo credit: BenoÎt Koffi
Benin Ghana Kenya Niger South Africa Uganda
5/6
5/6
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Benin Ghana Kenya Niger South Africa Uganda
National legislation on M&E No Yes No, in the 
Constitution
No No Yes
National monitoring system Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes
National M&E framework Yes Yes Yes Draft Yes Yes
Regular monitoring of national 
development plan
Quarterly Quarterly Quarterly No Quarterly Quarterly
National and provincial 
departments have M&E plans 
monitored regularly
National, not sub-
national
Yes National, not sub-
national
M&E plans, but no 
monitoring
National, some 
sub-national
Yes
Report to Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development
NDPC Director, M&E 
Department
Premiers and 
President
OPM
Regularly monitored programmes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Regularly monitored local 
government plans
Some All N/A Some Yes Yes
National evaluation policy Yes Draft planned Yes – awaiting 
approval
Draft developed Yes Yes
Evaluation of policies and 
programmes
A few each year Uneven across 
departments
A few each year A few each year Yes A few each year
National system for evaluations Yes Being built now Mostly No Yes Yes
Formalised M&E capacity 
development programme
Not formal (ad 
hoc)
Not formal (ad 
hoc)
Not formal (ad 
hoc)
Not formal (ad 
hoc)
Yes Yes
Responsible for capacity 
development
Bureau of public 
policies evaluation 
and government 
action analysis
National 
Development 
Planning 
Commission 
M&E department, 
individual 
ministries, and 
counties
 Ministère du 
Plan et haut 
Commissariat a la 
Modernisation
DPME Civil Service 
College Jinja under 
the Ministry of 
Public Service
Active volunteer organisations for 
professional evaluation (VOPE)
Somewhat  Yes, GMEF Yes Active, hosted 
AfrEA conference 
in 2007
Yes, SAMEA Yes, UEA
04
The policy- and decision-making environment is inherently 
political – both party political in terms of achieving an electoral 
mandate, and in terms of organisation politics and the political 
economy of the country. This leads to webs of power and 
influence, through which stakeholders must learn to navigate. In 
this context, evaluation evidence is one influence on outcomes. 
It requires translating complex evaluation findings into useable 
information and recommendations, building a portfolio of 
evidence, a coalition of stakeholders to support it, and ensuring its 
use requires planning and influencing strategies.
More importantly, a long-term view needs to be taken. Some 
evaluations create great changes, others little tremors – but a delay 
in implementing findings and recommendations does not equate 
to not using them at all. And ultimately, evidence-based policy and 
practice is a means to social betterment, not an end goal.
For evaluations to have meaningful impact, governments must 
have a serious commitment to facing the failures evaluations may 
bring to the surface, and to making the improvements suggested. 
Through Twende Mbele, countries can learn from each other, 
adapt learnings from their peers, and, where appropriate, develop 
common approaches. They can learn from each other’s activities as 
well as those of other regional initiatives.
The successful collaboration of Twende Mbele countries can help 
to augment and entrench the use of M&E for change. This means 
that lessons need to be documented and shared, knowledge 
generated must be owned by all parties, and, perhaps most crucial 
of all, participating countries must be accountable to each other, 
and to their supporters in-country, with both peer learning and 
peer competition helping to drive change.
Conclusion
Country national 
evaluation systems 
at a glance
+27 11 717 3453
Programme manager: cara.waller@wits.ac.za
Twende Secretariat at CLEAR AA, Univesity of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
www.twendembele.org
@TwendeMnE