<<<PAGE=1>>>
DISCUSSIONPAPER
USING M&E TO LINKBUDGETS AND PLANNINGIN NATIONALGOVERNMENTS
<<<PAGE=2>>>
1  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
Discussion Paper: Using M&E to Link Budgets and Planning in National 
Governments 
March 2022 
 
I. Introduction:  
As governments increasingly face a demand in accountability, there has been a growing focus in using 
evidence to inform plans and link them better with budgets. With significant public financial management 
reforms across emerging markets and developing countries in the last two decades, there are a range of 
budgeting tools, systems and processes that governments have adopted to align policy goals to planning 
needs. However, there are still specific challenges in the extent to which future national plans and 
budgeting decisions are grounded in evidence on specified criteria, including  cost effectiveness of the 
previous national plans and budgets.  
 
There are some common barriers that have been identified across the budgeting and planning process of 
African countries. National plans can be oftentimes unrealistic, unaffordable or under -estimate the full 
range of capabilities required for implementation. In addition, budgets may not reflect national plans, 
react to changing policy priorities and emerging evidence from monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems. 
There is seldom a connection or usage of past year’s program performance to inform the future budgeting 
process, which may be due to mis -aligned timelines of evidence generation, national planning and 
national budgeting. This literature review is a starting point to understand how some of these challenges 
could be addressed with new and existing tools in the Global South and  highlight factors that can affect 
their implementation. 
 
It is part of a series of scoping activities expected to lead to the development of  a multi-faceted program 
of work that supports the improved linkage of the planning, budgeting and   M&E systems in the six 
Twende Mbele countries (Benin, South Africa, Niger, Kenya, Uganda and   Ghana), and improve capacity 
of government officials to understand, use and present evidence; and  improve leadership for evidence 
use across various levels of government.   
 
II. The Budget process and M&E: 
Monitoring and evaluation processes help inform policy decision making in different spheres of 
government, including budget formulation. Even though M&E is predominantly used to track and evaluate 
various government programs and policies, it can play a critical role in improving the cost effectiveness of 
the program budgets1.  
The 
current guidance from OECD and PEFA (Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework) 
says that national budgets should be linked to national development plans and medium- term strategic 
priorities that go beyond the traditional annual cycle and recognizes the alig nment of budgets with 
strategic planning to identify the resources required to achieve planned outputs and outcomes. 
Challenges often exist despite using various budgeting tools because of a lack of technical capacity, weak 
                                                            
1  (M&E Systems and the Budget.2010)
<<<PAGE=3>>>
2  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
data management systems (and  inadequate performance data), and an overall lack of understanding of 
why M&E is important in budgeting.  
Therefore, even if there are different tools that allow for the linkage between national plans and budgets, 
their implementation can vary depending on co untry strategies on Public Financial Management (PFM) 
reform. This review looks at specific strategies that can either enhance the usage of existing tools in the 
system like Medium-Term Budgeting, Public Expenditure Reviews or incorporate new tools like the World 
Bank’s readiness assessment for M&E implementation. Medium term budgeting as a PFM reform, creates 
an effective link between annual budgets and national priorities , while performance-based budgeting is 
another tool that can enable the implementation of the medium-term budgeting.2 (OECD)  
T
he budget process involves various actors and stakeholders, some of which are common across different 
countries. A standar d budget process involves the Ministry of Finance as the key stakeholder, which 
coordinates with the rest of the government to formulate the annual budget.  
M&E can interact with all stages of the budget process and inform decision making both from  the 
formulation to execution of the budget. Broadly, there are three ways in which monitoring and evaluation 
is integrated in the budget process through various degrees of performance-based budgeting3– 
1) P
resentational performance budgeting  involves the provision of performance information in 
parallel with the annual budget, e.g.,  sector ministries can pu blish M&E data or attach 
performance reports on programs at the end of the budget year. These reports could be used by 
the legislature for budget negotiations but there is no requirement to do so without a formal 
process and is used as a transparency exercise or as background information for policy makers. 
2) Performance-informed budgeting  presents performance information in a systematic manner 
alongside the financial allocations, with the objective of facilitat ing policy makers in taking 
account of this information, to the extent that they may deem appropriate, when deciding upon 
with the budget allocations. 
3) The most rigid form of performance based budgeting ( PBB) is Direct P erformance Budgeting 
where performance information is linked to previously stated objectives and will have direct 
consequences for the budget allocations. However, when funding is tied to specific performance 
targets, there is limited scope for evaluations and the system tends to be rigid to changing 
priorities or contexts.  
Based on evidence from the IMF, for even the most basic version of PBB to be functional, there are some 
key pre-requisites or factors of success -- 
1) Availability of information about the objectives and results of the government expenditure in the 
form of key performance indicators and program evaluation.  
2) A budget process that is designed to facilitate the use of this information in budget spending 
decisions, including simple expenditure reviews and processes. This is further aided by program-
based classification of expenditure.  
                                                            
2  (Anderson, 2008) 
3  (Anderson, 2008)
<<<PAGE=4>>>
3  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
3) Spending agencies are required to explicitly define the outcomes that its services aim to deliver 
to the public and provide the Ministry of Finance and decision -makers during the budget 
preparation process the key performance indicators of its services.  
The following schematic shows the specific ways in which M&E interacts with the Budget Cycle: 
 
Figure 1: M&E and the budget cycle4 
Next we discuss the challenges and strategies in integrating performance information in the budget 
process, where M&E is a tool to achieve that integration. 
III. Existing common challenges in incorporating M&E into budget processes: 
There are various challenges when it comes to incorporating  M&E in the budget process. Most countries 
incorporate performance information in their budgets, which can be helpful if it is used by the right actors 
in the budget process. The literature review and research by Twende Mbele shows that even though M&E 
systems have been adopted in many countries in sub -Saharan Africa, there remains a vast degree of 
underutilization of the data and information from M&E activities, which calls for a greater alignment and 
prioritization in budget execution and formulation.  
A self-evaluation from east African countries and diagnostics from Pacific Island Countries showed the key 
issues were,  
• There are critical missing links between budgets and national/sector priorities, where budgets do not 
usually reflect the latter, within a resource constrained macro-economic framework. 
• Budget management controls are not adequate which can ensure that expenditures, both capital and 
recurrent are in line with approved allocations. This impedes the analysis of spending on programs 
against program performance, to feed back into the policy planning cycle.  
                                                            
4  (Results, Performance and Trust in Government 2010)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
4  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
• Lack of a country -appropriate medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEF) that incorporates long 
term policy goals in the budget. 
• Challenges with off -budget support projects that are not reviewed, costed and monitored explicitly 
and not captured in line ministry proposals and national budget documents. 
• Most b udget documents have limited or no reference to planned priorities , without narrative s to 
explain use of current (and future direction) of estimated revenue and expenditure. 
• Weak institutional links between the national/sector planning functions and budget  functions within 
government can further exacerbate the lack of coordination between planning and budgeting, due to 
the common practice of separating planning and budgeting departments/ministries/staff resources. 
• The Cabinet may devote inadequate time to discussing budget realities and deciding development 
priorities holistically and might focus mostly on budget allocations based on requests raised by the 
specific line ministry. Moreover, Cabinet procedures may not  be systematic in approving policy 
changes throughout the year without appropriate fiscal reviews or medium-term prioritization 
• There can be a lack of alignment between monitoring of perfromanc e indicators for national/sector 
plans and the measurement of service delivery, and budget monitoring and expenditure 
management. Budget reporting is limited to monitoring expenditure against allocations and led by 
finance ministries and focuses on aggregate expenditure, expenditure against the budget allocation 
by agency and type (e.g.,  salaries, wages). Whereas national/sector plan reporting is led by planning 
agencies and sector ministries, focusing on broad development outcomes without drawing any strong 
links between these outcomes and government spending. Therefore, it becomes difficult to ascertain 
the effectiveness of actual expenditure on specific policy and planned priorities within individual 
sectors. 
• There may be a lack of  common understanding of the benefits of M&E among various levels in 
government which creates resistance to the introduction of these reforms 
• The reforms enacted to introduce M&E are not entirely reconciled  with the laws, regulations and 
procedures in place to completely reap the benefits of the reforms.  
• There is often more focus on reform technicalities like developing reporting templates and 
perfromance indicators without establishing how this information would be used to improve decision 
making in prioritization and allocation of resources 
• Ministries and a gencies may lack the adequate skills and capacity to analyze this performance 
information and integrate it with financial information through the Integrated Financial Management 
Information Systems (IFMIS) 
IV. Strategies and tools to better integrate M&E with the budget process 
Given these challenges, it is evident that there needs to be a more robust link between national planning 
and budgeting at different stages of the budget process. Based on the experience of the assessment of 
Pacific Island countries, as well as countries in sub-Saharan Africa like Ghana, there are specific strategies 
and tools that can be incorporated to improve the usage and consumption of M&E in the budget and 
planning process:
<<<PAGE=6>>>
5  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Linking the national planning and budget process5:  
Integrating national planning and budgets is not a straightforward process, however, the following lessons 
emerge as potential strategies, which include using already existing tools, to initiate the linkages: 
• Creating ownership of the national development agenda which goes beyond the Ministry of Finance 
to various sector ministries and departments, as well as the private sector and civil society 
organizations.  
• Strengthening i nstitutional linkages between planning and budgeting – through strong political 
leadership and specifically through a clear coordinating mandate with a unit in the Ministry of Finance 
or a separate entity , which works with the  teams of both the planning agency and the Ministry of 
Finance.  
• Creating sector groups within the Ministry of Finance (education, health etc.) to generate ownership 
and resourcing and reorganizing central agency (Ministry of Finance) with combined responsibilities 
on budget analysis, planning and resource mobilization, and primarily coordinate with their 
counterparts in the line ministries 
• Requiring budget documents to have narratives on direction of current and future expenditure  
estimates, including data on implementation of projects/policies approved in the past, and new 
approved projects or policies 
• Requiring ministry of Finance to conduct “Budget Impact reviews” of all policy/project proposals 
(included those externally funded)  to have reviews of impact before consideration by Cabinet for 
decision 
• Introducing a strategic phase in the budget cycle early in the budget cycle to incorporate preliminary 
consideration of the government’s  broad expenditure priorities. Introducing a strategic phase and a 
medium-term perspective into the budget process can foster  a greater appreciation of priorities and 
assists in building stronger links between planning and budgeting. It specifically reviews national and 
sector plan priorities and new policy initiatives. These can then be framed within the overall budget 
context. A strategic phase in the budget process also  assists in facilitating the prioritization of 
competing policy initiatives and helps to reconcile costs to  available resources. It also enables more 
detailed scrutiny of budget proposals by sector ministries,  the ministry of finance, and political 
decision makers. (UN 2018) (IMF 2009) 
• Developing an MTEF that is suited to the capacity levels in the government, can help achieve greater 
coordination and integration of planning and budgeting system. A full MTEF process may not be 
feasible in low-capacity environments, but a phased approach can be implemented. 
• This can be followed by a simple  public expenditrue review process which should have specific 
reporting requirements for program expenditures for the past year accompanied by basic 
performance information on programs.  
 
2. Imp
lementing a readiness ass essment for M&E6: 
Readiness Assessments can help countries diagnose their M&E capacity and systems to understand what 
incentives are in place, and what demand exists for such information. Evidence from various developed 
and developing countries shows that incentives and demand for information on results is the most 
                                                            
5  (Challenges of Developing MTEFs and PBB in East Africa .2016) 
6  (Zall et al., 2011)
<<<PAGE=7>>>
6  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
important determinant of the degree to which these systems add value in linking program performance 
with resource allocation. The M&E readiness assessment can provide key insights into understand ing 
where the gaps in demand exist, which can help address the challenge of better utilization of M&E .  
A readiness assessment is a diagnostic tool – a questionnaire – to understand the following  
i) What can be measured and monitored? 
ii) What is currently being measured and monitored – both within national development plans 
and budget performance 
iii) Who are the stakeholders involved in the various aspects of reporting? 
iv) Who consumes the reported information and where is it being delivered? 
 
On the demand side, a readiness assessment can help identify the status  of demand for monitoring  and 
performance information from a breadth of stakeholders and  identify ways to harmonize incentives and 
stakeholder engagement to improve accountability, transparency and learning.   
 
On the supply side, a readiness assessment can identify strengths and gaps in country capacity develop 
and use M&E tools over the long run, alongside other budgetary tools that M&E will compliment, like 
medium term budgeting. 
 
For example, in Egypt, the readiness assessment provided crucial information about potential entry points 
for designing an M&E system by identifying existing strong champions in government to support the 
process. Moreover, in Egypt the Minister of Finance supported the move to perfo rmance-based 
management and provided the necessary political leadership to form key perfromance partnerships with 
ministerial counterparts across the government. Therefore, there was significant buy in from the 
government before an elaborate M&E system was implemented. 
 
3. Strengthening indicator reporting links between Budgets and National plans 
 
Creating adequate performance indicators without over burdening the system is key for the success of 
operationalizing the use of M&E.  
• Since the budgets focus on expenditure outcomes while plans focus on development outcomes, it is 
important to create an effective link between the two by identifying a set of common and comparable 
indicators for both plans and budgets. The commonality of indicators would allow the M&E 
framework to track both plan and budget performance in an integrated manner and against each 
other to measure cost-effectiveness of programs.  
• One of the tools that can incorporate common indicators and used for t he purpose of  integrating 
plans and budgets through M&E is the Public Expenditure Review  (PER). A PER can help the 
government assess whether the budget allocations reflect policy priorities of the government and 
whether the desired outcomes are being achieved.  
• There should be a narrative in the budget documents that draws a link between the trends of 
performance indicators and budget allocation. They can also include expenditure estimates for the 
current budget year and for medium- term budgeting, with reference to medium- term plans and 
priorities. 
• Producing performance indicators is not enough and monitoring needs to be combined with program 
evaluations, where possible. Impact evaluations are the most rigorous and scientific form of producing
<<<PAGE=8>>>
7  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
evidence of program perfromance that directly establish a causal linkage between the intervention 
and the impact on beneficiaries. However, impact evaluations can be expensive, lengthy and cannot 
be conducted on a regular basis to actively identify program success within a budget cycle. Therefore, 
there is a need for more rapid, frequent but comprehensive evaluations. Rapid evaluations can be 
carried out in the same budget year and inform budgetary processes as well. For example, Chile 
conducted almost 250 rapid evaluations betwe en 1997 and 2010 – and the evaluation schedule is 
determined by the Ministry of Finance and Congress. The evaluations are conducted by the expert 
consultants and monitored by the Chilean Budget office and used during Chilean budget negotiations. 
Even though desk-based evaluations are not rigorous, they can provide significant insights into  
operational issues relevant to budgetary considerations. (M&E links) 
 
4. Reliable and consistent information and financial management systems:  
For establishing common indicators and tracking performance of plans and budget simultaneously, i t is 
important to have a system of reconciling the performance of programs with the budgetary allocations 
made to them over the course of the year. However,  a key pre-requisite for that is  to have a well -
functioning IFMIS and a good cash management system for cash forecasting and managing arrears. It is 
not necessary that the performance data be linked to the Financial Management Information system 
(which would be a more advanced system), h owever, there would need to be a process in place to 
reconcile the program related financial data to the performance data in the course of a year to ensure 
that the Ministry of Finance and the line ministries are in agreement on the cash allocated to speci fic 
programs and the corresponding activities and outputs generated. This reconciliation between the IFMIS 
and performance data at a program level would also be critical for the spending review process.  
5. M&E skills training for staff across all ministries and agencies 
Some of the key challenges with implementing M&E systems is that the staff responsible for implementing 
and executing these processes may not either completely understand the purpose of doing M&E or may 
not see an advantage to it, which is from a missing “M&E mindset”. To enable a consistent understanding 
of the importance of incorporating performance information in the budget cycle, there needs to be 
significant investment in providing M&E training to all staff, irrespective of whether they are directly 
involved in M&E processes or not. This would help develop consensus on the importance of assessing 
performance across the board and  make it easier to create a buy in on implementing these processes in 
government.  
6. S
ynchronizing the national plan and budgeting cycles7 
If the cycles of reviewing national plans and budgeting are more coordinated, it can enable joint reporting 
and integration of performance and expenditure information in the budget, as discussed earlier. The 
following schematic describes an example of how this can occur in an annual budgeting cycle.  
1) National development plans are prepared in advance of the budget cycle, with explicitly defined 
policy goals that can feed into the budget formulation process 
2) The National plan can then help determine 
                                                            
7  (UNESCAP, 2018)
<<<PAGE=9>>>
8  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
a. the MTEF which is clearly linked to sector plans, with each sector having an idea of their 
medium-term resource ceilings  
b. specific sector ministry plans with outcomes  
3) The above two components will then be reviewed in the Strategic Phase of the annual budget, 
where the national development plans are linked to planned expenditures and available resources  
4) The Strategic Phase should result in an agreement of the final poli cy priorities to be achieved in 
the given budget cycle and associated common performance indicators for performance and 
expenditure  
5) The budget formulation and implementation phase will follow the strategic phase, with 
performance monitoring through the budget implementation cycle, done by sector ministries and 
the specific sector teams within the Ministry of Finance, coordinated by a single entity in the 
planning ministry (as an example) 
6) At the end of the budget cycle, the public expenditu re review will use all the performance 
information, which will then be fed into the subsequent year’s budget cycle.  
 
 
Figure 2: Schematic of integrating M&E with the budget process8 
Additionally, evidence from IMF shows that there are certain common factors that have contributed to a 
successful linkage of M&E to budgets:  
1) Senior government officials in the Ministry of Finance were convinced that the present budgetary 
toolkit was insufficient to deal with adequate fiscal planning to achieve specific development 
objectives, which was often catalyzed by periods of fiscal austerity, volatile revenues, or crises of 
confidence in the government’s ability to spend wisely – which often combined to create a sense 
of urgency for reform.  
                                                            
8 Author’s illustration
<<<PAGE=10>>>
9  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
2) There were individuals or islands of excellence who were the “champions” ready to sell 
performance information as a product for the technical and political benefits of different 
stakeholders – in a centralized ministry like the Ministry of Finance.  
3) The above two were instrumental in providing an impetus to the ministers and political leaders 
to adopt an M&E mindset and overcome resistance.  
4) Delegating M&E to mini stries and agencies  is an important factor not only for the buy -in of 
reforms, but also manage the workload of a centralized M&E system (or within a Ministry of 
Finance). When ministries operate perfromance indicators and buy into the evaluation results, it 
forestalls many potential conflicts later in the budget negotiation process with the Ministry of 
Finance. A stronger stake of ministries increases the likelihood of M&E results being used for  
managerial purposes within ministries, to benefit operational efficiencies.  
The case of Paraguay 9 shows a successful performance informed framework which was a result of a 
government’s decision to implement performance- based budgeting to establish a more  direct link 
between public expenditure and resource allocation. Paraguay followed a phased approach where it 
started using performance information in 2004 but it was only in 2011 that government laid the 
groundwork for a more comprehensive performance fra mework. According to the framework, the 
Ministry of Finance exercises the role of control, monitoring and evaluation of the information submitted 
by the Agencies and Entities of the State under the performance informed framework. 
Ther
e are three main tools adopted under this framework –  
1) Performance indicators. These indicators provide qualitative and quantitative information related 
to outcomes on goods and service provision. In 2015, there were 166 performance indicators applied 
against 57 programs, subprograms and projects from the central administration. 
2) Public Management Annual Reviews (Balances Anuales de Gestión Pública BAGP). The BACPs are 
annual reviews where ministries and agencies report the progress achieved during the fiscal year, in terms 
of objectives, goals and results, and set the institutional commitments for the next fiscal year. These 
documents are presented to Congress and are available on the webpage of each institution. 
3) Public programme evaluation. This is a form of ex- post evaluation report on the evolution of 
public programmes, comparing the achieved results with the initial objectives. There have been 26 public 
programmes/sub-programmes evaluated in the past 5 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
9  (OECD, 2018)
<<<PAGE=11>>>
10  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
V. Conclusion 
This literature review provides a starting point for further discussion on how to improve the integration 
of the three processes - M&E, national planning, and budgeting. There are several factors and pre -
requisites that can determine the success integrating the systems which include – cultivating an M&E 
mindset in institutions, ministerial ownership of the M&E process, integration of data systems that track 
financial and performance information and streamlining indicators across the three processes. Conducting 
a readiness assessment before implementing an M&E system would help develop a system that is more 
suited to the country context. Existing tools like MTEF, PERs can be leveraged to enhance the use of M&E 
through creating dependencies between the M&E information and these specific outputs. Ultimately, the 
integration of these systems will depend on signficant synchronization between various government 
agencies, and M&E can be leveraged to be a tool of coordination as well as accountability.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
11  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
VI. Bibliography 
Allen, Richard, Taz Chaponda, Lesley Fisher, and Rohini Ray. “Medium-Term Budget Frameworks in Sub-Saharan 
African Countries,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2017. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3043168. 
Anderson, Barry. “Performance Budgeting: A Users Guide,” 2008. 
Bank, Asian Development. Results-Based Public Sector Management: A Rapid Assessment Guide. Asian 
Development Bank, 2012. 
https://www.vlebooks.com/vleweb/product/openreader?id&#61;none&amp;isbn&#61;9789290928393. 
“Challenges of Developing MTEFs and PBB in East Africa .” IMF, March 1, 2016. 
De Renzio, Paolo. “Aid, Budgets and Accountability: A Survey Article,” Development policy review 24, 24, no. 6 
(November 2006): 627–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7679.2006.00351.x. 
Goldman, Ian, and Mine Pabari. Using Evidence in Policy and Practice: Lessons from Africa. Taylor & Francis, 2020. 
“How to Structure Budgets to Enable the Use of Evidence,” 2013. 
Kusek, Jody Zall. “GET Brief: Assessing Country Readiness for M&E Assessing Country Readiness for Results-Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation to Support Results Informed Budgeting,” January 1, 2011. 
Lienert, Ian. “Role of the Legislature in Budget Processes.” CABRI. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137315304.0016. 
Mackay, Keith Robin, and Robin MacKay Keith Robin MacKay. How to Build M&E Systems to Support Better 
Government. Independent Evaluation Group Studies. Herndon: World Bank Publications, 2007. 
https://doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-7191-6. 
“M&E Systems and the Budget.” World Bank, 2010. 
“M&E: Tools, Methods and Approaches.” World Bank, 2004.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
12  USING M&E TO LINK BUDGETS AND PLANNING IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 
Mink, Stephen D. “Findings Across Agricultural Public Expenditure Reviews in African Countries.” International 
Food Policy Research Institute. International Food Policy Research Institute, April 1, 2016. 
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1820838277. 
OECD. “Chapter 3. Linking Strategic Planning to Budgeting, OECD Public Governance Reviews: Paraguay,” 2018. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264301856-en. 
“OECD Public Governance Reviews: Paraguay.” OECD, 2018. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264301856-en. 
“Performance Evaluation and Expenditure Review: Budgeting and Accountability.” Government of  Mississippi, n.d. 
https://www.peer.ms.gov/Reports/reports/reports/chap5518.pdf. 
“Results, Performance and Trust in Government .” World Bank, 2010. 
Robinson, Marc. “Performance-Based Budgeting Manual,” 2009. 
Robinson, Marc, and Duncan Last. “A Basic Model of Performance-Based Budgeting,” Technical Notes and Manuals 
2009, 2009, no. 1 (2009): 1. https://doi.org/10.5089/9781462320271.005. 
UNESCAP. “Improving the Links between National (and Sector) Plans and Budgets for Sustainable Development in 
Pacific Island Countries A Practical Guidance Note.” United Nations ESCAP, March 1, 2018. 
Worthington, Ross. “Performance and Programme-Based Budgeting in Africa.” SSRN Electronic Journal. CABRI, 
2017. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3057023. 
Zall, Jody, Kusek Ray, and C Rist. “THE WORLD BANK Ten Steps Ten Steps to a Results- Based Monitoring and 
Evaluation System to a Results- Based Monitoring and Evaluation System.” World Bank, 2011.