<<<PAGE=1>>>
This brief focuses on common 
challenges experienced by Civil 
Society Organisations (CSOs) 
in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda 
and Ghana in their efforts to 
share and collaborate with 
government ministries and 
departments on monitoring and 
evaluation. A series of workshops in 
these countries provided insights into how sharing 
and learning between governments and CSOs 
can be strengthened to improve contributions to 
development objectives. 
STRENGTHENING 
PARTICIPATION  
OF CIVIL SOCIETY 
ORGANISATIONS  
IN NATIONAL EVALUATION 
SYSTEMS
→ Insights from Uganda, Rwanda, Kenya and Ghana
BRIEF                         JUNE 2019
<<<PAGE=2>>>
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANISATIONS AND GOVERNMENT
Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) contribute significantly to the social and economic development of countries. Acting 
as intermediaries within their societies, CSOs cover a wide range of institutions and mandates, and include work at a  
community level – known as Community-Based Organisations (CBO) and professional Non-Government Organisations 
(NGO), as well as advocacy, lobbying and research organisations. 
CSOs come with varying human and financial capabilities, and serve on issues ranging from basic social services to the 
protection of human and environmental rights. As such, CSOs represent a wealth of knowledge and potential influence, 
and have much to offer in the process of national development. 
Within a countries evaluation ecosystem, CSOs play a significant role as a source of evidence generation. They employ 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) professionals; commission evaluations in different countries, and in many cases, they 
have the more advanced M&E systems, generating significant amounts of data and evaluation evidence. However, the 
participation of CSOs in government evaluation systems both at national or sectoral level tends to be limited. And with 
that, there is a missed opportunity for sharing and learning between governments and CSOs. 
While CSOs in the participating countries are faced with a number of challenges that are context-specific and deter-
mined by socio-political and historical factors that differ from country to country, there are some challenges that are 
common between them.
A small number of CSOs participated in these 
workshops. The views of the CSOs who participated in 
the workshop and the findings made are valuable but 
might not be representative of the experiences of all 
CSOs in that country.
→
BACKGROUND
Recent diagnostic studies unpacked the current status 
of a National Evaluation System (NES) in five partner 
countries, in order to determine the most appropriate 
interventions for strengthening evaluation systems 
in targeted countries. This work highlighted the need 
for CSOs to be further included in government M&E 
systems to enhance Government performance and 
accountability. 
In trying to find appropriate areas for collaboration, the 
workshops in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Ghana al-
lowed participants to grapple with the extent to which 
CSOs contribute to their government M&E systems and 
where specific opportunities for strengthened engage-
ment exist. Understanding the different functions with-
in an NES, and how they relate to each other, is crucial 
for both defining a range of sub-systems, and providing 
a more nuanced analysis of the capacity of an evalua-
tion system and the ways different stakeholders inter-
act within it. We used this framework to provide insight 
into areas where collaboration or engagement can be 
strengthened or established.
To understand the status of CSOs in the NES, we asked 
workshop participants to identify areas that CSOs have 
been contributing to. The workshops also acted as a 
theory of change training, which saw participants pre-
senting challenges to greater collaboration, and then 
designing a casual pathway to achieve their desired 
change. 
SUMMARY OF WORKSHOP FINDINGS
There is a large degree of similarity regarding the chal -
lenges discussed across the four targeted countries and 
can be categorised according the Ten Functions of a 
National Evaluation System.1 The main drivers of limited 
participation within their countries NES was expressed 
as a lack of collaboration opportunities between CSO; by 
donor priorities as the main driver of evaluation demand 
and use; as well as weak M&E capacity in the sector. The 
main outcome of the workshops was the desire for CSOs 
to become involved in their country’s policy planning and 
implementation cycle. CSOs have limited opportunities 
to influence Government planning as CSO evidence was 
perceived to be less credible (or more controversial) and 
as such CSOs are rarely deliberations on using M&E in 
planning or program improvement. Capacity restrictions 
encountered by CSOs – particularly financial and human 
resources – also greatly affect CSO’s ability to be involved 
in government M&E systems. 
With the exception of a few, most CSOs lack the necessary 
in-house capabilities for policy analysis or research to en-
gage effectively with the state. Fragmentation within civil 
society further weakens collaboration and agreement on 
key policy issues, meaning that CSOs lack a coordinated 
front to engage effectively through a centralised evalua-
tion system. Despite the fact that CSOs are usually striving 
towards the same ultimate objectives of purposeful social 
change to enhance the wellbeing of people, harmonisa-
tion between these organisations and bodies, remains 
relatively weak. 
1  Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results Anglophone Africa, 2018, Ten 
Functions of a National Evaluation System: https://www.wits.ac.za/clear-aa/
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Evidence production and research
CSOs have access to information and data that 
can contribute to evidence-based decision making 
at a policy level. Whether mandated by design or 
by funder demands, CSOs are indispensable in 
generating evidence that can be used for improving 
service delivery, accountability and good governance. 
CSOs also undertake evaluations of their interventions, 
presenting government with key findings that might 
assist in planning and citizen feedback.
Capacity building
Capacity building of CSO staff occurs through 
donor-funded investments and the development 
community, which help build the M&E capacity of 
local CSOs. In addition, these investments may create 
capacity for CSOs to conduct evaluation that will have 
benefits beyond the programme. In countries where 
CSOs have organised platforms for collaboration, 
capacity building can be far-reaching, and able to 
strengthen the work of their peers and government.
AREAS IN WHICH CSOs CONTRIBUTE  
TO NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS
Dissemination of evidence
CSOs are well connected locally, regionally and (often) 
internationally at both vertical and horizontal scales, 
and believe they are strong in disseminating evidence. 
Networks can be built thematically, regionally, or as 
a result of shared donors – the act of disseminating 
knowledge with other organisations, in fact, may be 
a requirement of funding. CSOs may also be part of 
formal and informal professional networks, where 
best practice is often shared, and feedback given. 
This can benefit government agencies wishing to 
incorporate further evidence into their planning and 
policy development.
Performance monitoring
CSOs are heavily engaged in assessing the 
performance of their programmes and those 
of government departments where there is 
collaboration. While this monitoring is often driven 
by donors, the organisations also make use of 
performance monitoring to inform what is working 
and what is not in order to improve the programming, 
make changes, and seek additional capacity (which 
may include further funding).
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Twende Mbele has focused on how to improve the performance of accountability and transparency of 
the State using M&E as a tool; it has not specifically focused on CSOs, however in Twende’s mandate to 
improve accountability, other actors have been included.This means Twende is interested in Government 
accountability to Parliament, for example, and accountability to wider Society – hence our work with CSOs. 
Twende has looked at how CSOs can help in the responsiveness and accountability of the State and what 
role civil society could play.
Twende’s work has included country-level diagnostic studies on CSO involvement and, in particular, has 
looked at the role of CSOs in National Evaluation Systems. The project resulted in the development of 
theories of change in each country exploring what an active role in NES would look like. 
Dr Ian Goldman, Twende Mbele Founding Member – South Africa 
→
Limited collaboration between CSOs
Collaboration between similar CSOs could result 
in optimising available resources and spreading 
the workload. However, exacerbated financial 
competition, dominance of the donor agenda, 
donor-shaped M&E systems, and differing ideologies 
between CSOs hamper opportunities to coordinate 
inputs on policy processes. Civil society itself lacks 
appropriate platforms to self-organise and the 
capacity to engage with other CSOs. An organised 
and informed civil society can leverage off of work 
already being done – avoiding duplicating of effort 
which frees up resources for other work. An organised 
civil society is better equipped to engage in policy 
processes. 
Limited collaboration with government
A lack of political will to engage fully and meaningfully 
with CSOs hinders the uptake of evidence from 
civil society. Similarly, some CSOs may not seek to 
collaborate due to a lack of capacity and constricting 
donor requirements. Inflexible programmes, poor 
governance structures and inadequate human 
resources also contribute to a lack of collaboration 
and opportunities to engage. There is often mistrust 
between civil society and government due to a 
variety of reasons ranging from infringements on 
civil liberties, censorship of critical voices, capacity 
challenges at state level and so forth.
Influence of donors
While donor funding makes critical activities 
possible, the funding comes with an agenda that 
could take preference over the CSO’s mandate, and 
may not be aligned with national needs. Donor-
driven programmes can be inflexible to changes 
in context and may not contribute to a culture of 
sharing information, as the CSO is primarily focused 
on meeting donor requirements. The reliance on 
donor funding is also unpredictable and limited, 
and drives competition between CSOs. Government 
and CSOs follow different guidelines for collecting 
data based on the discrepancies between what 
donors and the government are looking for. There 
are often indicators for performance monitoring that 
are deemed irrelevant or inadequate for monitoring 
progress in service delivery at the local level.
Limited funding
Because of a limited capacity to bargain, and 
a lack of autonomy, CSOs often end up with 
short implementation periods for most of their 
programmes, and an inability to fund other activities. 
A lack of funding also means CSOs are not able to 
afford experienced evaluation experts, and end up 
with the lowest bidders in the market and usually 
unqualified staff. 
Lack of power
CSOs have little influence over how the incentive 
structures or values of government M&E systems, and 
are often excluded from existing M&E structures, with 
an inability to influence the government system as a 
whole.
CHALLENGES CSOs FACE IN CONTRIBUTING  
TO NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS
AREAS IN WHICH CSOs CONTRIBUTE  
TO NATIONAL EVALUATION SYSTEMS
<<<PAGE=5>>>
FINALLY…
Civil society organisations play a key role in promoting social change particularly in situations where 
governments has failed. However, the relationship between CSOs and government has been tainted with 
antagonism and animosity due to different ideologies around achieving development outcomes. CSOs 
that are interfacing with the government are normally those that are highly recognised and funded by 
international donors, normally working within the ‘invited’ spaces compared to ‘invented’ spaces. This brief 
demonstrated that CSOs produce research and evaluation evidence key to inform policy, decision making, 
programming and budgeting which can bring about social change. Furthermore, there is often limited 
interaction between CSOs and governments. This has resulted to less meaningful engagement thereof and 
as a result there is limited learning and use of products generated either by CSOs or government to inform 
social change. Leveraging opportunities between CSOs and governments will go a long way in improving 
governance, transparency and accountability. 
→
REFERENCES
Amisi, M.M. (2015). Development of South Africa’s National Evaluation Policy and System 2011-2014. www.aejonline.org.
Davies, I., C. (2017). National evaluation policy within a national M&E policy framework. Kenya
DPME. (2011). National Evaluation Policy Framework. Pretoria: Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation.
Goldman, I., Byamugisha, A., Gounou, A., Smith, L.R., Ntakumba, S., Lubanga, T., Sossou, D. & Rot- Munstermann, K., (2018) ‘The 
emergence of government evaluation systems in Africa: The case of Benin, Uganda and South Africa’, African Evaluation 
Journal 6(1), pp 1-11
Government of Zimbabwe (2015). National Monitoring and Evaluation Policy.
Hojlund, S. (2015). Evaluation in the European Commission: For Accountability or Learning? European Journal of Risk 
Regulation, Vol. 6 No. 1, Cambridge University Press.
Mwaijambe, F. (2018). Why Should Countries Have National Evaluation Policies? In IDEV (2018), Building Supply and Demand 
for Evaluation for Evaluation in Africa. Volume 1. 
Office of the Prime Minister, (2011). National policy on public Sector Monitoring and Evaluation. Uganda.
Segone, Bamberger and Reddy (2015). National Evaluation Policies for sustainable and equitable development: How to 
integrate gender equality and social equity in national evaluation policies and systems.
The Presidency, Ministry of Devolution and Planning. (2016). National Monitoring & Evaluation Policy. Kenya.
I believe there is an important role for think-tanks and we need to move away from seeing Government 
departments and Parliaments as the key audiences for evaluations. We see think-tanks as important 
knowledge brokers which interact with wider society on particular sectors. 
Finding platforms where evaluations results can be shared and engaged with, could see greater 
participation in evaluation systems. In sharing content, civil society can see the work being done, and 
that which is not being done, and provide the necessary push back needed to make government more 
accountable.
Dr Ian Goldman, Twende Mbele Founding Member – South Africa
<<<PAGE=6>>>
TWENDE MBELE is a multi-country peer-learning partnership centred on country government 
priorities for building national evaluation systems in an effort to improve government performance and 
accountability to citizens. 
www.twendembele.org
Phone: +27 (0) 11 717 3453; Email: cara.waller@wits.ac.za 
CLEAR-AA, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
Phone: +229 2130 1655; Email: esegla@gmail.com 
Bureau de l’Evaluation des Politiques et de l’Analyse de l’Action Gouvernementale 
03BP 743 Cotonou, Benin
Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results
ANGLOPHONE AFRICA
The Centre for Learning on Evaluation and Results Anglophone Africa (CLEAR-AA) is a regional centre 
that develops high-quality, applied, cost-effective regional technical assistance and capacity-building 
programmes, and connects with global learning to produce innovative materials and methods to enable 
practical knowledge-sharing on M&E and performance management.
www.wits.ac.za/clear-aa 
The Oval Building, University of the Witwatersrand 
2 St David’s Place, Parktown, Johannesburg 
Telephone: +27 11 717 3157; Fax: +27 86 765 5860 
E-mail: CLEAR.AnglophoneAfrica@wits.ac.za