<<<PAGE=1>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
Available online 4 August 2023
2666-5573/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Role of course relevance and course content quality in MOOCs acceptance 
and use 
Chimobi R. Ucha
* 
School of Computing, Weber State University, 1395 Evaldson Street, Rm 379, Ogden, UT 84408, USA   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Technology acceptance model 
MOOCs 
Course relevance 
Course content quality 
ABSTRACT  
Despite several benefits attributed to the use of MOOCs for learning, acceptance levels remain low and studies 
investigating adoption and use of the technology are limited. This study draws from the literature on specific 
factors that influence online learning environments and extends the technology acceptance model (TAM) to 
understand if those factors can be used to explain and facilitate MOOCs acceptance and use behaviors among 
learners. The factors investigated include, course content quality, course relevance, course instructor quality, 
course design quality, learner-instructor interaction, and learner-interaction. There were 138 participants in the 
study. Partial Least Squares SEM (PLS-SEM) was used to analyze the relationships proposed for the study. The 
results suggest that the extended TAM offered a good explanation of MOOC acceptance and use, with course 
relevance and course content quality as external variables affecting MOOCs acceptance. Findings from this study 
provides practical implications for MOOCs implementation to increase acceptance and further lays a foundation 
for future research   
Introduction 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are online courses that aim 
to make quality higher education more accessible to people across the 
world, regardless of their geographical location [ 16,45 ]. The term 
MOOC was first used to describe an online course taught by Professor 
George Siemens at the University of Manitoba in 2008 [16] . However, in 
2012, a different form of MOOCs, sometimes referred to as xMOOCs was 
popularized by top MOOC providers such as Coursera and edX [ 16 , 21 ]. 
This new form is what we know and refer to as MOOCs today. MOOCs 
have become a major higher education advancement and continue to 
gain increasing popularity as they provide online learning opportunities 
on a large scale to people with no geographic limitations [ 15 , 37 ]. They 
are especially beneficial in providing quality higher education to those 
who have limited access, for instance, those in developing countries [ 21 , 
22 ]. 
The benefits of MOOCs have since been enjoyed by both those in 
developing and developed countries, as anyone who needs to learn a 
new skill or improve on an existing skill with limited barriers to learning 
can turn to MOOCs for their educational needs. However, despite 
growing interest in MOOCs, there are limited studies investigating 
adoption behaviors of the learning technology [22] and how the 
perceptions people hold about the technology affect their intention to 
adopt or use them. This topic is especially important because, despite all 
the benefits associated with MOOCs, researchers have often pointed to 
the fact that MOOCs are not being utilized to their potential [ 7 , 14 ]. And 
this is potentially because users are not accepting and using them effi -
ciently for their learning purposes [42] . Hence, it is important to 
continue to explore the subject of how to improve acceptance and use of 
MOOCs among learners if their potential is to be realized [37] . 
As a result, investigating ways to improve acceptance and use has 
become important for MOOC research and a few studies have examined 
this phenomenon using different theories such as Technology Accep -
tance Model (TAM) (e.g., [ 37 , 43 , 44 ]). However, a lot of previous studies 
examining acceptance and use of MOOCs have mostly focused on de -
mographic, psychological and social factors [37] . With studies exam -
ining specific course-related factors that can aid in tangible 
improvements in MOOC quality and acceptance, still limited [43] . 
Although some of these course-related factors have been explored in the 
context of e-learning [ 1 , 31,43 ], the results of those studies may not 
directly translate to the MOOCs context. Hence, it is important to 
explore how those different factors affect acceptance and use of MOOCs. 
This is especially crucial because learning in MOOCs differ significantly 
from learning occurring in more traditional learning environments. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: chimobiucha@weber.edu .  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computers and Education Open 
journal homepag e: www.sci encedirect. com/journa l/computers-a nd-educati on-open 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2023.100147 
Received 22 December 2021; Received in revised form 29 June 2023; Accepted 3 August 2023
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
2
Especially since MOOCs learning is primarily optional, informal, and 
self-regulated, requiring more self-motivation and persistence for suc -
cess [43] . Understanding such specific factors that influence learners ’ 
intention to participate in MOOCs can enable and support MOOC de -
velopers and course designers to design content and strategies that will 
be valuable to students and increase their use of MOOCs [43] . 
This study therefore draws from the literature on specific factors that 
have been found to influence acceptance and use of traditional online 
learning environments to understand if they can be used to explain and 
facilitate MOOCs acceptance and use behaviors among learners. The 
phenomenon was explored using the TAM framework and the study 
proposes a MOOC acceptance framework that examines the roles of the 
identified factors, namely, course content quality, course instructor 
quality, course design quality, course relevance, learner-learner inter -
action and learner-instructor interaction in learner acceptance and use 
of MOOCs. The aim is to provide MOOC platforms and designers some 
guidance on course-specific factors to consider when developing MOOCs 
in order to increase learner acceptance and use. Hence, the main 
research question examined by the study was: 
RQ. What specific factors associated with e-learning courses influ -
ence learners ’ acceptance and use of MOOCs? 
To answer the research question, the study examined the well- 
explored TAM constructs (perceived usefulness and perceived ease of 
use) and less-explored course characteristics variables related to MOOCs 
use experience, namely, course instructor quality, course content qual -
ity, course design quality, course relevance, learner-instructor interac -
tion, and learner-learner interaction. The TAM framework was 
considered appropriate because of its strong predictive power of an in -
dividual ’ s intention to use a system [ 32 , 40 ]. Partial least squares 
structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) was used to test the proposed 
relationships because of the exploratory nature of the study. Data for the 
study was collected using online surveys and a total of 138 people 
completed the survey. 
Literature review and research model 
Technology acceptance model 
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is a technology adoption 
framework that proposes that peoples ’ behavioral intention to use a 
system is a strong predictor of actual usage behavior. It also stipulates 
that behavioral intention to use a system is a factor of an individuals ’ 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of the system [ 6 , 40 ]. This 
theory further holds that perceived ease of use also influences perceived 
usefulness, as a system would be generally more useful if it is easy to use 
[41] . Perceived usefulness is defined as “ the degree to which an indi -
vidual believes that using a particular system will enhance his or her job 
performance ” ( [6] , p.319; [40] ). In other words, how useful they expect 
the system to be in their effort to achieve their goals. This construct deals 
more with the utilitarian value of a system, that is, how useful or ad -
vantageous users consider it to be in achieving their goals [ 6 , 40 ]. 
Perceived usefulness drives motivation in such a way that, the more 
useful a person considers a system, the more they are likely to intend to 
use it and vice versa [6] . Perceived ease of use on the other hand refers to 
the degree or extent to which “ a person believes that using a particular 
system would be free of effort ” [ 6 , 41 ]. In other words, how easy they 
believe it will be to use the system. This construct drives motivation in 
such a way that, the easier a system is to use, the more users are likely to 
accept and use it [6] . 
TAM remains the most widely utilized theory of acceptance and use, 
due to the superior predictive power of its constructs [ 6 , 40 ]. TAM was 
considered appropriate for this study because it is a framework that has 
been used by other researchers to examine acceptance and use of 
MOOCs [ 23 , 37 ] and other e-learning contexts [ 9 , 24 ]. For instance, Tao 
et al. [37] found that perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use 
significantly predicted intention to use MOOCs among college students. 
They also found that perceived ease of use was a strong predictor of 
perceived usefulness and that behavioral intention significantly pre -
dicted actual usage behavior of MOOCs among the students. Similarly, 
Ma and Lee [23] , found perceived usefulness to be a strong predictor of 
behavioral intention to use MOOCs. Furthermore, while examining 
e-learning acceptance among university students, Mailizar et al. [24] 
found that perceived usefulness strongly predicted students ’ behavioral 
intention to use e-learning and that perceived ease of use was strongly 
associated with perceived usefulness of e-learning. Fearnley and Amora 
[9] also found that behavioral intention to adopt learning management 
systems (LMS) is influenced by perceived usefulness. Perceived useful -
ness on the other hand was influenced by perceived ease of use and 
behavioral intention significantly predicted actual usage of LMS among 
participants [9] . Based on evidence from previous studies on the use of 
TAM to predict acceptance and use of e-learning and MOOCs, the 
following hypotheses were proposed ( Fig. 1 ): 
H1 . Perceived usefulness will positively influence behavioral inten -
tion to use MOOCs. 
H2. Perceived ease of use will positively influence perceived use -
fulness of MOOCs. 
H3. Perceived ease of use will positively influence behavioral 
intention to use MOOCs. 
H4. Behavioral Intention to use MOOCs will positively influence 
actual usage of MOOCs. 
Extending TAM: examining determinants of perceived usefulness and ease 
of use 
The basic framework of TAM has been extended by several studies 
that examine external factors likely affecting the key constructs of 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use [ 1 , 31 , 32 , 40 , 41 ]. For 
instance, Venkatesh & Davis [40] suggested that factors such as result 
demonstrability, job relevance, output quality, and perceived ease of use 
all predicted perceived usefulness. And factors such as computer anxiety 
and playfulness predicted ease of use [41] . Similarly, Park et al. [32] , 
found relevance and perceived ease of use to be significant predictors of 
perceived usefulness. These studies further emphasize the need to 
Fig. 1. Technology acceptance model [39] .  
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
3
consider the importance of external variables influencing TAM con -
structs in the design and implementation of effective information sys -
tems and to improve adoption of such systems [32] . Mathieson [26] 
further emphasizes the importance of such variables by suggesting that 
examining TAM without consideration for external factors that are likely 
influencing its main constructs will only provide a broad view of user 
opinions about the system with no specific information that can inform 
the design of a better or enhanced system. Hence, specifying external 
factors for TAM constructs not only predicts intention to use a system 
but further offers an explanation as to why a particular system is not 
being adopted, so that corrective measures can be implemented [ 6 , 40 ]. 
Discussed below are the external variables that were examined as 
potentially influencing the main TAM constructs in this study with 
regards to MOOC adoption and use: 
Course content, instructor, and design quality 
Providing quality instruction is important for any learning environ -
ment. This is even more so for online learning platforms (such as 
MOOCs) where the instructor is not always available to clarify any lack 
of understanding of the course content. As a result, course quality, 
instructor quality and overall quality of instruction are important factors 
that have been found to be affecting learner perceptions of usefulness 
and ease of use of online learning [ 1 , 31 , 43 ]. For instance, Abbas [1] 
found that students ’ perceptions of the quality of the instructor signifi -
cantly predicted both perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of 
the platform. Similarly, Lee, Yoon, and Lee [19] found instructor char -
acteristics and quality of teaching materials to be positively related to 
perceptions of usefulness of e-learning, while finding content design to 
be positively associated with perceptions of ease of use. Furthermore, 
Ozkan and Koesler [31] found both instructor and content quality to be 
strong predictors of learners ’ perceived satisfaction with an e-learning 
system. Instructor quality was found to be significantly predicting 
perceived usefulness, while course design quality was significantly 
predicting perceived ease of use of e-learning [4] . Also, the content 
quality of an e-learning website was found to be positively associated 
with perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use [29] . And course 
content quality and course design quality were found to be predictors of 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of mobile learning [2] . 
Although studies examining the relationship between these quality 
antecedents within the context of MOOCs are limited, a few studies have 
found a positive relationship between some of these factors and 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of MOOCs. For instance, 
in their study examining the quality factors that influence students ’ 
continuous intention to participate in MOOCs, Yang et al. [43] found 
course quality to be positively associated with perceived usefulness of 
MOOCs. Also, Razami and Ibrahim [34] found a significant positive 
relationship between course quality and perceived usefulness while 
investigating factors influencing MOOCs acceptance in higher educa -
tion. Furthermore, course interface design was found to be positively 
associated with perceived ease of use of MOOCs, while course quality 
was positively associated with perceived usefulness of MOOCs [37] . And 
Yang and Zhao [44] found that the information quality of MOOCs 
courses positively influenced their perceived usefulness. 
In general, these studies show that instruction characteristics such as 
the quality of instructional materials, instructor feedback, teaching 
style, among others, positively affect students ’ perceptions of usefulness, 
ease of use of online learning, and overall perception of the course. 
Hence, within the context of TAM, this study proposes that ( Fig. 2 ): 
H5. Course content quality will positively influence perceived use -
fulness of MOOCs. 
H6 . Course content quality will positively influence perceived ease of 
use of MOOCs. 
H7. Course instructor quality will positively influence perceived 
usefulness of MOOCs. 
H8. Course instructor quality will positively influence perceived ease 
of use of MOOCs. 
H9. Course design quality will positively influence perceived ease of 
use of MOOCs. 
Course relevance 
Relevance is a successful learning motivator, with different studies 
finding that materials that learners perceive to be relevant, either in 
their work or personal interests, successfully motivated them to learn [ 3, 
13 ]. Specific to MOOCs, Khalil and Ebner [18] found that when learners 
perceive that MOOCs hold relevance for them either in their professional 
Fig. 2. Conceptual framework – Extended technology acceptance model.  
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
4
or academic life, they are more motivated to learn using them. 
Furthermore, Keller [17] suggests that engaging strategies such as 
demonstrating the intrinsic value of the learning content to the students, 
explicitly suggesting how instruction can help students meet their future 
goals, and having learners relate instruction to their own goals, estab -
lishes relevance for the course content and can motivate students to 
learn. 
The importance of relevance on perceived usefulness of a system was 
established in TAM2 by [40] where they identified job relevance as a 
determinant of perceived usefulness. They defined this construct as “an 
individual’s perception regarding the degree to which the target system 
is applicable to his or her job”and found it to be significantly predicting 
perceived usefulness. In the context of e-learning, relevance has been 
found to be a strong predictor of perceived usefulness of e-learning 
systems [27,32]. It is evident from these studies that relevance is related 
to perceived usefulness in such a way that, the more relevance learners 
attribute to a MOOC, the more they are likely to consider it useful. 
However, there is a lack of recent studies examining online learning 
course relevance within the context of TAM. Although, some studies 
have examined the construct in understanding positive online learning 
perceptions and behavior in general. For instance, Cheng and Xie [5] 
found that students’ perceived content relevance had an indirect effect 
on student procrastination in online learning, through task value. And 
course content relevance was also found to be a major factor influencing 
student satisfaction in online learning in higher education in Malaysia 
[38]. Hence, within the context of TAM, this study proposes that (Fig. 2): 
H10. Course relevance will positively influence perceived usefulness 
of MOOCs. 
Learner-Instructor and learner-learner interaction 
The social information processing model of interpersonal interaction 
by Walther [47] assumes that participants in a computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) environment are essentially driven to develop 
social relationships. The model maintains that it is possible for players in 
CMC environments to attain and surpass the level of communication 
quality obtainable in face-to-face environments, especially given the 
unique affordances of CMC environments which make different kinds of 
communication possible. Following this, it can be argued that the 
absence of face-to-face interaction does not have to inhibit the level of 
communication that is required for online learning, however, the issue 
of lack of interpersonal interaction continues to be regarded as the 
biggest bottleneck for learning occurring in online spaces. For instance, 
Moore & Kearsley [28] argue that learners tend to feel isolated in online 
learning environments as they lack the level of rich interaction they 
experience in traditional environments. More recent studies have also 
referred to lack of sense of community and effective social interactions 
as major issues facing online learning, including MOOCs [14,15]. There 
is therefore a need for an enhanced level of interpersonal interaction to 
be designed into online learning environments for learners to be moti -
vated more by such learning. 
More (1989) defined two types of interaction related to interpersonal 
communication that he considers essential for online learning, namely 
learner-instructor interaction (i.e., interaction involving teacher and 
learners) and learner-learner interaction (i.e., interaction involving 
learners with each other). Consequently, many studies have since 
examined these types of interactions within online learning environ -
ments, to determine their effects on student learning. For instance, in 
their study involving 299 learners from an online MBA course, Peltier, 
Drago, and Schibrowsky [33] found student-student interaction and 
student-instructor interaction to be significant determinants of 
perceived effectiveness of the course by students. Similarly, Marks et al. 
[25] found that instructor-student interaction and student-student 
interaction had significant effects on learning effectiveness in online 
learning spaces, with instructor-student interaction having twice as 
much effect as student-student interaction. Furthermore, Hone and El 
Said [14] reported a lack of satisfaction with MOOCs among students 
who indicated feeling isolated as a result of a lack of interaction with 
another human in the course. Other studies have also linked these 
constructs to learning satisfaction [36], perceived effectiveness of online 
courses [33], increased motivation and retention in online learning [30] 
and MOOCs [10]. Hence, given that interpersonal interaction will likely 
affect perceptions about different aspects of the course as indicated by 
previous studies, this study proposes that interpersonal interaction 
perceptions will positively influence both TAM constructs (Fig. 2): 
H11. Learner-instructor interaction will positively influence 
perceived usefulness of MOOCs. 
H12. Learner-instructor interaction will positively influence 
perceived ease of use of MOOCs. 
H13. Learner-learner interaction will positively influence perceived 
usefulness of MOOCs. 
H14. Learner-learner interaction will positively influence perceived 
ease of ue of MOOCs. 
Research methodology 
Study design and measures 
The study used a structured online questionnaire consisting of two 
parts for testing the theoretical model proposed. The first part of the 
survey was used to gather demographic information of the participants 
while the second part collected data on the main study constructs being 
measured. The construct items were measured using a 5-point multi- 
item Likert scale, where participants were asked to indicate to what 
extent they agree or disagree with a statement where (1) represents 
“strongly disagree” and (5) strongly agree. 
All the construct items, except actual usage, were adopted from 
previously validated scales and were modified to fit the context of this 
study. The items for perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use were 
adapted from the original TAM model proposed by Davis [6], while 
items for behavioral intention were adapted from Venkatesh [41]. The 
item used to measure actual usage for this study was specifically 
measuring the level of MOOC enrollment among participants. This was 
considered appropriate as the study aimed to explore adoption of 
MOOCs by participants. The scales for course instructor quality and 
course content quality were adapted from Ozkan & Koseler [31] and Lee 
et al. [19], while that of MOOC design quality will be adapted from Lee 
et al. [19]. The items for course relevance were adapted from the scales 
of relevance established in Venkatesh and Davis [40] and Park et al. 
[32]. The items for learner-instructor and learner-learner interaction 
were adapted from the scales established in Peltier et al. [33] and Marks 
et al. [25]. Please find a full table indicating the items used for each scale 
in Appendix 1. 
Participants and procedure 
The study investigated perceptions of MOOCs learners to better un -
derstand how those influence their intention and actual use behavior of 
MOOCs. Participants for the study were recruited via Prolific (an online 
research data collection service). A purposeful sampling technique was 
used because the study aimed to include only those with some experi -
ence using MOOCs and participants who did not meet that criterion were 
filtered out using a screening questionnaire. Particularly, only those who 
indicated that they have enrolled in and completed at least one MOOC 
course in the past were selected for the study. Also, participant country 
was restricted to the US in the selection process to allow for a more 
focused sample, as the platform consists of people from different coun -
tries. The main survey was sent out on the 29th of July 2020 and was 
active for a total of 1 week. All respondents were required to be at least 
18 years old to participate and were required to complete a consent form 
before proceeding. A total of 138 people completed the survey. Of the 
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
5
138 participants who completed the survey, 70 were male, 67 were fe -
male and 1 indicated as non-binary. The mean age of respondents was 
28.41 ( SD = 8.991), with about 60% of participants being 28 years or 
younger. Also, the participants were mostly educated, with about 57% of 
them having an undergraduate degree or above, and another 24% 
having some college or technical education. 
Data analysis technique 
Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) was 
used for data analysis for the study. PLS-SEM was considered more 
appropriate than the traditional covariance-based SEM for this study 
because it is more suited for exploratory research and is more efficient 
for examining smaller sample sizes, as was the case in this study [ 11,12 ]. 
PLS-SEM was also considered desirable because it allows for the esti -
mation of complex models without distributional assumptions [12] . 
SmartPLS3 software [35] was used to run the PLS-SEM technique for this 
study. As suggested by Hair et al. [12] , a two-stage approach was used in 
the PLS-SEM data analysis process. First, the reliability and validity of 
the measurement (outer) model were assessed using the criteria pro -
posed by Hair et al., [12] . Specifically, the outer weights, Cronbach 
alpha, composite reliability, and average variance explained of each 
construct were examined to ensure that they are within the recom -
mended range [12] . Secondly, the structural (inner) model was assessed 
by examining the variance explained of the dependent variables, the 
predictive relevance of the constructs, and the level of significance of the 
proposed relationships [ 11,12 ]. 
Results 
Assessing the measurement model 
To assess the measurement model for reliability and validity, the 
factor loadings for the construct indicators were first examined. Almost 
all the reflective indicators had loadings that were higher than 0.50, 
indicating acceptable item reliability [46] , except for CDQ5 (0.396) and 
LII3 (0.423). The two items were dropped from their respective con -
structs before the measurement model was assessed. Furthermore, the 
composite reliabilities and Cronbach alpha values of the constructs were 
all above the recommended value of 0.70, indicating good internal 
consistency and less than the recommended threshold of 0.95, indicating 
that items within the constructs are not redundant [ 8,11,12 ]. 
Convergent validity, which is the extent to which the variance 
observed in the individual indicators is explained by the construct they 
represent, was examined using average variance extracted (AVE). The 
AVE values were above the recommended value of 0.50 for all the 
constructs, indicating good convergent validity [12] . Finally, discrimi -
nant validity, which is the extent to which constructs are distinct from 
each other (i.e., the absence of multicollinearity across constructs), was 
assessed using heterotrait-monotrait (HTMT) ratio of the correlations as 
recommended by Hair et al. [12] . The HTMT values across the con -
structs were under the recommended limit of ≤ 0.90, indicating good 
discriminant validity [12] , i.e., that the constructs measured are truly 
distinct as no multicollinearity was observed. 
Overall, the measurement model showed satisfactory internal reli -
ability, convergent validity, and discriminant validity, indicating 
adequate robustness for the structural model proposed for the study to 
be assessed. See detailed results of the measurement model in 
Appendix 1 . 
Assessing the structural model 
Further, the structural model of MOOCs acceptance and use that was 
proposed for the study was assessed based on recommended criteria in 
Hair et al. [12] . First, it is recommended that before assessing the 
structural relationship in a model, it is important to examine the level of 
collinearity to ensure that the regression results obtained are not biased 
[12] . The variance inflation factor (VIF) values for all the predictors 
were between 1.000 to 1.985, which is well within the recommended 
limit of ≤ 5 [35] , indicating that no collinearity issues were detected for 
the structural model in this study. Next, R-squared ( R
2
), predictive 
relevance, and significance of the path coefficients of the relationships 
specified in the study model need to be examined [12] . 
R
2 
is the proportion of variance in the dependent variables explained 
by the independent variables in the study. The R
2 
values of the endog -
enous (dependent) variables, namely, perceived usefulness, perceived 
ease of use, behavioral intention, and actual usage were 0.50, 0.28, 0.40 
and 0.25, respectively. These values were all within the acceptable range 
of 0.10 and above for R
2 
[12] . The results indicate that 50% of the 
variance in perceived usefulness is explained by its significant predictor, 
course relevance, and 28% of the variance in perceived ease of use is 
explained by its significant predictor, course content quality. The 
Fig. 3. Hypotheses testing results.  
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
6
combined effect of all the significant exogenous (independent) variables 
on behavioral intention to use MOOCs was 40%, meaning that, the total 
effect of the factors, perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, course 
relevance, and course content quality explained 40% of the variance 
observed in behavioral intention to use MOOCs. Furthermore, about 
25% of the variance in actual usage was explained by the combined 
effects of perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, course relevance, 
course content quality, and behavioral intention. 
The predictive relevance of the structural model was assessed using 
Q
2
, a blindfolding technique that cross-validates a model for redun -
dancy. The Q
2 
values for the endogenous constructs were all greater 
than zero (BI = 0.34, PU = 0.33 and PEOU = 0.18, AU = 0.09), indicating 
acceptable predictive relevance of the proposed path model [12] . 
Finally, a bootstrapping technique using 1000 subsamples was used 
to test the study hypotheses for significance, as recommended by Hair 
et al. [12] . Only five (5) of the proposed hypotheses were supported. The 
results showed that perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use had 
significant positive impact on behavioral intention to use MOOCs ( b =
0.52, p < 0.001 and b = 0.24, p < 0.01, respectively), supporting H1 and 
H3. Also, behavioral intention predicted actual usage behavior of 
MOOCs ( b = 0.50, p < 0.001), supporting H4. Furthermore, course con -
tent quality predicted perceived ease of use ( b = 0.27, p < 0.05), while 
course relevance predicted perceived usefulness ( b = 0.69, p < 0.001), 
supporting H6 and H10 respectively. All other hypotheses proposed for 
the study were not supported. Particularly, no relationships were found 
between course content quality and perceived usefulness, course design 
quality and perceived ease of use. And none was found between course 
instructor quality, learner-learner interaction, learner instructor 
Table 1 
Factor loadings, Cronbach ’ s alpha, composite reliability, and average variance extracted.  
Construct Indicators Factor Loadings Cronbach ’ s Alpha ( α ) Composite Reliability (CR) Average Variance Extracted (AVE) 
Perceived Usefulness (PU) PU1 
PU2 
PU3 
PU4 
PU5 
0.84 
0.76 
0.84 
0.84 
0.85 
0.88 0.92 0.68 
Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU) PEOU1 
PEOU2 
PEOU3 
PEOU4 
0.81 
0.85 
0.85 
0.86 
0.86 0.91 0.71 
Course Content Quality (CCQ) CCQ1 
CCQ2 
CCQ3 
CCQ4 
CCQ5 
0.69 
0.71 
0.83 
0.73 
0.79 
0.81 0.87 0.57 
Course Instructor Quality (CIQ) CIQ1 
CIQ2 
CIQ3 
CIQ4 
CIQ5 
0.76 
0.75 
0.77 
0.52 
0.80 
0.79 0.85 0.53 
Course Design Quality (CDQ) CDQ1 
CDQ2 
CDQ3 
CDQ4 
0.73 
0.78 
0.67 
0.79 
0.74 0.83 0.55 
Course Relevance (CR) CR1 
CR2 
CR3 
CR4 
CR5 
0.85 
0.77 
0.78 
0.87 
0.81 
0.88 0.91 0.67 
Learner-Instructor Interaction (LII) LII1 
LII2 
LII4 
0.80 
0.89 
0.67 
0.73 0.83 0.63 
Learner-Learner Interaction (LLI) LLI1 
LLI2 
LLI3 
LLI4 
0.81 
0.81 
0.76 
0.75 
0.79 0.86 0.61 
Behavioral Intention (BI) BI1 
BI2 
BI3 
0.93 
0.95 
0.91 
0.92 0.95 0.86 
Actual Usage (AU) AU1 1.00 1.00  1.00  1.00   
Table 2 
Discriminant validity (HTMT values).   
AU BI CCQ CDQ CIQ CR LLI PU PEOU TLI 
AU           
BI 0.52          
CCQ 0.22 0.43         
CDQ 0.19 0.39 0.83        
CIQ 0.13 0.20 0.65 0.72       
CR 0.38 0.48 0.69 0.68 0.61      
LLI 0.18 0.13 0.16 0.22 0.28 0.21     
PU 0.41 0.43 0.58 0.55 0.44 0.29 0.12    
PEOU 0.26 0.65 0.53 0.42 0.40 0.78 0.12 0.34   
LII 0.16 0.18 0.22 0.23 0.39 0.27 0.79 0.16 0.11   
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
7
interaction and perceived usefulness or ease of use. Fig. 3 below illus -
trates the results of the hypotheses testing is illustrated in Fig. 3 below 
and more detailed results of the test can be found in Appendix 2 . 
Discussion 
Introduction 
This study examined key course-specific factors that are likely 
contributing to people ’ s intention to use MOOCs and their actual usage 
behavior, to better understand adoption behavior associated with the 
learning technology. This study specifically uses TAM as a theoretical 
framework to understand the acceptance and use of MOOCs. It extends 
TAM by investigating specific factors influencing people ’ s perceived 
usefulness and perceived ease of use of MOOCs. The specific factors 
examined include, course instructor quality, course content quality, 
course design quality, course relevance, learner-instructor interaction, 
and learner-learner interaction. Learning in MOOCs is optional, 
informal, and self-regulated, hence, ensuring that a course possesses 
appealing characteristics is important to attract and keep learners. 
Therefore, investigating external factors like those proposed in this 
study can have important implications for instructors or MOOCs course 
providers that want to create courses that are appealing, and that people 
want to enroll and learn from. 
Perceived usefulness mediates the relationship between course relevance 
and behavioral intention to use MOOCs 
The results showed that MOOC learners in this study consider 
tangible value (e.g., educational, and job-related benefits) associated 
with MOOCs to be an important determinant of the decision to use them. 
Specifically, the more useful they considered a MOOC to be, the more 
likely they are to consider using them for their needs. Additionally, 
course relevance was found to be affecting how useful learners in this 
study consider MOOCs to be such that more relevant learners consider 
the course content or materials covered in a MOOC to be for either their 
professional or personal purposes, the more they would consider that 
course to be, and they will in turn be more motivated to participate in 
that course. This is consistent with previous studies that found learners ’ 
perceived usefulness of a MOOCs course to be a reason why people want 
to participate in such a course [ 9 , 23 ]. It also supports previous findings 
that suggest that content that is relevant to participants ’ job needs is a 
major factor drawing students to participate in MOOCs [20] . In other 
online learning environments, it has also been found that course rele -
vance is a strong predictor of perceived usefulness [27] , motivation to 
learn [32] and student perceptions and behavior [ 5 , 38 ]. Hence from 
these findings, it can be argued that the MOOC learners are likely to 
consider how useful and relevant a course is to their needs as important 
factors when choosing to accept and use MOOCs. Therefore, it is 
important to develop strategies to demonstrate tangible value associated 
with the learning content to learners. For instance, explicitly providing 
details on how participating in the course can help students meet their 
future goals, whether it is academic or job-related. This can involve 
helping learners build their portfolio with projects and providing a more 
direct path from MOOC learning to real-life experience, whether it is 
through volunteer projects, internships, or job opportunities. 
Perceived ease of use mediates the relationship between content quality 
and behavioral intention to use MOOCs 
Additionally, the results also showed that, MOOC learners in this 
study consider the effort required to use MOOCs, a main factor influ -
encing their decision to use them. Specifically, the less effort that is 
required to participate in MOOCs, the more likely learners were to 
consider using them. Furthermore, course content quality was found to 
be affecting how easy the learners find MOOCs to be such that, when the 
course content is of desirable quality, for instance, enjoyable, easy to 
follow, and have established guidelines, learners are more likely to 
consider the course easy to use. And as such, they would be more willing 
to participate in MOOCs. Although studies examining the relationship 
between content quality and perceived ease of use of MOOCs are 
limited, this finding supports a previous study that showed course 
content quality to be a significant predictor of perceived ease of use in 
online learning contexts [ 2 , 29 ]. Hence, the findings can be used to make 
the argument that, the effort required to use MOOCs and the quality of 
the content provided in MOOCs are important factors affecting people ’ s 
willingness to accept and participate in them. Hence, it is essential that 
MOOC providers make the platforms and courses enjoyable and 
learner-friendly, to attract and keep learners. This may entail working 
with professional instructional designers to ensure that the content of 
the courses is clear and easy to follow, captures learners ’ attention (e.g., 
through use of real-world examples, multimedia, minimal text, and 
interactive components), and fits the objectives that the learner expects 
from any given course. 
Behavioral intention to use MOOCs predicts actual usage of MOOCs 
The results also showed that the actual usage behavior of the MOOC 
learners in this study reflected their intention to use MOOCs. Particu -
larly, those who have a higher level of experience with MOOCs 
Table 3 
Path coefficients.  
Hypothesis Path b t 95% CI [LL, UL] Supported f
2 
VIF 
H1 PU - > BI 0.52*** 5.90 [0.33, 0.67] Yes 0.40
b 
1.098 
H2 PEOU - > PU 0.15 1.73 [   0.01, 0.33] No 0.03 1.381 
H3 PEOU - > BI 0.24** 3.15 [0.10, 0.39] Yes 0.08
c 
1.098 
H4 BI - > AU 0.50*** 11.15 [0.38, 0.60] Yes 0.33
b 
1.000 
H5 CCQ - > PU 0.02 0.27 [   0.13, 0.21] No 0.00 2.038 
H6 CCQ - > PEOU 0.27* 2.29 [0.03, 0.49] Yes 0.05
c 
1.898 
H7 CIQ - > PU   0.06 0.69 [   0.22, 0.10] No 0.00 1.753 
H8 CIQ - > PEOU 0.16 1.82 [   0.01, 0.34] No 0.02 1.779 
H9 CDQ - > PEOU 0.186 1.60 [   0.05, 0.40] No 0.02 1.985 
H10 CR - > PU 0.69*** 8.05 [0.49, 0.82] Yes 0.56
a 
1.697 
H11 LII - > PU 0.06 0.99 [   0.08, 0.17] No 0.01 1.554 
H12 LII - > PEOU   0.02 0.24 [   0.16, 0.15] No 0.00 1.546 
H13 LLI - > PU 0.01 0.14 [   0.14, 0.16] No 0.00 1.478 
H14 LLI - > PEOU 0.03 0.24 [   0.26, 0.30] No 0.00 1.483  
a
Large effect size. 
b
Medium effect size. 
c
Small effect size. 
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05. 
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
8
enrollment were more likely to be those that indicated intention to 
continue learning with MOOCs. Meaning that when people intend to use 
MOOCs, due to how useful and easy to use they consider them to be, the 
more they may be likely to have a high usage behavior. This is consistent 
with previous findings that have found behavioral intention to be a 
strong predictor of actual usage behavior in different technologies, 
including online learning [9,41]. 
Examined factors not influencing perceived usefulness and perceived ease 
of use of MOOCs 
Furthermore, it was found that for participants in this study, having a 
high-quality instructor, course content, and course design may not be as 
important in influencing how useful and easy to use a learner will 
perceive a course to be. It was also found that interpersonal interaction 
may not be as important in MOOCs as it is in other more formal online 
learning platforms. These findings are contrary to those found for other 
more traditional e-learning platforms, where those factors were found to 
be important in predicting the perceived ease of use and perceived 
usefulness of the platforms (e.g., [4,10,14,30,37]). It is however 
important to note that the items for this study were adapted from studies 
examining traditional e-learning environments, so it is possible that the 
items are more suited to that specific learning environment. And the 
differences between the features of MOOCs and traditional e-learning 
environments can be a contributing factor to those differences observed 
in this study. For instance, as indicated earlier, MOOC learning is pri -
marily optional, informal, and self-regulated and typically requires more 
self-motivation and persistence from learners for participation. Hence 
learners’ assessment of these factors in MOOCs can differ significantly as 
it is generally easier for them to switch from one course to another, since 
the sense of commitment to a course is fundamentally different from that 
of traditional online learning courses. Also, interacting with the 
instructor and other students, which are major quality determinants in 
traditional learning environments, are not very integrated into the 
MOOC learning structure. So how those components will affect MOOCs 
acceptance and use will essentially be different for learners. In summary, 
the way that course content quality, instructor quality, course design 
quality and interaction components are measured may need to be 
redefined for MOOCs. This suggests a need for further studies to explore 
and develop these factors that are more specific to the unique context of 
MOOC learning environments for a better understanding on how they 
can influence MOOCs acceptance and use. 
Theoretical implications 
This study contributes to the literature in two important ways. First, 
it provides empirical evidence that the TAM framework is a viable 
framework in understanding the acceptance and use of novel technology 
such as MOOCs. Evidence from the study suggests that learners’ 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of MOOCs are important 
predictors of their behavioral intention to learn using them. However, 
contrary to previous studies, perceived ease of use did not predict 
perceived usefulness in this study, implying that making MOOCs easy to 
use may not be enough for learners to consider them useful. Future 
Table 4 
Constructs, measures, and sources.  
Construct Measures Sources 
Perceived 
usefulness (PU) 
PU1: I find MOOCs useful in accomplishing 
my education or job-related goals 
PU2: Using MOOCs enables me to 
accomplish my education or job-related 
tasks more quickly 
PU3: Using MOOCs increases my learning 
or job productivity 
PU4: Using MOOCs is beneficial for me in 
preparing for further education or a new 
role 
PU5: Using MOOCs makes it easier for me 
to gain desirable skills I need for my studies 
or my job 
[6,39,41] 
Perceived ease of 
use (PEOU) 
PEOU1: I find MOOCs easy to use 
PEOU2: Learning to use MOOCs is easy for 
me 
PEOU3: My interaction with MOOCs is 
clear and understandable 
PEOU4: It is easy for me to become skillful 
at using MOOCs 
[6,39,41] 
Behavioral 
Intention (BI) 
BI1: I intend to use MOOCs in the future 
BI2: I will use MOOCs in the future 
BI3: I predict that I would use MOOCs in the 
future 
[6,39,41] 
Actual Usage (AU) AU1: Approximately how many MOOCs 
classes have you enrolled in till date? 
Created for 
this study 
Course Instructor 
Quality (CIQ) 
CIQ1: Instructors clearly provide students 
with relevant information in MOOCs 
CIQ2: Instructors promptly respond to 
student inquiries in MOOCs 
CIQ3: Instructors provide timely feedback 
to students in MOOCs 
CIQ4: Instructors encourage interaction 
among students in MOOCs 
CIQ5: Instructors deliver instructions 
clearly to students in MOOCs 
[19,31] 
Course Content 
Quality (CCQ) 
CCQ1: MOOCs content and presentation 
attracts attention 
CCQ2: I find it easy to understand and 
follow the content of MOOCs 
CCQ3: MOOCs content is very enjoyable 
CCQ4: Learning objectives are clearly 
established in MOOCs 
CCQ5: MOOC course content fits with my 
learning objectives 
[19,31] 
Course Design 
Quality (CDQ) 
CDQ1: The level of difficulty of MOOCs 
learning content is appropriate 
CDQ2: The content of MOOCs assignments 
is easy to understand 
CDQ3: The amount of learning content in 
MOOCs are appropriate 
CDQ4: The delivery schedule of MOOCs 
learning content is flexible 
CDQ5: MOOCs provide individualized 
learning management (dropped) 
[19,31] 
Course Relevance 
(CR) 
CR1: MOOCs are relevant to my needs 
CR2: MOOCs are important for my needs 
CR3: MOOCs provide relevant information 
in my area(s) of interest 
CR4: Content provided in MOOCs relate 
well to my needs 
CR5: MOOCs have adequate resources for 
my needs 
[32,40] 
Learner-Instructor 
Interaction (LII) 
LII1: Interacting with the instructor in 
MOOCs is more difficult than in other 
courses I have taken 
LII2: The interaction between students and 
instructors is inadequate in MOOCs 
LII3: The instructor seldom answers 
students’ questions in MOOCs (dropped) 
LII4: Class discussions are more difficult to 
participate in MOOCs than in other courses 
I have taken 
[25,33]  
Table 4 (continued ) 
Construct Measures Sources 
Learner-Learner 
Interaction (LLI) 
LLI1: There is little interaction between 
students in MOOCs 
LLI2: Interacting with other students in 
MOOCs is more difficult than in other 
courses I have taken 
LLI3: Students seldom ask or answer each 
other’s questions in MOOCs 
LLI4: There are inadequate opportunities to 
participate in class discussions in MOOCs 
[25,33]  
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
9
studies can explore the relationship between perceived usefulness and 
perceived ease of use, with regards to MOOCs to further support or 
contradict this assertion. Furthermore, this study created items for 
MOOC usage behavior and confirmed that people’s intention to use a 
technology predicts their actual usage behavior, as suggested in TAM. 
Secondly, the study also provides evidence of the importance of 
extending the TAM framework to include external determinants of the 
main constructs of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, to 
offer context-specific explanations for the acceptance of a particular 
technology. Specifically, it was found in this study that course relevance 
predicted perceived usefulness, and course content quality predicted 
perceived ease of use within the context of MOOCs. Hence, course 
relevance and course content quality are two factors that can be added to 
TAM to examine the acceptance and use of MOOCs as a learning 
technology. 
Limitations and future research 
This study is not without limitations, which creates opportunities for 
future research. First, participants for the study were recruited from a 
specialized research participation platform, Prolific, where only regis -
tered users on the platform and those who were active on the during the 
period of the study would have had a chance to participate. Hence, 
generalizing the results of this study to all MOOC learners should be 
done cautiously. Future research can recruit participants more randomly 
using varied means. Additionally, with regards to sampling, the partic -
ipants in the study had varied level of MOOC experience, which may 
have influenced their responses. Although all participants were required 
to have enrolled in and completed at least one MOOC course in the past. 
Future research can modify the criteria for choosing participants to 
include those with similar level of experiences for a more unified 
outcome. 
Furthermore, only specific course characteristics were explored in 
the study as determinants of the main TAM constructs. Future studies 
can explore other factors that may also be relevant within the MOOCs 
context. Furthermore, this study required learners to self-report their 
MOOC usage behavior, so there is a possibility that participants over- 
reported their usage, thereby introducing social desirability bias into 
the data. Future studies can determine usage behavior via other means, 
e.g., obtaining direct proof of completed courses and certificates. 
Finally, the survey items were close-ended and were therefore limited by 
the amount of information that can be obtained to explain a construct. 
Supplementing survey data with a qualitative component such as in -
terviews would be beneficial for future studies to gather more in-depth 
perspectives about people’s perceptions of the phenomenon being 
studied and get more insights on how to better design MOOCs to in -
crease their acceptance by learners. 
Conclusion 
This study integrated specific course characteristics variables into 
the well-known TAM framework to enhance understanding of accep -
tance of MOOCs among learners. The findings show that perceived 
usefulness, perceived ease of use, course relevance and course content 
quality are all important factors affecting MOOCs acceptance. These 
results support previous findings that TAM constructs can be used in 
understanding acceptance of MOOCs and e-learning [9,23]. It also 
supports the argument that relevant external variables be added to TAM 
to better understand the technology being studied [26,41]. This study 
contributes to the literature by establishing the importance of 
less-explored variables, course relevance and course content quality in 
learners’ acceptance and use of MOOCs. The results specifically confirm 
previous findings that perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use 
significantly influence behavioral intention to use MOOCs [23,37]. 
While two of the external variables explored, course relevance and 
course content quality, indirectly influenced behavioral intention 
through perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use respectively. 
These results are in support of those found in previous studies exploring 
other e-learning contexts [20,38]. 
The study concludes that, the relevance of a MOOC course to the 
needs of the learners and the quality of the content provided, are factors 
that need to be addressed to increase acceptance. These factors can be 
utilized by MOOC platforms and course designers when designing 
courses to appeal to learners. For instance, to create courses that are 
useful and relevant to the needs of learners, MOOC developers can 
ensure that the objectives of the course are clearly communicated early 
on during the course and that the content and activities provided to 
achieve those objectives are relevant to the topic being addressed. They 
can also ensure that adequate resources on the topic or subject are 
provided throughout the course. These will potentially enable the stu -
dent to easily identify if the course or specific aspects of the course is 
relevant for their needs and that they have adequate resources to sup -
port their learning of the content. Also, MOOC platforms can ensure that 
there are strategies in place to demonstrate tangible value associated 
with the learning content to learners. For instance, creating a connection 
between the course and a tangible future goal for the learners, whether 
academic or job-related, through activities like, portfolio building, 
interview preparation, volunteer projects, internships or even job op -
portunities for best performers. Furthermore, to create courses that are 
easy to use, MOOC developers can ensure that the learning content is of 
good quality by establishing clear learning objectives and providing 
content that captures attention, is easy to understand and follow, and is 
enjoyable. They can do this by engaging the services of professional 
instructional designers. Overall, the study shows that the TAM frame -
work, with course relevance and course content quality included as 
external variables, can be used to explain MOOC acceptance and use 
among learners. 
This study therefore had the following major contributions: 
The study investigates MOOCs acceptance and use, a topic that is still 
understudied regardless of the proliferation of the learning tech -
nology in question. 
The study adds to the MOOCs acceptance literature by proposing a 
conceptual framework that investigates the roles of less-studied 
course-specific variables such as, course instructor quality, course 
content quality, course design quality, course relevance, learner- 
instructor interaction, and learner-instructor interaction. 
This study explicitly identifies and adds to the literature, course 
relevance and course content quality, as specific course-related fac -
tors affecting MOOCs acceptance and use, providing more context to 
inform course design for better acceptance. 
To the best of the researcher’s knowledge, this is one of the first 
studies to investigate the course-specific variables outlined in this 
study within the context of MOOCs acceptance. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the Michigan State University Graduate 
School research fellowship. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
None. 
Appendix 1: Measurement model assessment 
Tables 1 and 2. 
Appendix 2: Structural model assessment 
Table 3. 
C.R. Ucha
<<<PAGE=10>>>
Computers and Education Open 5 (2023) 100147
10
Appendix 3: Study measures 
Table 4 . 
References 
[1] Abbas T. Social factors affecting students ’ acceptance of e-learning environments in 
developing and developed countries: a structural equation modeling approach. 
J Hosp Tour Technol 2016;7(2):200 – 12. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHTT-11-2015- 
0042 . 
[2] Almaiah MA, Jalil MA, Man M. Extending the TAM to examine the effects of quality 
features on mobile learning acceptance. J Comput Educ 2016;3(4):453 – 85 . 
[3] Bonk CJ. Online training in an online world. Bloomington, IN: CourseShare. com; 
2002 . 
[4] Cheng YM. Effects of quality antecedents on e-learning acceptance. Internet Res 
2012;22(3):361 – 90. https://doi.org/10.1108/10662241211235699 . 
[5] Cheng, S.L., & Xie, K. (2021). d. The internet and higher education , 50, 100807. 
[6] Davis FD. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of 
information technology. MIS Quart Manag Inf Syst 1989:319 – 40. https://doi.org/ 
10.2307/249008 . 
[7] De Freitas SI, Morgan J, Gibson D. Will MOOCs transform learning and teaching in 
higher education? Engagement and course retention in online learning provision. 
Br J Educ Technol 2015;46(3):455 – 71. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12268 . 
[8] Diamantopoulos A, Sarstedt M, Fuchs C, Wilczynski P, Kaiser S. Guidelines for 
choosing between multi-item and single-item scales for construct measurement: a 
predictive validity perspective. J Acad Mark Sci 2012;40(3):434 – 49 . 
[9] Fearnley MR, Amora JT. Learning management system adoption in higher 
education using the extended technology acceptance model. IAFOR J Educ 2020;8 
(2):89 – 106 . 
[10] Gregori EB, Zhang J, Galv ´an-Fern ´andez C, Fern ´andez-Navarro Fde A. Learner 
support in MOOCs: identifying variables linked to completion. Comput Educ 2018; 
122:153 – 68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.03.014 . 
[11] Hair Jr JF, Matthews LM, Matthews RL, Sarstedt M. PLS-SEM or CB-SEM: updated 
guidelines on which method to use. Int J Multivar Data Anal 2017;1(2):107 – 23 . 
[12] Hair JF, Risher JJ, Sarstedt M, Ringle CM. When to use and how to report the 
results of PLS-SEM. Eur Bus Rev 2019;31(1):2 – 24. https://doi.org/10.1108/ebr- 
11-2018-0203 . 
[13] Hodges CB. Designing to motivate: motivational techniques to incorporate in e- 
learning experiences. J Interact Online Learn 2004;2(3):1 – 7. www.ncolr.org . 
[14] Hone KS, El Said GR. Exploring the factors affecting MOOC retention: a survey 
study. Comput Educ 2016;98:157 – 68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compedu.2016.03.016 . 
[15] Jung Y, Lee J. Learning engagement and persistence in massive open online courses 
(MOOCS). Comput Educ 2018;122:9 – 22 . 
[16] Kay J, Reimann P, Diebold E, Kummerfeld B. MOOCs: so many learners, so much 
potential. IEEE Intell Syst 2013;28(3):70 – 7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MIS.2013.66 . 
[17] Keller JM. Development and use of the ARCS model of instructional design. 
J Instruct Dev 1987;10(3):2 – 10. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02905780 . 
[18] Khalil H, Ebner M. MOOCs completion rates and possible methods to improve 
retention-a literature review personal learning environment view project open 
educational resources view project. In: Proceedings of the world conference on 
educational multimedia, hypermedia and telecommunications; 2014. p. 1236 – 44. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/306127713 . 
[19] Lee BC, Yoon JO, Lee I. Learners ’ acceptance of e-learning in South Korea: theories 
and results. Comput Educ 2009;53(4):1320 – 9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compedu.2009.06.014 . 
[20] Littenberg-Tobias J, Reich J. Evaluating access, quality, and equity in online 
learning: a case study of a MOOC-based blended professional degree program. 
Internet Higher Educ 2020;47:100759 . 
[21] Liyanagunawardena TR, Adams AA, Williams SA. MOOCs: a systematic study of the 
published literature 2008-2012. Int Rev Res Open Distance Learn 2013;14(3): 
202 – 27. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v14i3.1455 . 
[22] Ma L, Lee CS. Understanding the barriers to the use of MOOCs in a developing 
country: an innovation resistance perspective. J Educ Comput Res 2019;57(3): 
571 – 90 . 
[23] Ma L, Lee CS. Drivers and barriers to MOOC adoption: perspectives from adopters 
and non-adopters. Online Inf Rev 2020;44(3):671 – 84 . 
[24] Mailizar M, Burg D, Maulina S. Examining university students ’ behavioural 
intention to use e-learning during the COVID-19 pandemic: an extended TAM 
model. Educ Inf Technol 2021;26(6):7057 – 77 . 
[25] Marks RB, Sibley SD, Arbaugh JB. A structural equation model of predictors for 
effective online learning. J Manag Educ 2005;29(4):531 – 63. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1052562904271199 . 
[26] Mathieson K. Predicting user intentions: comparing the technology acceptance 
model with the theory of planned behavior. Inf Syst Res 1991;2(3):173 – 91. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2.3.173 . 
[27] Miller J, Khera O. Digital library adoption and the technology acceptance model: a 
cross-country analysis. Electr J Inf Syst Dev Ctries 2010;40(1):1 – 19. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/j.1681-4835.2010.tb00288.x . 
[28] Moore MG, Kearsley G. Distance education: a systems view of online learning. 
Cengage Learning; 2011 . 
[29] Al Mulhem A. Exploring the key factors in the use of an e-learning system among 
students at King Faisal. University Saudi Arabia; 2020 . 
[30] Nandi D, Hamilton M, Harland J. Evaluating the quality of interaction in 
asynchronous discussion forums in fully online courses. Distance Educ 2012;33(1): 
5 – 30. https://doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2012.667957 . 
[31] Ozkan S, Koseler R. Multi-dimensional students ’ evaluation of e-learning systems 
in the higher education context: an empirical investigation. Comput Educ 2009;53 
(4):1285 – 96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2009.06.011 . 
[32] Park N, Roman R, Lee S, Chung JE. User acceptance of a digital library system in 
developing countries: an application of the technology acceptance model. Int J Inf 
Manag 2009;29(3):196 – 209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2008.07.001 . 
[33] Peltier JW, Drago W, Schibrowsky JA. Virtual communities and the assessment of 
online marketing education. J Mark Educ 2003;25(3):260 – 76. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0273475303257762 . 
[34] Razami HH, Ibrahim R. Investigating the factors that influence the acceptance of 
MOOC as a supplementary learning tool in higher education. J Adv Res Dyn 
Control Syst 2020;12(3):522 – 30 . 
[35] Ringle CM, Wende S, Becker JM. SmartPLS 3.0. Boenningstedt: SmartPLS GmbH; 
2015 . 
[36] Sher A. Assessing the relationship of student-instructor and student-student 
interaction to student learning and satisfaction in Web-based online learning 
environment. J Interact Online Learn 2009;8(2):102 – 20 . 
[37] Tao D, Fu P, Wang Y, Zhang T, Qu X. Key characteristics in designing massive open 
online courses (MOOCs) for user acceptance: an application of the extended 
technology acceptance model. Interact Learn Environ 2022;30(5):882 – 95 . 
[38] Vaz A, Tendulkarb A, Fernandezc RT, Mansorid S. Student preference and content 
relevance as important service quality factors that impact online learning design in 
tertiary education in Malaysia. TEST Eng Manag 2020;83(March – April 2020): 
574 – 85 . 
[39] Venkatesh V, Davis FD. A model of the antecedents of perceived ease of use: 
development and test. Decis Sci 1996;27(3):451 – 81 . 
[40] Venkatesh V, Davis FD. A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance 
model: four longitudinal field studies. Manage Sci 2000;46(2):186 – 204. https:// 
doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.46.2.186.11926 . 
[41] Venkatesh V. Determinants of perceived ease of use: integrating control, intrinsic 
motivation, and emotion into the technology acceptance model. Inf Syst Res 2000; 
11(4):342 – 65. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.11.4.342.11872 . 
[42] Wu B, Chen X. Continuance intention to use MOOCs: integrating the technology 
acceptance model (TAM) and task technology fit (TTF) model. Comput Hum Behav 
2017;67:221 – 32 . 
[43] Yang M, Shao Z, Liu Q, Liu C. Understanding the quality factors that influence the 
continuance intention of students toward participation in MOOCs. Educ Technol 
Res Dev 2017;65(5):1195 – 214. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-017-9513-6 . 
[44] Yang B, Zhao Y. Research on the continuance intention of MOOC platforms based 
on the technology acceptance model: a case of MOOC learning platforms in Chinese 
Universities. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on artificial 
intelligence and education (ICAIE). IEEE; 2021. p. 642 – 5 . 
[45] Emanuel EJ. MOOCs taken by educated few. Nature 2013;503(7476):342. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/503342a . 
[46] Fornell C, Larcker DF. Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable 
variables and measurement error. J Mark Res 1981;18(1):39 – 50 . 
[47] Walther JB. Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and 
hyperpersonal interaction. Commun Res 1996;23(1):3 – 43 . 
C.R. Ucha