<<<PAGE=1>>>
111
European Policy Analysis - Volume 1, Number 2 - Fall 2015
Elisa VecchioneA & Justin ParkhurstB
The use of evidence within policy evaluation in health in 
Ghana: implications for accountability and democratic 
governance
A London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM)
B London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM)
The use of evidence in policymaking is commonly considered a good practice 
of democratic governance by improving accountability, effectiveness, and 
stakeholders’ involvement in policy decisions. The features of this practice, 
however, remain vague in the general discourse of evidence-based policymaking 
(EBPM) with the risk of obscuring important governance and legitimacy 
implications. In policy evaluation especially, the use of evidence can be critical 
to translate technical measurements of policy achievements into political values 
for shaping future policy directions. We present a case study based on the 
health policy review process in Ghana in order to discuss how institutionalized 
evidentiary practices used in policy evaluation affect structures and processes of 
democratic governance. Drawing on qualitative interviews with international 
and local actors, we reflect on how the evidence review process—a process 
agreed in collaboration with development partners—links to the evidence 
advisory system and the accountability systems in place. We find that the uses 
of evidence promoted by international donors within the evaluation process 
actually creates disconnect with the national accountability system in place, 
with implications for democratic governance.
Keywords: evidence-based policymaking; accountability; policy evaluation; 
Ghana; health policy; democratic governance; international donors.
1. Introduction
I
n a recent editorial in the Internation-
al Journal of Health Policy and Man -
agement, Jeremy Shiffman points out 
a need to question and challenge the ex -
ercise of power in global health policy—
particularly when that power arises from 
claims of expertise (Shiffman 2014). His 
concern revolves around the lack of con -
sideration of the epistemic and normative 
dimensions of power which are relevant to 
the production of meaning and categories 
that shape world views (productive pow -
er) and to the structuring of interpersonal 
perceptions that guide our actions within 
a certain world (structural power). Draw-
ing from international relations scholars 
such as Barnett and Duvall (2005), Shiff -
man points to international organizations
<<<PAGE=2>>>
112
European Policy Analysis
in global health establishing their power 
through their capacity to perform research 
and produce expert advice. In an earli -
er contribution, Barnett and Finnemore 
(1999) explained that this power endows 
such organizations with the legitimacy 
to intervene in public affairs. Following 
Weber’s theory on the power of bureau -
cracies (e.g., Weber 1947), these authors 
claim that the mounting power of inter -
national organizations relies on the same 
rational–legal authority that bureaucra -
cies possess in their exercise of technical 
expertise and control of information. As a 
consequence, the authority of these orga -
nizations simultaneously generates an al -
ternative power with respect to that of the 
state and legitimacy to act independently 
from it.
 Global health organizations usu -
ally gain their legitimacy to intervene 
under the remit of supporting “sound” 
decision making in countries with limited 
local capacity, and are increasingly couch-
ing their recommendations for action 
within a discourse of “evidence-based” 
policymaking (EBPM). From a purely 
technical perspective, that decisions are 
of higher quality when they are informed 
rather than uninformed by evidence, is an 
assumption that needs little discussion. 
Especially in health policy, it is widely 
accepted that the choice of clinical treat -
ment or intervention must be taken on 
the basis of rigorous evidence review to 
maximize benefit and minimize potential 
harms (Chalmers 2003). However, the as-
sumption that evidence-based decisions 
are better than non-evidence-based deci -
sions goes beyond pure instrumental con-
siderations of technical validity. Besides 
being widely recognized that health poli -
cy decisions are more than simply exercis-
es in technical decision making (Russell 
et al. 2008), decisions based on evidence 
may have governance implications on the 
structure of power within and among pol-
icy actors. Such implications, however, go 
beyond re-organizing public policies and 
improving their efficiency. A number of 
authors drawing strongly on the work of 
Michel Foucault have explored the emer -
gent ways in which the act of governing 
and the operation of bureaucratic poli -
cymaking techniques also have “govern -
mentality” effects, namely by reconstruct-
ing power relationships in the direction 
of precise strategies and rationales (Miller 
and Rose 1995; Pellizzoni 2015; Foucault 
[1978] 1991). These type of reflections, in 
turn, have increasingly inspired the study 
of the performative effects of particular 
evidence-utilization tools such as reviews, 
guidelines, or economics analyses (cf. Fer-
lie, Mcgivern, and FitzGerald 2012; Smith 
and Stewart 2015)—tools that Fiere et al. 
have also referred to as “technologies of 
governance” (Ferlie, Mcgivern, and Fitz -
Gerald 2012). We argue that if the strat -
egies and rationales for evidence utiliza -
tion are only seen through the prism of 
technical performances, evidence-based 
decisions risk eluding the detection of 
important governmentality effects. Ad -
dressing this starts by recognizing that 
any assumptions (or statements) that 
evidence-based decisions are better than 
non-evidence-based decisions implicitly 
touch upon issues of political responsibil-
ity to use evidence, to take it into account, 
and to account for it. But what does polit-
ical responsibility over evidence use mean 
in practice? Who is responsible for evi -
dence use, and to whom should users of 
evidence be responsible and accountable?
 These are questions that are often 
overlooked and left implicit within cur -
rent calls for “evidence-based policymak -
<<<PAGE=3>>>
113
European Policy Analysis
ing” (EBPM), even when discourses over 
EBPM include claims that evidence can 
somehow improve accountability practic-
es and democratic decisions (cf. Clarence 
2002; Weisburd and Neyroud 2011). In 
fact, the way such improvement should 
occur remains vague and under-investi -
gated. From a general decision-making 
perspective, the use of evidence serves to 
inform decisions and to make them more 
“rational” . In addition, explicit use of ev-
idence potentially improves transparen -
cy and along with it the accountability of 
decisions. However, accountability is not 
an inherent property of decisions. It is a 
practice put into being by policy agents 
and procedures. We therefore believe that 
there is a need to explore what an “ac -
countable-use of evidence” looks like in 
practice, especially in terms of what polit-
ical effects the pursuit of evidence in spe -
cific bureaucratic settings can produce. In-
vestigating the link between evidence use 
and accountability in policymaking in this 
way can provide a solid basis for advanc -
ing informed theoretical considerations 
over the use of evidence for democratic 
decision making.
 To explore these issues, we use a 
case study of the system for evidence-in -
formed health policymaking in Ghana, 
with a particular analysis of the policy 
evaluation process. The study of the demo-
cratic implications of evidence use in poli-
cymaking has traditionally been applied to 
more developed (high-income) countries 
where the expansion of the administrative 
machine raises concerns over the balance 
between governance improvements and 
legitimacy decisions. However, we believe 
that the case of Ghana proves a particu -
larly interesting case over which to expand 
this line of enquiry. Ghana is considered 
as one the most stable and democratic 
countries in Africa, but furthermore, its 
status of aid-recipient country1 evokes the 
same concern that Barnett and Finnemore 
(1999) raise in relation to the mounting 
power of transnational organizations, that 
is, the expansion of expert-based deci -
sion-making structures outside national 
polities. Hence, the context of an aid-re -
cipient country such as Ghana provides an 
interesting arena in which to investigate 
how governance and legitimacy relate to 
each other in light of the involvement of 
global actors, with particular questions 
over how accountability and evidence 
play out within this delicate relationship. 
Foucaldian-inspired analyses of emergent 
power relationships from the operation of 
the development apparatus are also not 
new to the field of critical development 
studies (cf. Ferguson 1994; Escobar 1995; 
Rahnema and Bawtree 1997), yet there 
has not been extensive application of these 
lenses to the question of evidence use in 
policymaking. Building on the concern 
that development studies generally over -
look the distinction between governance 
and policymaking (Hyden and Court 
2002), we recognize that the promotion 
of evidence use in developing countries 
may exacerbate the confusion between 
governance needs for more efficient pol -
icy outcomes and legitimacy quests for 
more democratic decision processes and 
outcomes. Despite their connections, the 
1 A recent estimate from the U.S. Global Health Initiative in Ghana shows that 40% of the national 
budget comes from development assistance (available at http://www.ghi.gov/wherewework/docs/
ghanastrategy.pdf).
<<<PAGE=4>>>
114
European Policy Analysis
two needs are distinct and should not be 
conflated through an imprecise semantics 
of evidence use. Especially in relation to 
its status of aid-depended country, Ghana 
is continually subjected to “tests” over the 
effectiveness of aid (Pallas et al. 2015) in 
which the use of evidence provides a fun-
damental tool for aid performance. The use 
of “monitoring and evaluation” (M&E) of 
health policies is one diffused governance 
practice supporting these tests, which has 
its counterpart in the policymaking pro -
cess through policy evaluation.
 Policy evaluation itself has an es -
tablished legacy in public policy studies 
through the idea that decisions are “bet -
ter” when they can be tested (Weiss 1999). 
Evidence plays a prominent role in en -
abling such tests and validating the value 
of decisions according to their outcomes. 
Indeed, evidence used in evaluation to in-
form future policy choices can serve as a 
powerful tool for translating the technical 
measurement of policy achievements into 
a political value for shaping policy direc -
tions. This translation is a political act 
that shapes future policy choices while be-
ing supported by evidence use. However, 
the political character of this process can 
also go unobserved under the language of 
“evidence-informed policymaking” , ob -
scuring the ways in which evidence use 
brings about political decisions within 
the evaluation process. We argue that the 
link between evidence use and policy de -
cisions, instead, should not be underesti -
mated, especially when claims to the use 
evidence—such a precisely in policy eval-
uation—raise issues of authority relations 
between knowledge production (epistem-
ic authority) and knowledge use (politi -
cal authority) (Strassheim and Kettunen 
2014).
 In order to investigate the practi -
cal applications of the “accountable-use 
of evidence” in policy evaluation in Gha -
na, this paper combines theoretical and 
empirical considerations as follows: we 
first review theoretical arguments drawn 
from public administration and policy 
studies to understand how the concepts 
of accountability and evidence use have 
been associated in governance and pol -
icymaking studies (Section 2). We then 
investigate such association through em -
pirical analysis of health policy in Ghana 
(Sections 3 and 4). Finally, we discuss the 
theoretical contributions in light of both 
our empirical findings (Section 5.1) and 
sociological approaches to policymaking 
(Section 5.2). Hence, we first set the theo-
retical basis of our discussion in Section 2, 
in which we explain how a managerial un-
derstanding of evidence use and account-
ability has found its way onto democratic 
decision making and the role that policy 
evaluation has accordingly acquired in 
policymaking. We particularly highlight 
that the current employment of principles 
of evidence use and accountability in pol-
icymaking has left untreated the inherent 
tension—or duality—between informing 
and justifying policy choices. This sets up 
Section 3, in which we explore the duality 
through an empirical analysis of the evi -
dence advisory system in health in Ghana. 
We describe how evidence production and 
use is structured within existing internal 
accountability mechanisms, and how pol-
icy evaluation plays a key role in the whole 
process through an institutionalized pro -
cess of interagency review assessment.
 Our analysis for our empirical 
sections is principally informed by a set 
of 24 in-depth interviews conducted in 
2014 with a set of stakeholders in Gha -
naian health policy—including represen -
tatives of the Ministry of Health (MoH),
<<<PAGE=5>>>
115
European Policy Analysis
the Ghana Health Services (GHS), inter -
national development partners (DP), local 
nongovernment organizations (LNGOs), 
and members of parliament (MP). When 
specific interviewees are cited in this pa -
per, they are designated by an anonymous 
number and one of these acronyms. In -
terviews followed a semi-structured ap -
proach and were conducted as part of a 
broader study investigating the political 
and institutional factors shaping the use 
of evidence in a range of country cases. 
The interviews aimed to understand the 
institutional role and position of each in -
terviewee with respect to other actors in 
the health sector, as well as their percep -
tion and understanding of evidence use in 
health policymaking. Data analysis partly 
benefitted from the use of qualitative tools, 
such as Nvivo coding, and from the tri -
angulation with other sources of data in -
cluding official documents from the MoH 
and the GHS. Section 4 then discusses 
how the link between evidence use and 
accountability becomes more unstable 
and questionable in light of international 
donors’ participation into the evaluation 
of the health policy sector in Ghana. Find-
ings from our analysis illustrates that the 
practices of evidence use in health poli -
cy evaluation reveal important aspects 
on the accountability structure actually 
in place beyond formal arrangements. At 
this point, the duality of evidence use as 
both an informative and justificatory tool 
of policymaking becomes apparent; in 
the same vein, the role of accountability 
mechanisms gain relevance beyond vague 
statements of reporting and including 
stakeholders (discussed in Section 5). In 
light of our empirical findings over the 
use of evidence and its connection to ac -
countability mechanisms, we conclude by 
advancing theoretical considerations over 
the democratic content of policy evalua -
tion in Ghana.
2. Theoretical approach
2.1 - Accountability, evidence, and democ-
racy
W
hile there have been asser -
tions within the EBPM field 
that better uses of evidence 
improves governance (cf. Commission of 
the European Communities 2007; OECD 
2013; BBC Newsnight 2015), the connec -
tion between evidence use and democ -
racy appears to rest upon a very general 
understanding of accountability. In its 
simplest form, accountability corresponds 
to the capacity to control political agency 
and evaluate decision outcomes (Dub -
nick and Frederickson 2011). This view 
of accountability derives from manage -
rial concerns of performance evaluation, 
which has subsequently been expanded to 
include the oversight of delegated admin-
istrative agents in policy settings. What 
has to be overseen is precisely the discre-
tion of the delegated “agent” to apply the 
directives of the elected “principle” (Pratt 
and Zeckhauser 1985). This expansion of 
the concept of managerial accountability 
to political accountability has assembled 
together the idea of delegation (of power 
to implement public interests) with the 
idea of representation (of public interests) 
(Brown 2009), while often leaving them 
indistinct. Accordingly, policy evaluation 
has been increasingly considered a funda-
mental stage of the policy cycle as it pro -
duces a measure of policy achievements, 
constitutes an important process to give 
account of them, and ensures democratic 
representation of policy actions.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
116
European Policy Analysis
 Given these premises, the connec-
tion between accountability and democra-
cy has remained quite elusive in the pub -
lic policy and administration literature: 
accountability has been praised mainly 
as a democratic value in itself, ensuring 
that the delegation of power from elected 
authorities to administrative ones reflects 
the will of public representatives—hence 
the common/public will (Koppell 2005; 
Bovens 2010; Flinders 2011; Salminen 
and Lehto 2012; Heidelberg 2015). But as 
much as the idea of democracy as aggre -
gation of individual preferences has been 
partly overcome by new forms of public 
participation and deliberative decision 
making (Hajer 2003; Brown 2009; Heidel-
berg 2015), the principle of accountability 
needs to be reconsidered as more than a 
value in itself. Accountability serves pri -
marily a mechanism (Bovens 2010) by 
which decisions get exposed to some pub-
lic test of legitimacy (Rosanvallon 2011), 
to evaluation, and to judgment (Urbina -
ti 2014). These, we hold, are key features 
of democratic decision making, which 
are directly connected to accountability 
structures in place and which deserve pre-
liminary attention if considerations over 
the democratic nature of decisions are to 
be issued.
 In this framework, the use of evi -
dence appears as an important ingredient 
of the accountability structure, possibly 
supportive of legitimacy tests (Rosan -
vallon 2011), and hence to democratic 
decision making. In principle, evidence 
helps operationalize accountability rules: 
by informing decisions within the range 
of discretion that authorities have over 
decisions, and by defining the legitimacy 
of decisions within specific jurisdictional 
frontiers2. This double use of evidence 
for accountability is generally regard -
ed as implying that decisions can be at 
the same time efficient—because they 
are informed—and legitimate—because 
they are taken by the competent author -
ity. However, combining these principles 
risks confusing the legitimacy of decisions 
with their legality; accordingly, their dem-
ocratic content is only linked to a practice 
of authoritative decision making. Instead, 
two points should be considered: first, an 
authority is such so long as it can be con -
tested; hence accountability structures are 
supportive of democracy to the extent that 
they allow decisions to be contested. Nadia 
Urbinati (2014) refers to this point in her 
claim that the democratic mechanism of 
representation is based on the diarchy of 
the “common will” as in the Rousseauian 
tradition on the one hand, and judgment 
as the capacity to contest decision on the 
other (Urbinati 2014). The second point 
is the recognition that democracy can be 
exercised outside of the strict spaces del -
egated by constitutional authority, with 
stakeholders having access to the polity 
through various forms of participation 
within the policymaking process (Dryzek 
1996; Ingram and Schneider 2006). There-
fore, accountability rules built into broad-
er decision-making systems are import -
ant insofar as they allow stakeholders to 
participate to the public space of decision 
making, provide them with the capacity to 
judge and influence final policy outcomes.
2 For instance, the use of evidence by administrative agencies in the United States is particularly em-
bedded in their accountability and decision-making practices due to the presence of extensive judicial 
review (Vecchione 2016).
<<<PAGE=7>>>
117
European Policy Analysis
2.2 - Evaluation as a policy space
 Under this conceptualization of 
accountability, democracy, and evidence 
use, the process of evaluating decisions 
becomes more complex. In addition to 
the perspective that evaluation serves a 
managerial or technical function, the idea 
that it also serves as a test for decisions, 
and hence an opportunity for improve -
ment (Weiss 1999), becomes more appar-
ent. Indeed, once it is recognized that ac -
countability built into evaluation systems 
exposes decisions to judgment and con -
testation (Heidelberg 2015), it becomes 
easier to appreciate the importance of the 
phase of evaluation in which evidence is 
translated into policy insights to guide fu-
ture interventions. In this way, evidence 
use informs policy performances and val-
idates the value of decisions by allowing 
judgments and reflections on those per -
formances. Evidence use in policy evalu -
ation therefore serves as a powerful tool 
for testing the achievement of policy ob -
jectives, directing policy discussions, val -
idating a particular policy strategy, and 
rewarding it by allocating more funds or 
prolonging its life cycle.
 Precisely for these reasons of 
multiple functionality of evidence use, 
it is critical to analyze how pieces of ev -
idence shift from measuring ( evaluation) 
to judging ( valuation) of policy. We are 
particularly interested in how this shift  
can often occur within a specific policy 
space created by formalized evaluation 
processes. These insights provide a frame-
work in which we can analyze how the 
policy evaluation process provides space 
for participation and contestation among 
stakeholders over the use of evidence to 
judge policy value. It further allows re -
flection on how rules of accountability 
within those evaluation processes serve to 
establish power relations and set the spac-
es through which such contestation takes 
place. In the sections that follow, we will 
present the case of health policy evalua -
tion in Ghana to investigate this phenom-
enon and to critically reflect on challenges 
to the assumed relationship between ev -
idence use, improved accountability, and 
democratic decision making.
3. Evidence and health sector as -
sessment in Ghana
G
hana is a lower-middle income 
country located in Western Afri -
ca. It is often considered one of 
the more democratic and developed of 
Sub-Saharan African nations, but it still 
suffers from significant resource limita -
tions. The structure of the health system 
in Ghana follows the basics of functional 
separation between decision making and 
implementation in policymaking (Cassels 
1995). Primarily instructed by concerns 
over efficiency, some functions tradition -
ally concentrated in the MoH were del -
egated to technical agencies benefitting 
from a certain degree of independence 
and discretion with respect to the MoH. 
The GHS is an autonomous Executive 
Agency of the MoH and represents one of 
the most important policy implementa -
tion body in the health sector, responsible 
to manage and operate all public health 
facilities and tasked with planning, imple-
mentation, monitoring and performance 
assessment of health programs, and ser -
vices (Adjei 2003).
 The GHS has considerable power 
in the health sector that goes beyond pure 
operational and managerial activities. 
The process of its constitution testifies to
<<<PAGE=8>>>
118
European Policy Analysis
the concern of deconcentrating the verti -
cal programs under the MoH (e.g., HIV , 
TBA, etc.) into a parallel structure of hi -
erarchical governance in which the GHS 
would have integrated the operationaliza-
tion of health policies through local units 
of management and implementation 
(Cassels and Janovsky 1992).
 The goals of managerial improve -
ments of service delivery in Ghana were 
also driven by a broader political objec -
tive to bring coherence into the health 
system, which also led to development 
of the health management information 
system (Adjei 2003). The Health Informa-
tion Management Department (HIMD) 
of the Policy, Planning, Monitoring, and 
Evaluation (PPME) division was estab -
lished within the GHS as the focal unit 
responsible for the collection, analysis, 
reporting, and presentation of health ser -
vice information. Its creation aimed to 
support the decentralization process con-
ducted across regional and district levels 
of management: Regional and the District 
level offices were established with each 
having their own Health Administrations 
(RHAs and DHAs) and each is supposed 
to report to the higher hierarchical level 
(Adjei 2003) (see Figure 1). Some ele -
ments of confusion still exist in the sys -
tem of accountability for health services, 
with overlapping responsibilities at times 
across managerial units and local politi -
cal authorities (Couttolenc 2012) 3. Y et in 
spite of these problems, a fairly well for -
malized structure of accountability exists 
(within the GHS and between the GHS 
and the MoH), integrated with a system -
atic practice of reporting and reviewing 
performances of implementation policies 
as widely acknowledged by our interview-
ees at the GHS.
 The connection between evidence 
use and accountability in the Ghana health 
system can be seen in the integration of 
the Health Information Management De-
partment (HIMD) within this national 
system of accountability. The HIMD’s spe-
cific task is to gather health information 
such as administrative, demographic, and 
clinical data—typically collected through 
desk review, although at times accompa -
nied sometimes by interviews (Zakariah 
2014). This is fed upwards from facility to 
district to region and, ultimately, to cen -
tral health management levels in order to 
inform health sector performances (for 
more details see Ghana Health Service 
2012, 30). The Centre for Health Infor -
mation Management within the HIMD 
collects the data from the district level 
through the software called the District 
Health Information Management Infor -
mation System, and then sends it to the 
regional level. The aim of this procedure 
is to collect information from the district 
up to the national level in order to support 
each Ministerial Agency within the health 
sector—not only the GHS—with the im -
3 Confusion and overlapping responsibilities are mainly due to the fact that the deconcentration of 
health services as under the Ghana Health Service and Teaching Hospitals Act 525 of 1996, has not 
yet produced full delegation of power to the local assemblies representing the political authority at the 
district level as in the Local Government Act 462 of 1993 (Couttolenc 2012). For instance, one local key 
informant explained that, as consequence of incomplete decentralization, there exists a dual hierarchy 
in the lines of accountability of the DHA, which has to report back to both the district assembly and to 
the regional director.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
119
European Policy Analysis
Figure 1 —The governance structure of health policy in Ghana
 
plementation of their respective strate -
gies established in their “Programmes of 
Work” (POWs). Each Agency assesses 
its progress in implementing the POWs 
through an in-house Monitoring & Eval -
uation (M&E) plan, which relies on the 
information produced by the HIMD. The 
results of M&E outcomes should finally 
converge each year into the Interagency/
Health Sector Performance Review.
 Therefore, a combined mecha -
nism of information diffusion and evalu -
ation of performance exists in Ghana that 
ties the health governance structure into a 
system based on a structured review pro -
cess: operating internally at each admin -
istrative level and vertically between dis -
trict, regional, and headquarter managers 
via peer-review meetings.
 Considering that one key goal of 
policy evaluation is to inform future pol -
icy choices, this begs the question of how 
the review of performances translates into 
policy direction. Our interviews indicat -
ed, however, that there exists a significant 
missing element in this description of the 
formal structure. Interviews conducted 
with both administrative officials of the 
MoH and DP confirmed that, besides the 
senior managers meeting at the GHS, the 
main venue for research dissemination 
and discussion of evidence was the Health 
Summit—the annual meeting in which 
DP and government discussed the so-
called “Holistic Assessment” of the health 
sector (Interviews MoH-1, DP-1, DP-2, 
DP-3). Indeed, according to one MoH of-
ficial, the Health Summit is “the key pol -
icymaking structure within the sector” 
(MoH-1).
<<<PAGE=10>>>
120
European Policy Analysis
4. The accountability system and 
its tools: how evaluation reveals 
power relationships
O
n the top of the process described 
above combining information 
and evaluation within the Ghana-
ian hierarchy, a “Holistic Assessment tool” 
has been developed to guide interagency 
performance review. The existence of this 
policy tool further binds the structure of 
the health sector together as it exposes its 
evaluation outside the existing boundar -
ies of the health sector. As we will discuss, 
the Tool functions as interface between 
the MoH, responsible for the health sector 
performance, and international DP , which 
demand accountability of performances 
to the MoH.
4.1 - The use of evidence in policy evalua -
tion: the Holistic Assessment Tool
 The Holistic Assessment tool was 
established within the framework of the 
Common Management Arrangement 
(CMA), which governs and set the rules 
for partnership between the MoH and in-
ternational donors. The GHS explains this 
within its documentation on the “CMA ” 
in place for implementation of the nation-
al health sector plan. It states:
“The holistic assessment  of  perfor -
mance  in  the  health  sector  is  a  
structured  methodology  to  assess 
the  quantity,  quality  and  speed  of  
progress  in  achieving  the  objectives  
of  the  programme  of  work.  The 
primary objective of the assessment  
is  to  provide  a  brief  but  well in -
formed,  balanced  and  transparent  
assessment  of  the  sector’s  perfor -
mance  and  factors  that  are  like -
ly  to  have  influenced this   perfor -
mance.   The   assessment   is   based   
on   indicators   and   milestones   in   
the   PoW   and   is presented and dis-
cussed at the April Health  Summit  
and  negotiated  and  agreed  upon  
by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  
partners  at  the  subsequent  business  
meeting.  The outcome serves as in -
put into the [Multi-Donor Budget 
Support Performance Assessment 
Framework]” (Ghana Health Sector 
2012, 20).
 The CMA was conceived to ad -
dress the problem of parallel donor sys -
tems and increased aid transaction costs. 
Now in its third iteration (CMA III), the 
CMA itself was originally introduced in 
1997 with the national health sector re -
form of decentralizing service delivery—
the creation of the GHS being one of the 
main outcomes—under the sponsorship of 
the World Health Organization as part of 
“cooperation for health” program, setting 
out “arrangements for effective collabora-
tion and coordination within the health 
sector” (Ghana Health Sector 2012, 5). As 
a solution, a health-sector-wide approach 
was established along with a pooled fund-
ing account (Pallas et al. 2015). The meth-
od to govern this new framework of col -
laboration was precisely identified in the 
Holistic Assessment (IHP+ 2003) which 
is used to inform joint government-donor 
planning meetings, assess their partner -
ship and provide input into future donor 
planning activities.
 The use of sector-wide indicators, 
milestones, and targets are a key com -
ponent of the Holistic Assessment tool. 
These are established at the national level 
within the four-year Health Sector Medi -
<<<PAGE=11>>>
121
European Policy Analysis
um Term Development Plan (HSMTDP)4 
and are (re-)formulated each year with the 
program of work (POW) that the MoH 
prepares in lines with the objectives of 
the national health strategy as set in the 
HSMTDP . In relation to decentralization, 
milestones, targets, and indicators at the 
local level are derived from national ones. 
The data generated by the HIMD from the 
district to the national level are indeed de-
voted to fill sector-wide indicators speci -
fied in the HSMTDP from which health 
sector agencies draw their own POWs and 
implementation strategies (Nyonator et al. 
2014). Targets, on the other hand, are ne-
gotiated at the decentralized level between 
the GHS and the cost centers (called Bud-
get Management Centres) present at the 
different governance levels to administer 
DP’s funds across the national, regional 
and district level5. Precisely because indi -
cators are pre-established at the national 
level for all types of performances at any 
agency and administrative level, indica -
tors have the potential to perform as a 
“holistic tool” of evaluation.
 However, as suggested, the Ho -
listic Assessment is also used by interna -
tional partners to test health sector per -
formances. As part of this participation, 
international donors are involved in the 
process of selecting indicators, targets and 
milestones. We do not have data to report 
on how the process develops in practice, 
but information shows that performance 
indicators get established and revised each 
November of the year during the Business 
Meeting between the MoH and DP (Gha-
na Health Sector, 2012) 6. Based on these 
indicators, the Holistic Assessment re -
ports a score for each health sector objec-
tive established within the annual POW , 
e.g., bridging equity gaps in health care, 
improving efficiency, and effectiveness 
in the health system. A score of +1 is at -
tributed if the indicator has attained the 
set target, 0 if it just show a good trend, −1 
if the target has been missed (IHP+ 2003, 
37-38).
 The presentation of the Holistic 
Assessment to the Health Summit is to 
provide the mechanism for all sector part-
ners to review performances and assess 
the level of compliance with the CMA. 
4 The HSMTDP is prepared by the MoH and its Ministries, Departments, and Agencies under the guid-
ance of the National Development Commission and sets the objectives of the national health strategy 
over a period of four years.
5 There are several Budget and Management Centres spread throughout the three administrative and 
facility levels. The headquarters of the GHS is managed as one of them; 10 Regional Health Admin-
istration, 8 Regional Hospitals, 110 District Health Administrations, and 95 District Hospitals (GHS, 
available at http://www.ghanahealthservice.org/ghs-subcategory.php?cid=&scid=43).
6 There are three business meetings. The business meeting during the April health summit will assess 
the sector Performance Assessment Framework (PAF) to feed into the Multi-Donor Budget Support di-
alogue. The second business meeting in August will review the sector’s progress from the beginning of 
the year to date and provide an opportunity to table new issues. The business meeting in November will 
be devoted to planning and budgeting. The meeting will discuss and agree on health sector plans and 
associated budget for the ensuing year. It will also agree on indicators for the PAF based on the sector 
program that was presented and discussed. Finally, and “ Aide Memoire” will be signed by the Ministry 
of Health and representatives of Development Partners that records the decisions taken during the 
business meeting of November.
<<<PAGE=12>>>
122
European Policy Analysis
Formally speaking, the objective of the 
CMA that governs the Holistic Assess -
ment framework is to support the imple -
mentation of the HSMTDP . However, this 
mechanism of evidence generation serves 
another purpose besides bringing coher -
ence to the decentralized system of health 
governance; it makes the system evaluable 
by external reviewers. These two drives are 
functionally linked and theoretically har -
monized through the use of the same tools 
for national and external assessment, i.e., 
the Holistic Assessment tool; in this, com-
mon indicators and milestones in princi -
ple guarantee that the interagency eval -
uation and MoH-donors evaluation be 
aligned. However, the CMA clearly states 
that the use of the Holistic Assessment tool 
should be made “in line with the princi -
ples of mutual accountability” between the 
MoH and the donors (Ghana Health Sec-
tor 2012) showing that the Health Summit 
represents not only an additional venue 
of evaluation, but also an additional sys -
tem of accountability in which the MoH is 
accountable to DP for the overall perfor -
mance of the health sector.
4.2 - The use of evidence and the alignment 
of distinct spaces of accountability: one-fits-
all evidence?
 In principle, the creation of a sec -
ond system of accountability external and 
parallel to the hierarchical structure of 
management of the Ghana health system 
should raise no issue, as the use of com -
mon tools for evaluation should ensure 
the alignment and coordination between 
the two systems of accountability (and 
evaluation). Simply, the use of the Holis -
tic Assessment tool would federalize these 
two spaces of accountability into one in -
clusive space of policy evaluation at the 
national level. As such, evidence would 
guide the translation of the interagency 
assessment into some future policy di -
rections while including DP . However, 
the scores attributed to each target in the 
Holistic Assessment entails some political 
statement of success and failure, raising 
questions of responsibility and liability for 
these outcomes (Bovens, 't Hart, and Kui-
pers 2006). In fact, the conflation between 
the two accountability systems makes it 
unclear to which responsibility and liabili-
ty issues should be referred.
 Many might assume that the MoH 
is responsible for the health sector perfor-
mance and should be equally accountable 
to all the stakeholders composing the space 
of policy evaluation, including NGOs (and 
especially the Health coalition of NGOs), 
international donors (often referred to as 
“partners”), health agencies, academics, 
health associations, etc. In practice this is 
not the case, however, as each stakeholder 
has its own power to influence the outcome 
of policy evaluation and, accordingly, in -
fluence or bypass accountability structures 
in place. Such power, in turn, depends on 
the capacity of each stakeholder to use ev-
idence as a tool for applying its scrutiny to 
policy performances and defining its dis -
cretion in guiding future policy directions; 
hence, evidence appears as a powerful tool 
for stakeholders to negotiate their own 
position with respect to the other partic -
ipants.
5. The instability between techni -
cal evaluation and accountability 
relations
A
ccording to the CMA framework 
and the use of the Holistic Assess-
ment Tool, the use of evidence
<<<PAGE=13>>>
123
European Policy Analysis
reflects a functional effort to combine 
two systems of accountability, namely by 
aligning them within a common evalu -
ation process. However, this functional 
solution does not assure that practices 
of evaluation are harmonized across the 
policy spaces in which they are employed, 
namely the decentralized structure of peer 
review and the international partnership 
structure of mutual accountability; in this 
regard, concern has been raised that the 
donor driven nature of policy evaluation 
may create a “potential threat” to the ef -
fectiveness of agency’s M&E plans (Gha -
na Health Service 2012, 13). Nor does this 
functional solution assures that the policy 
spaces converge into one common space 
of decision in which the participation of 
multiple stakeholders be taken as a proxy 
of democratic decision making. This is 
due to both the multidimensional logic 
of evidence use in policymaking, particu -
larly apparent through policy evaluation; 
and to the nature of accountability rela -
tionships, which imply more than simply 
reporting on policy choices and achieve -
ments. We shall see how these two aspects 
of evidence use and accountability are re-
lated.
5.1 - Evidence use and accountability rela-
tionships
 On a general epistemological lev -
el, indicators come from a process of elab-
oration, namely of data, and aim to “indi-
cate” (rather than prove) whether some 
programmatic situation is still relevant to 
be considered within a certain policy per-
spective or whether new situations have 
emerged that affect policy trajectories. 
As in the case of Ghana, the HIMD has 
primarily the duty to “fill”—rather than 
create—indicators; however, our inter -
views clearly stated that some margin of 
discretion over data selection always ex -
ist, especially when data are lacking. Also, 
discretion exists in the very use of indica-
tors to produce reports and draw political 
attention on them. So for instance, one 
interviewee indicated that the Director 
General of the GHS can request specific 
data or indicators that do not fall into the 
HSTMDP , for instance as was apparently 
being done to inform the next HSMT -
DP of 2014–2018 (GHS-1). The discre -
tion over data and indicators could also 
be seen in the way that particular pieces 
of data, or particular results of analysis, 
could be promoted by bureaucrats with -
in the HIMD to influence policymakers. 
And indeed, the utilization of data might 
depend on the capacity of specific indi -
viduals (e.g., within the PPME) to get pol-
icymakers interested in those data—e.g., 
with examples of policy briefs, maps, and 
one-pager documents used for generating 
interest from the Director General of the 
GHS (GHS-1).
 The discretion in filling indicators 
with data is not a problem per se, nor is 
it about selecting specific indicators to 
promote political awareness over certain 
issues; on the contrary, discretion is a typ-
ical characteristics of technical agencies 
supposed to simplify very complex situ -
ations and enhance the quality and pace 
of policy decisions. However, discretion 
raises questions if it is exclusively driven 
by the bureaucracy in the absence of po -
litical engagement to use information in 
a way that reflects political priorities. As 
a general consideration, this is a techni -
cal problem of managerial accountability 
relationships, in which, in a typical prin -
cipal-agent perspective, the “principal” 
should guide the “agent” in the imple -
mentation of policy objectives (Pratt and
<<<PAGE=14>>>
124
European Policy Analysis
Zeckhauser 1985). In the case of Ghana, 
this consideration upgrades to an addi -
tional concern related to the fact that the 
production of indicators and the political 
values built into them will be used as a 
policy tool for negotiation (i.e., the Ho -
listic Assessment tool) during the Health 
Summit. The holistic assessment of prog -
ress is indeed meant to be presented and 
discussed during the Health Summit and 
negotiated and agreed upon by the MoH 
and Partners at the immediately subse -
quent business meeting in April (Gha -
na Health Sector 2012, 20). Indeed, the 
outcome of the health sector assessment 
serves as the basis for discussing the Per -
formance Assessment Framework (PAF) 
for Multi-Donor Budget Support during 
the business meeting following the Health 
Summit (Ghana Health Sector 2012) 7. 
Therefore, the CMA sets the framework 
for both constructing evidence—by spec -
ifying how the Holistic Assessment tool 
should be used—and deciding which ev -
idence should be taken as relevant for fu -
ture planning.
 Therefore, evidence use becomes 
extremely sensitive from a political point 
of view. As a general consideration, the 
case of Ghana shows that the use of evi -
dence does not respond to a purely infor-
mative concern of enhancing the quality 
of decisions and anticipating the conse -
quences of actions; it also responds to the 
need to justify decisions at the moment 
of the Health Summit, hence to negotiate 
the value of the actions that may follow 
(Boltanski and Thévenot 2006). As a sec -
ond consideration, the power of DP to 
influence the selection and evaluation of 
indicators proves to be important in in -
fluencing the outcome of the negotiating 
process and in setting future policy di -
rections. Indeed, the capacity that stake -
holders have to influence each other’s 
views often reflects an adversarial pro -
cess, in which the construction of policy 
meaning occurs through negotiation be -
tween competing views over policy per -
formances and the subsequent judgments 
on future policy directions (Bovens, 't 
Hart, and Kuipers 2006). Evidence can 
be used to arbitrate such adversarial pro -
cess, but at the same time, where dispari -
ty emerges as to the capacity to employ it, 
evidence can end up determining policy 
directions.
 Excluding coercion, the power 
that each actor has to influence the pro -
cess in which policy value get shaped 
partly vests in the way accountabili -
ty structures establish common rules 
for participation and values discussion. 
These rules, in turn, get operationalized 
by stakeholders through the selection, ac-
tivation, and evaluation of policy evalua -
tion tools (Pearce, Wesselink, and Cole -
batch 2014). And indeed these tools are 
truly “instrumental” to create different 
types of public spaces of discussion while 
realistically admitting only those partici -
pants with the capacity to provide insights 
and feedback. For instance, one of our 
interviewees from the MoH complained 
about the superior technical capacity of 
DP to produce evidence of performances 
(GHS-1). This asymmetry is problematic 
in two respects: on the one hand, Ghana -
ian officials have little capacity to enter 
the technical discussion due to a lack of 
7 See supra note 6.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
125
counteracting arguments, hence to raise 
issues of political relevance connected 
to them. On the other hand, the absence 
of clear problem setting and policy di -
rections established by the MoH makes 
the discussion dominated by technical 
considerations of policy implementation 
performance. Interviewees from both DP 
and NGOs (DP-3 and LNGO-1) recog -
nized such absence as problematic. In the 
wording of one representative of an inter-
national agency (DP-3), health policy in 
Ghana is only conceived in operational 
and strategic terms by the government 
and never in terms of policy objectives; 
accordingly, he reiterated, indicators are 
set only in the form of outcomes (e.g., 
how many new hospitals have been built?) 
rather than impacts (e.g., how much 
child mortality has diminished?). On a 
different level, an NGO representative 
(LNGO-1) explained us that the “Gha -
na Coalition of NGOs in Health” (http://
www.ghanahealthngos.net/) has recently 
decided to challenge the government on 
health priorities by creating a concurrent 
space of advocacy and evidence use; the 
objective being to produce an alterna -
tive evidence-based report and submit 
it to the parliament select committee on 
health in order to influence health financ-
ing. However, the Parliament has very 
little power in influencing actual health 
policy outcomes (Ayee 2002) as some of 
our interviewees confirmed. It was ex -
plained, for instance, that the Parliament 
lacks the financial resources to commit 
its own inquiries and studies which could 
allow it to have greater say in the direc -
tion of health policy. This makes Parlia -
ment’s influence over domestic policy 
dependent on external aid provided di -
rectly to the legislature, for instance for 
organizing meetings with the civil society 
(DP-3, MEP-1 DP-1); at the same time, 
such dependence renders the Parliament 
practically impotent to have a say in the 
approval of sectoral budgets (Ayee 2002).
 Therefore, evidence use reflects 
mainly on the use of common indica -
tors, which might fail to link evaluation 
to “accountable” (and potentially more 
democratic) decisions.  The reason draws 
precisely on the duality of evidence use as 
both informative and justificatory policy 
tools, and on the duality—almost sym -
metrical—of accountability relationships, 
which envisage at the same time report -
ing on performances and policy achieve -
ments, and exposing performances to 
some judgments and deliberation.
5.2 - Accountability structures matter to 
democratic outcomes
 As much as a practical investi -
gation on the use of evidence in policy 
evaluation has revealed the existence of 
structures of power, it has also revealed 
that policy evaluation is not only a tech -
nical process of assessment but most 
importantly a political process of value 
formation and judgment. In the case of 
Ghana, the health policymaking pro -
cess sees the two typical phases of pol -
icy evaluation, i.e., evidence synthesis 
and learning (evaluation and valuation), 
disjointed into two separate spaces of ac -
countability. One is structured around a 
decentralized structure of governance, 
whereas the other relies on the partner -
ship between donors and MoH. Where -
as the use of evidence—inscribed in the 
Holistic Assessment tool—is in principle 
envisaged in bringing these two spac -
es together, these in fact stay separated. 
This situation demonstrated that the re -
lation between technical evaluation and 
European Policy Analysis
<<<PAGE=16>>>
126
European Policy Analysis 
political accountability is unstable and 
certainly cannot be expected to be fixed 
by advocating, vaguely, for some ac -
countable-use of evidence. At the same 
time, this situation demonstrates that, 
despite the vagueness of accountability 
claims, looking at the systems of account-
ability in place along with the practices 
inscribed into them is important to un -
derstand the democratic implications of 
evidence use—in our case, the democrat -
ic implications of evidence use in policy 
evaluation. In conducting policy eval -
uation, accountability relationships are 
important in that they either stabilize the 
interactions between stakeholders and 
decision makers or provide the former 
with an opportunity to renegotiate their 
power to influence decision makers. For 
how mechanical and innocuous the prin -
ciple of accountability might resemble, 
it is instead a quite elusive but powerful 
concept that, broadly speaking, indicates 
how policymakers should respond to 
stakeholders as their interests and ideas, 
get unveiled during—and in contribution 
to—policy evaluation. This is indeed a 
moment in which stakeholders have the 
opportunity to make personal interests 
and ideas actionable by assessing policy 
outcomes, reassessing connected policy 
trajectories and possibly reconsider pol -
icy perspectives (Rose and Davies 1994).
 As much as the control of policy 
performances does not exhaust the whole 
process of determining the value of pol -
icy performances (Koppell 2005), such 
value is determined through a process 
of participation in which different actors 
variably contribute to the appreciation of 
policy interventions and variably influ -
ence their final judgment. In connection 
to the use of evidence in policymaking, 
Champagne, Contandriopoulos, and Ta -
non (2005) provide views of evaluation as 
a social process consisting of:
“making a judgment on the worth 
of an intervention by implementing 
a deliberate process for providing 
scientifically valid and socially legit -
imate information on an interven -
tion or any of its components in such 
a way that the various stakeholders, 
who may have different bases for 
judgements, are able to take a posi -
tion on the intervention and to con -
struct a judgment that could trans -
late into action” (143-44).
 From this perspective, the deter -
mination of the political values within 
decisions is a process in which account -
ability meets the vows for improved dem-
ocratic practices: by making these values 
exposed to public judgment and contes -
tation (Heidelberg 2015), accountability 
goes beyond simplistic checks of inter -
ests’ representation and enables a process 
of continuous reconstruction of political 
values. In this sense, accountability struc-
tures are important not only to shape au -
thority relationships, but also to activate 
a social mechanism of participation in 
which the principles of an ideal relation -
ship between the “governors” and the 
“governed” (Koppell 2005; Lascoumes 
and Le Galès 2007; Salminen and Leh -
to 2012) are continuously recreated and 
“tested” against legitimacy considerations 
(Rosanvallon 2011). In turn, the capacity 
to use knowledge and evidence becomes 
crucial to (re-)organize such principles 
through mechanisms of responsiveness 
and degrees of scrutiny over policymak -
ers’ decisions; hence, crucial to opera -
tionalize accountability.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
127
6. Conclusions
I
n this paper, we have tried to capture 
the concerns over the legitimacy of 
knowledge-based institutions and in -
ternational organization by looking at a 
case study based on health policy eval -
uation in Ghana. We have explored the 
practices of performing policy evaluation 
in light of the systematization of evidence 
use into the national structure of gover -
nance and accountability. By first con -
centrating on the national structure of 
evidence use and then on the governance 
framework of policy evaluation, we were 
able to explore how the use of evidence, 
generally advocated as an unquestioned 
virtue of policymaking, has implications, 
at least theoretically, for democratic de -
cision making. These implications are 
difficult to appreciate when there is only 
a general and vague understanding of 
accountability relationships, or of way 
the use of evidence plays a role in shap -
ing those relationships. In particular, the 
Health Summit in Ghana has revealed the 
importance of the policy evaluation stage 
within the policymaking process to un -
derstand the performative effects of the 
use of evidence in policymaking, as policy 
evaluation is precisely devoted to trans -
late technical considerations into policy 
orientations. In this process, we showed 
that use of evidence becomes a clear is -
sue of power. Also, the process of policy 
evaluation within the Health Summit re -
veals with particular clarity the duality of 
evidence use in informing and justifying 
decisions and its relevance for under -
standing how accountability relationships 
matter in structuring power relationships. 
The structure of the accountability rela -
tionship, therefore, provides the basis for 
discussing issues of democratic decision 
making connected to the use of evidence 
in policymaking. Indeed, we have showed 
that the involvement of international do -
nors as responsible for funding a signifi -
cant amount of health services can chal -
lenge the national structure of authority 
and accountability relationships within 
existing constitutional parameters or the 
existing governance structure of the state.
 These findings may prove chal -
lenging to international DP who champi -
on the language of EBPM, while simulta -
neously embracing the language of good 
governance and democratic represen -
tation in aid-recipient countries. As the 
case of Ghana has showed, it is import -
ant that donors involved in processes of 
evidence use to inform policy—either by 
extracting local data to generate their own 
assessments or in constructing indicators 
to serve as evaluation tools—consciously 
consider the potential implications these 
practices have over local accountability 
mechanisms along with possible “gov -
ernmentality” effects and legitimacy con -
cerns.
 This exploration of the use of ev -
idence in health evaluation in Ghana has 
proved to be fundamental to determine 
the nature of the accountability mecha -
nisms outside those established within 
formal constitutional governance rela -
tionships; indeed, it has revealed the ex -
istence of two policy spaces of decisions 
that would otherwise remain unclear. 
These accountability mechanisms in turn, 
have informed our theoretical reflections 
on the link between democracy and ev -
idence use in policymaking insofar as 
accountability structures provide one 
important mechanism for stakeholders’ 
participation in the policy evaluation 
process, along with their power to influ -
European Policy Analysis
<<<PAGE=18>>>
128
ence decision outcomes. These findings 
can help inform future work in Ghana by 
helping identify where in the policymak -
ing process the use of governance tools 
and mechanisms are most influential; 
these findings can also provide an exam -
ple for other countries of how the investi-
gation of accountability mechanisms and 
practices can help detect emergent gover-
nance relationships along with their legit-
imacy implications.
Acknowledgements
This work has developed as part of the 
Getting Research into Policy in Health 
(GRIP-Health) project, supported by a 
grant from the European Research Coun-
cil (Project ID#282118).
References
Adjei, Emmanuel. 2003. "Health Sector 
Reforms and Health Information in Gha-
na." Information Development 19 (4): 256-
264.
Ayee, Joseph. 2002. "Governance, Institu-
tional Reforms, and Policy Outcomes in 
Ghana." In Better Governance and Public 
Policy. Capacity Building and Democratic 
Renewal in Africa , eds. Dele Olowu and 
Soumana Sako. United States: Kumarian 
Press, 173-191.
Barnett, Michael, and Raymond Duvall. 
2005. "Power in International Politics." 
International Organization 59 (01): 39-75.
Barnett, Michael N., and Martha Finne -
more. 1999. "The Politics, Power, and Pa -
thologies of International Organizations." 
International Organization  53 (4): 699-
732.
BBC Newsnight. 2015. "Democracy Re -
wired." BBC.
Boltanski, Luc, and Laurent Thévenot. 
2006. On Justification: Economies of 
Wor th. USA: Princeton University Press.
Bovens, Mark. 2010. "Two Concepts of 
Accountability: Accountability as a Virtue 
and as a Mechanism." West European Pol-
itics 33 (5): 946-967.
Bovens, Mark, Paul 't Hart, and Sanneke 
Kuipers. 2006. "The Politics of Policy Eval-
uation." In The Oxford Handbook of Public 
Policy, eds. Michael Moran, Martin Rein, 
and Robert E. Goodin. United States: Ox-
ford University Press, 319-335.
Brown, Mark B. 2009. Science in Democ -
racy. Expertise, Institutions, and Represen-
tation. USA: MIT.
Cassels, Andrew. 1995. "Health Sector 
Reform: Key Issues in Less Developed 
Countries." Journal of International De -
velopment 7 (3): 329-347.
Cassels, Andrew, and Katja Janovsky. 
1992. "A Time of Change: Health Policy, 
Planning and Organization in Ghana." 
Health Policy and Planning 7 (2): 144-154.
Chalmers, Iain. 2003. "Trying to Do More 
Good Than Harm in Policy and Practice: 
The Role of Rigorous, Transparent, Up-
to-Date Evaluations’ ." Annals of the Amer-
ican Academy of Political and Social Sci -
ence 589: 22-40.
European Policy Analysis
<<<PAGE=19>>>
129
Champagne, François, André-Pierre Con-
tandriopoulos, and Anaïs Tanon. 2005. 
"A Program Evaluation Perspective on 
Processes, Practices, and Decision-Mak -
ers." In Using Knowledge and Evidence in 
Health Care: Multidisciplinary Perspec -
tives, eds. Louise Lemieux-Charles, and 
François Champagne. Canada: University 
of Toronto Press, 139-171.
Clarence, Emma. 2002. "Technocracy Re-
invented: The New Evidence Based Policy 
Movement." Public Policy and Adminis -
tration 17 (3): 1-11.
Commission of the European Com -
munities. 2007. "Towards More Knowl -
edge-Based Policy and Practice in Educa -
tion and Training." In Secondary Towards 
More Knowledge-Based Policy and Practice 
in Education and Training, ed. Secondary 
———. Brussels. Reprint. 
Couttolenc, Bernard F . 2012. Decentral-
ization and Governance in the Ghana 
Health Sector. World Bank Studies. Wash-
ington, DC: The World Bank. 
Dryzek, John S. 1996. "Political Inclusion 
and the Dynamics of Democratization." 
The American Political Science Review 90 
(3): 475-487.
Dubnick, Melvin, and George H. Fred -
erickson. 2011. Public Accountability: 
Performance Measurement, the Extended 
State, and the Search for Trust . Washing-
ton DC: National Academy of Public Ad-
ministration.
Escobar, Arturo. 1995. Encountering De-
velopment: The Making and Unmaking 
of the Third World . Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Ferguson, James. 1994. The Anti-Politics 
Machine: "Development," Depoliticization 
and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho . Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ferlie, Ewan, Gerry Mcgivern, and Louise 
FitzGerald. 2012. "A New Mode of Orga -
nizing in Health Care? Governmentality 
and Managed Networks in Cancer Ser -
vices in England." Social Science & Med -
icine 74 (3): 340-347.
Flinders, Matthew. 2011. "Daring to Be a 
Daniel: The Pathology of Politicized Ac -
countability in a Monitory Democracy." 
Administration & Society 43 (5): 595-619.
Foucault, M. [1978] 1991. "Governmen -
tality." In The Foucalut Effect: Studies in 
Governmentality, eds. Graham Burchell, 
Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Ghana Health Sector. 2012. "Common 
Management Arrangements for Imple -
mentation of the Sector Medium-Term 
Development Plan." Revised Draft.
Ghana Health Service. 2012. "GHS Mon -
itoring and Evaluation Plan 2011–2013." 
In Secondary GHS Monitoring and Evalu-
ation Plan 2011–2013.
Hajer, Maarten. 2003. "Policy without Pol-
ity? Policy Analysis and the Institutional 
Void." Policy Sciences 36 (2): 175-195.
Heidelberg, Roy L. 2015. "Political 
Accountability and Spaces of Con -
testation." Administration & Society 
0095399715581033.
Hyden, Goran, and Julius Court. 2002. 
"Comparing Governance across Coun -
European Policy Analysis
<<<PAGE=20>>>
130
tries and over Time: Conceptual Chal -
lenges." In Better Governance and Public 
Policy. Capacity Building for Democratic 
Renewal in Africa , eds. Dele Olowu, and 
Soumana Sako. United States: Kumarian 
Press, Inc, 13-33.
IHP+. 2003. "Joint Annual Health Sec -
tor Reviews: A Review of Experience." In 
Secondary Joint Annual Health Sector Re -
views: A Review of Experience.
Ingram, Helen, and Anne L. Schneider. 
2006. "Policy Analysis for Democracy." 
In The Oxford Handbook of Public Policy,  
eds. Michael Moran, Martin Rein, and 
Robert E. Goodin. Great Britain: Oxford 
University Press, 169-189.
Koppell, Jonathan G.S. 2005. "Pathologies 
of Accountability: Icann and the Chal -
lenge of “Multiple Accountabilities Dis -
order” ." Public Administration Review  65 
(1): 94-108.
Lascoumes, Pierre, and Patrick Le Galès. 
2007. "Introduction: Understanding Pub-
lic Policy through Its Instruments—from 
the Nature of Instruments to the Sociol -
ogy of Public Policy Instrumentation." 
Governance 20 (1): 1-21.
Miller, Peter, and Nikolas Rose. 1995. 
"Governing Economic Life." In Michel 
Foucault (2) Critical Assessments, ed. Bar-
ry Smart. London: Routledge, 146-174.
Nyonator, F ., A. Ofosu, M. Segbafah, and 
S d'Almeida. 2014. "Monitoring and Eval-
uating Progress Towards Universal Health 
Coverage in Ghana." PLoS Medicine 11 
(9): e1001691.
OECD. 2013. "Colombia: Implementing 
Good Governance." In Secondary Colom-
bia: Implementing Good Governance.
Pallas, Sarah Wood, Justice Nonvignon, 
Moses Aikins, and Jennifer Prah Ruger 
2015. "Responses to Donor Proliferation 
in Ghana’s Health Sector: A Qualitative 
Case Study." Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization 93: 11-18.
Pearce, Warren, Anna Wesselink, and Hal 
Colebatch. 2014. "Evidence and Meaning 
in Policy Making." Evidence & Policy: A 
Journal of Research, Debate and Practice 
10 (2): 161-165.
Pellizzoni, Luigi. 2015. "Bridging Prom -
ises and (Dis)Illusions: Deliberative De -
mocracy in an Evolutionary Perspective." 
In Evolutionary Governance Theory , eds. 
Raoul Beunen, Kristof Van Assche, and 
Martijn Duineveld. Switzerland: Springer 
International Publishing, 215-232.
Pratt, John W ., and Richard Zeckhauser. 
1985. "Principals and Agents: An Over -
view." In Principals and Agents: The Struc-
ture of Business , eds. John W . Pratt, and 
Richard Zeckhauser. Boston: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1-35.
Rahnema, Majid, and Victoria Bawtree, 
eds. 1997. The Post-Development Reader . 
London: Zed Books.
Rosanvallon, Pierre. 2011. Democratic Le-
gitimacy: Impartiality, Reflexivity, Proxim-
ity. Woodstock, UK: Princeton University 
Press.
Rose, R., and P . Davies. 1994. Inheritance 
in Public Policy . New Y ork: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
European Policy Analysis
<<<PAGE=21>>>
131
Russell, Jill, Trisha Greenhalgh, Emma 
Byrne, and Janet McDonnell. 2008. "Rec -
ognizing Rhetoric in Health Care Policy 
Analysis." Journal of Health Services Re -
search & Policy 13 (1): 40-46.
Salminen, Ari, and Kirsi Lehto. 2012. 
"Accountable to Whom? Exploring the 
Challenge of Multiple Accountabilities in 
Finnish Public Administration." Haldu-
skultuur – Administrative Culture 13 (2): 
147-162.
Shiffman, Jeremy. 2014. "Knowledge, 
Moral Claims and the Exercise of Power 
in Global Health." International Journal of 
Health Policy and Management 3 (6): 297-
299.
Smith, Katherine E., and Ellen Stewart. 
2015. "'Black Magic' and 'Gold Dust': The 
Epistemic and Political Uses of Evidence 
Tools in Public Health Policy Making." 
Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, 
Debate and Practice 11 (3): 415-437.
Strassheim, Holger, and Pekka Kettunen. 
2014. "When Does Evidence-Based Policy 
Turn into Policy-Based Evidence? Con -
figurations, Contexts and Mechanisms." 
Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, 
Debate and Practice 10 (2): 259-277.
Urbinati, Nadia. 2014. Democracy Dis -
figured. Opinion, Truth, and the People . 
Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, En -
gland: Harvard University Press.
Vecchione, Elisa. 2016. "Risk Analysis." In 
The International Handbook of Regulato -
ry Impact Assessment, eds. Claire Dunlop, 
and Claudio Radaelli. Cheltenham: Ed -
ward Elgar. Forthcoming, Ch. 12.
Weber, Max. 1947. Max Weber: The The -
ory of Social and Economic Organization , 
eds. and transl. A.M. Henderson and Tal-
cott Parsons. New Y ork: Free Press.
Weisburd, David, and Peter Neyroud. 
2011. "New Perspectives on Policing." In 
Secondary New Perspectives on Policing.
Weiss, Carol Hirschon. 1999. "The Inter -
face between Evaluation and Public Poli -
cy." Evaluation 5 (4): 468-486.
Zakariah, Afisah. 2014. "Holistic Assess -
ment of the Health Sector Performance 
for 2013." Paper presented at the 2014 
April Health Summit, GIMPA University, 
Accra.
European Policy Analysis