<<<PAGE=1>>>
Article
Teaching Public Administration
2024, Vol. 42(1) 15– 41
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/01447394221136430
journals.sagepub.com/home/tpa
Transforming the master of
public administration education
for a changing world of work: A
personal account of a South
African case
Jacobus S Wessels
University of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa
Abstract
Public administration managers are confronted with new and highly complex challenges
emerging at a rapid rate. This situation requires a reimagining of public administration
education to prepare public administration managers to capably deal with these chal-
lenges. While the Master of Public Administration (MPA) is globally used as vehicle for
preparing public administration managers for performing their functions, the question
posed is: How can MPA programmes be transformed to prepare students for dealing with
emerging complex challenges in the changing world of work? This article provides a
personal exploratory account of the transformation of teaching and learning of a South
African MPA case. The research design was not selected for generalisingﬁndings to the
universe of MPA offerings, but for obtaining case-speciﬁc information and insights. The
study draws from insider’s memory work supported by a variety of textual data such as
notes, reports, ofﬁcial documents, curriculum documentation and the content of the
2020 online module sites. The article proposes a transformed curriculum to provide for
the learning of public administration capabilities appropriate for dealing with emerging
challenges. It subsequently reports on the curriculum transformation project of the
selected case by reﬂecting on some philosophical assumptions and assumptions on how
people learn and explaining the use of the inquiry-driven learning strategy to facilitate the
learning of appropriate capabilities for dealing with public administration challenges. This
article contributes to the existing literature on the role of the MPA in the mid-career
education of public administration managers by suggesting the learning of public ad-
ministration capabilities through an inquiry-driven learning strategy.
Corresponding author:
Jacobus S Wessels, Department of Public Administration and Management, University of South Africa, PO
Box 392, UNISA, Pretoria 0003, South Africa.
Email: wessejs@unisa.ac.za
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Keywords
Master of Public Administration (MPA), capability approach, inquiry-driven learning,
learning, situatedness, interconnectedness, teaching and learning transformation
We are at the beginning of a revolution that is fundamentally changing the way we live, work,
and relate to one another.
Klaus Schwab (2016)
Introduction
The changing world of work has become not only a highly topical theme at conferences of
world leaders, but also the focus of scholarly reﬂection and research.1 This interest in the
changing world of work was further enhanced by the publication of the bookThe Fourth
Industrial Revolutionby KlausSchwab (2016), founder of the World Economic Forum, in
2016. He states the following in the second sentence of this book (Schwab, 2016: 7):
We are at the beginning of a revolution that is fundamentally changing the way we live, work,
and relate to one another. In its scale, scope and complexity, what I consider to be the fourth
industrial revolution is unlike anything humankind has experienced before.
Within the speciﬁc context of public administration, AllanRosenbaum (2014:9 2 )
observed that “new and very complex challenges have continued to emerge at a rapid
rate”, resulting in“various efforts to rethink and improve the quality of public admin-
istration education and training throughout the world”.
Considering that Master of Public Administration (MPA) programmes are globally
used as a vehicle for preparing public administration managers for performing their
functions, and that public administration managers are situated in diverse, dynamic and
co-constructed realities “with different features of time, space, structures, relationships,
multiple and non-linear connections and subsystems” (Wessels, 2021a: 438), a crucial
question is the following: How can MPA programmes be transformed to prepare students
for dealing with emerging complex challenges in the changing world of work?
This article reports on an examination of the MPA curriculum attributes necessary for
instilling those capabilities, through a South African case. As this case is situated within
the global context of the changing world of public administration, this world isﬁrstly
discussed.
The changing world of public administration
The reality of the changing world of work is rarely disputed. Within the world of public
administration, these changes have a fundamental impact on the life, work and behaviour
of public administration managers. This article shows that public administration managers
are situated in emerging, diverse, dynamic and co-constructed public administration
16 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=3>>>
realities. Public administration is an emerging and context-speciﬁc social construction
(Raadschelders, 2020). Therefore, emerging public administration challenges can only be
dealt with in the speciﬁc context of time and space (Raadschelders and Whetsell, 2018).
Irrespective of the effect of time and space on the socially constructed phenomenon of
public administration, it is possible to recognise this phenomenon within different
contexts of time and space from the presence of certain ontological attributes, namely that
of “organised, non-political, executive functions of the state” (Pauw and Louw, 2014: 16).
While these multiple executive functions of the state, broadly classiﬁed as that of
protection, promotion and enabling (Loxton, 1994:9 4–106; Wessels, 2020: 153–154),
have been traditionally performed through“a complex, logically inclusive composite of
activities undertaken by one or more government departments, or other public institu-
tions” (Robson, 2006: 72), the performing of those functions has gradually became more
complex with the inclusion of a diversity of other participants from outside the formal
organisational structures of government as well as a variety of context-speciﬁc functions
to be performed.
The protection functions of the state are commonly associated with whatHobbes
(1651: 166) referred to as“the Peace of the Subjects within themselves, and their Defence
against a common Enemy”; in other words, the functions performed by the police service
and the defence force. It is, however, noteworthy thatRousseau (1762: 219) included in
this category of functions a different type of protection, namely the protection of“the poor
against the tyranny of the rich”. Within the context of Africa, this is done through, inter
alia, child support grants for poor households (Wessels, 2021b), school feeding pro-
grammes (Govender et al., 2021; Tandoh-Ofﬁn et al., 2021b) and mental healthcare
(Wessels and Naidoo, 2021b). Furthermore, the global outbreak of the Covid-19 pan-
demic posed extreme challenges to the ability of states to protect society. Subsequently, to
protect society against the spreading of the virus, governments announced lockdown
measures that severely restricted the freedom of movement of individuals. Within the
South African context, the unintended consequences of these protection measures in-
cluded “a shutdown of the economy, which in turn resulted in a shock in the labour market
and a big change in the way people went about doing their work” (Stats SA, 2021: 5).
Similar unintended consequences caused the United Nations Children’s Fund to launch
initiatives for the protection of“the most vulnerable and disadvantaged children” (Unicef,
2019: 4). The challenges to governments’protection function inevitably became highly
complex. While these challenging interventions may share common functional categories
and purposes, their distinct contexts of time and space require situation-speciﬁc capa-
bilities for public administration managers to deal with them.
The conceptualisation of the state’s promotion functions is also rooted in the works of
esteemed philosophers of state.Hobbes (1651: 267), for example, articulated the rationale
for these functions as the obligation of the state to provide for members of society who
have become “unable to maintain themselves by their labour”. With regard to Africa,
Raadschelders (2003: 377) observes a“heavy reliance upon the state as the vehicle for
social and economic development”, perhaps a symptom of what the president of the
Republic of South Africa depicts as“a caring state” (Ramaphosa, 2019). It is within this
promotion functional sphere where public administration mangers are challenged with,
Wessels 17
<<<PAGE=4>>>
inter alia, the promotion of democratic governance in the sphere of local government
(Tandoh-Ofﬁn et al., 2021a ), the provision of water and sanitation infrastructure
(Tempelhoff et al., 2021) and the provision of access to higher education (Wessels,
2021c). As these challenges occur within distinct contexts of time and space, it follows
that the same contexts inform the capabilities necessary for dealing with them.
The last category of state functions is the enabling and facilitating functions of the
state. The purpose of these functions is to make it possible for the state to perform its
protection and promotion functions (Loxton, 1993: 54, 69). This category of functions is
also founded on whatRousseau (1762: 221, 223) referred to as providing“for the public
wants” such as the“management of the exchequer,… the expenses of public admin-
istration” and “the maintenance of the Magistrates and other Ofﬁcials”. These enabling
and facilitative functions include new, comprehensive and improved policies and
strategies (Constantin et al., 2018; Divay, 2015; Myrberg, 2017), coordination and
alignment of programmes aiming to protect and enhance (Hellevik, 2012) and the im-
provement of accounting comparability (Brusca and Mart´ınez, 2016). Within the context
of Africa, public administration managers have to deal with challenges such as the
procurement of service providers for social grant payments (Sambo, 2021), cooperative
ﬁnancial governance (Krishnan and Subban, 2021), sustained poor audit outcomes
(Wessels et al., 2021a, 2021b), the implementation of employment equity policies
(Wessels and Naidoo, 2021a) and risk management (Nundkumar and Subban, 2021).
These are all context-speciﬁc challenges.
The difﬁculty for public administration managers to perform these functions may vary
according to their speciﬁc situatedness in time and space (Wessels, 2021a). They are
increasingly confronted with what has been coined‘wicked problems’that resulted from
emergent and diverse contexts, roles and requirements (Wessels, 2020: 154); contra-
dictions in legislation; constant changes in the political, social, economic and admin-
istrative environments; increasingly complex systems (PSC, 2016: x, 21); numerous
conﬂicts; outbreak of diseases; rural–urban migrations (AUC, 2015); and a mismatch
between problem structures, organisational structures and accountability channels
(Christensen et al., 2015; Hellevik, 2012; Laegreid et al., 2015).
The challenges confronting public administration managers within their changing
world of work are evidently context-speciﬁc, emergent, complex and unpredictable.
Dealing with these challenges requires special but universal capabilities, which are
discussed next.
Appropriate capabilities for dealing with emerging challenges
While the capability approach is rooted in Aristotle’s articulation of the concept of
capability with reference to being, movement, acting and acting upon (Aristotle and
Barnes, 1995: 97, 1034, 1029), the contemporary use of the concept has been articulated
by Sen (1994: 334), with reference to the well-being and freedom of the human being“to
achieve functionings that we have reason to value”. Nussbaum (1997: 275) draws a
relation between the human capability to function and the achievement of speciﬁc higher-
order goals within society. With regard to public administration, Latib (2016:8 3 )
18 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=5>>>
contextualises operational capability with public value and legitimacy, with the impli-
cation that capability refers to the ability to perform legitimate functions of value. The
capability approach has shown to be characterised by an ability to act or move towards
legitimate goals that are valued.
While Nussbaum (1999: 237) identiﬁed three distinct categories of capabilities,
namely basic capabilities (the intrinsic equipment of individuals as starting point for
further development), internal capabilities (person-speciﬁc conditions sufﬁcient to per-
form the requisite functions) and combined capabilities, the relevant category for the
current study was the latter, namely combined capabilities.Nussbaum (1999: 237) deﬁnes
this category as“internal capabilities combined with suitable external conditions for the
exercise of the function”. While public administration managers function in diverse,
complex and sometimes interrelated functional areas, they are expected to be capable to
deal with these challenges (therefore, to function) in speciﬁc and diverse contexts.
What capabilities are necessary for public administration managers to deal with their
day-to-day challenges? Several scholars have attempted to answer this question. While
Latib (2016: 83) refers to ‘operational capabilities’, several other scholars refer to
‘governance capabilities’(Knasmüller and Meyer, 2013; Pacheco and Franzese, 2017: 45;
Quinn, 2013; Termeer et al., 2015: 685). Termeer et al. (2015: 683) provide a speciﬁc
deﬁnition of ‘capability’, namely “the ability of policy makers to observe wicked
problems and to act accordingly, and the ability of the governance system to enable such
observing and acting”. We are therefore dealing with capabilities necessary for public
administration managers to function within their speciﬁc contexts. These capabilities
include those of reﬂexivity, resilience, responsiveness, reciprocity, revitalisation and
rescaling.
Reﬂexivity
For Quinn (2013: 7), reﬂexivity means the ability of public administration managers to
question and reframe their own positions on an issue.Termeer et al. (2016: 13) outline the
concept as referring to an interactive process of framing (articulating) in which actors
discuss and negotiate competing frames of a challenge or wicked problem to decide which
frame is most helpful for making sense of it. Reﬂexivity entails observing conﬂicting
frames, convincing others to accept a speciﬁc frame and furthering reﬂexive activities
(Termeer et al., 2015: 700). Reﬂexivity in this context is not an individual capability, but a
social or collaborative capability.Raelin (2007: 502) refers to the developing of routines
that “transcend the sum of individual actions and capabilities… to practice and learn as
part of a social network”. Considering the context-speciﬁc nature of public administration
practice, Knassmüller and Meyer (2013: 83) rightfully advise that this capability should
be instilled on an appropriate level of complexity as required by the situation-speciﬁc
tasks and responsibilities of public managers.
Wessels 19
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Resilience
Several scholars (Bourgon, 2010:2 1 1 ;Eppel and Rhodes, 2018: 950; Termeer et al.,
2015: 689; Termeer et al., 2016: 14) identify resilience as an adaptative capability for
dealing with unpredictable public administration challenges. ForTermeer et al. (2016:
14), resilience entails dealing with the intrinsic uncertainties and interconnectivity of
public administration challenges through adapting“ﬂexibly to unpredictable and fre-
quently occurring and changing circumstances without losing identity and reliability”.
Eppel and Rhodes (2018: 955) also relate resilience to another capability, namely the
ability to respond effectively to challenges.
Responsiveness
Research purpose response. The awareness attribute is articulated byMischke (2010: 152)
as “a sensitivity and continuous awareness of societal expectations”, whileTermeer et al.
(2016: 14) explicate the societal expectations for public administration managers as to
observe and respond to“unlimited demands and concerns… [and] issues that are pressing
in politics and society”. One can therefore expect from responsive managers to be aware
not only of pressing and unlimited societal expectations, but also of the risk of disastrous
failures and the scarcity of resources (Notten, 2016: 72). Responsiveness implies that
public administration managers, situated and present within their challenging work
environment, should be actively risk-sensitive. An ample example of the absence of this
risk awareness and responsiveness within the South African context is the rapid de-
institutionalisation of vulnerable mental healthcare patients in the Gauteng province
without mitigating the embedded risks, which resulted in the deaths of at least 144 mental
health patients (Wessels and Naidoo, 2021b: 25). The literature furthermore shows that
the response attribute of the concept of responsiveness occurs within a context of time,
space and legitimacy. TheWetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid (WRR)
(2013: 12) of the Netherlands asserts in a 2013 report on the learning economy that
responsiveness does not occur in a vacuum, but in a speciﬁc context of time and space.
The context provides a sensitivity for“when to hold back and when to react” (Termeer
et al., 2016: 14). This sensitivity directly relates to the legitimacy of such a decision,
which may be more complex than simply working within the speci ﬁc regulatory
framework. The response attribute of responsiveness implies the ability to decide and act
in a proactive way. ForNotten (2016: 72), contextual responsiveness requires the cir-
culation of knowledge, knowledge differentiation and knowledge enrichment to support a
“proactive competency to link to and learn for the future”. In the same line, the report by
the WRR (2013: 122–129) emphasises the need for a culture of innovation in public
administration to inform and enrich public administration managers ’ responsive
capability.
20 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Reciprocity
The capability of reciprocity relates directly to the state of interconnectedness of public
administration managers with one another and with other stakeholders on a speciﬁc issue,
hence the need for them to collaboratively deal with the intrinsic uncertainties of a
changing world of work. According toHerrington and Herrington (2005: 201), public
administration managers should be exposed to reciprocal teaching to instil this capability.
Pacheco and Franzese (2017: 45) suggest that this capability should be instilled through a
master’s programme by developing a community of practice as support base“rooted on
values and engagement… which goes beyond a set of formal knowledge”. In this regard,
Yeung et al. (2012: 231) emphasise the importance of trust and the acceptance of mutual
obligations, whileHead and Alford (2015: 725) point out that the building of trust often
takes considerable time to realise. The practice of cultivating reciprocity within pro-
fessional learning communities has shown to be founded on“a rich theoretical base of
collaboration and professional learning” (Timperley et al., 2009: 228).
Revitalising
The capability of revitalising is a response to stagnations, powerplays or deadlocks of
processes presenting themselves as counterproductive patterns or wicked problems
(Termeer et al., 2015: 686;Termeer et al., 2016: 15). To prevent or mitigate the risk of
regression or commencement with futile actions, the capability of revitalisation entails the
unblocking of stagnations, the reanimation of processes and the changing of existing
patterns of behaviour (Termeer et al., 2015:6 8 6 ;Termeer et al., 2016: 15).
Rescaling
Termeer et al. (2016: 16) deﬁne the capability of rescaling as“the ability to address
mismatches between the scale of a problem and the scale at which it is governed”.
Rescaling is therefore in particular relevant for dealing with ill-deﬁned or wicked
problems amid diverse and overlapping perspectives and jurisdiction spheres (Wessels,
2020: 161). In time and space, the consequences of this capability may be far-reaching for
the inclusion and exclusion of both jurisdiction spheres and responsible actors for dealing
with a public administration challenge.
While one can expect from public administration managers to be equipped with
resources of authority, funding, people and diverse sources of knowledge, they do need
the ability to, in the words ofNussbaum (1999: 232), “convert resources into func-
tionings”. The capabilities of re ﬂexivity, resilience, responsiveness, reciprocity, re-
vitalising and rescaling are therefore instrumental for public administration managers to
make that conversion into the performing of those legitimate functions which they value.
The MPA can be regarded as most appropriate for the learning of these capabilities by
current and aspiring public administration managers. The following section provides a
personal exploratory account of a South African case of redesigning an MPA programme
for this purpose.
Wessels 21
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Instilling capabilities for dealing with emerging challenges in
MPA students: A South African case
The MPA qualiﬁcation is probably the most widely used capacity building vehicle for
mid-career public ofﬁcials. This qualiﬁcation is offered in various countries, including the
United Kingdom, the USA, the Netherlands, Australia, New Zealand, Zambia, Kenya,
Tanzania and South Africa (ANZSOG, 2021; Ngele, 2019; Wessels, 2010, 2012, 2020)
with the aim to prepare public administration managers to optimally function within their
speciﬁc world of work (Dall’Alba, 2009: 39; Wessels, 2012: 159–160). At the time of
authoring this article, the MPA was offered by nearly all the South African universities.
The MPA offered by the University of South Africa (Unisa), South Africa, has been
selected as typical case of the phenomenon of MPA education. The purpose of this case is
to provide an exploratory account of the transformation of MPA education to prepare
public administration managers for a changing world of work. As this account is situated
within the broader scholarly discourse on MPA education, trends in this discourse relevant
to the speciﬁc case are articulated, whereafter the inculcation of appropriate capabilities in
public administration managers is explored.
MPA education as phenomenon of this study
MPA education is a widely researched phenomenon (Hiedemann et al., 2017; Notten,
2016; Quinn, 2013; Ry Nielsen and Quinn, 2016; Wessels, 2010, 2012; Ysa et al., 2017).
It has been approached as mid-career education (Kearns and Kearns, 2022; Notten, 2016;
Quinn, 2013; Ry Nielsen and Quinn, 2016) as well as executive education (Hiedemann
et al., 2017; Ysa et al., 2017) for public administration managers. The phenomenon has
also been studied for the ability of its curricula to prepare public administration managers
for emerging and challenging worlds of work (D’Agostino et al., 2019; Termeer et al.,
2015; Wessels, 2020). Some literature shows that these worlds of work have context-
speciﬁc differences, resulting in diverse role perceptions (Knassmüller and Veit, 2016)
and perspectives on public administration challenges (Stout, 2018). The implication of
this emerging world of work is the need for changes in education programmes and their
curricula (Oldﬁeld, 2017; Wessels, 2020; Wooldridge, 2004) to improve the preparation
of public administration managers for dealing with emerging wicked problems (Termeer
et al., 2015). In this regard,Termeer et al. (2015)and Termeer et al. (2016)propose the
learning of public administration capabilities, as referred to earlier in this article.
Research purpose
The purpose of this article was to provide a personal exploratory account of the
transformation of the mode of teaching and learning of the MPA programme offered by
Unisa for instilling these capabilities in MPA students. This account includes a reﬂection
on the process followed, the difﬁculties encountered and the implications of the study for
the current scholarship on MPA education.
22 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Selection of the MPA at Unisa as case
In South Africa, the MPA wasﬁrst introduced by the University of Pretoria in 1965 under
the name Master of State Administration (Cloete, 1988: 97), while Unisa introduced the
MPA in 1982 (Auriacombe, 1988: 174). The MPA offering at Unisa has been selected as a
typical case for this study due to its shared attributes with MPAs globally. The MPA is a
master’s by coursework and mini-dissertation (cf.CHE, 2013: 36). This qualiﬁcation is
pitched in South Africa on the National Qualiﬁcations Framework (NQF) Exit Level 9
and consists of 180 credits (equivalent to 1 800 notional study hours) at this level. All
MPA offerings in South Africa must meet the criteria of this framework.
Unisa, the largest university on the African continent, offers a wide range of quali-
ﬁcations, including the MPA, through a distance and e-learning mode of tuition (Unisa,
2021). The curriculum of the MPA initially consisted of eight papers (modules) offered at
honours level and a dissertation of limited scope offered at master’s level (Ngele, 2019:
34). In preparation for the new qualiﬁcation framework announced in 2013 (CHE, 2013),
Unisa introduced a new curriculum for the programme in 2012, consisting of four
compulsory coursework modules at NQF Exit Level 9, a research proposal module and a
mini-dissertation. The coursework modules focus on four broad functional areas of a
public administration manager, namely public policy, the management of public human
resources, leadership and the management of public money (Ngele, 2019:3 5–36). As in
the past, the coursework modules of the revised qualiﬁcation were offered by means of
correspondence – tutorial letters, study guides, prescribed books, recommended scholarly
articles, formative assignments and summative examinations.
It became evident that the cohort throughput rate of this qualiﬁcation
2 was consistently
low, with the highest rate of 17% in 2005, while the throughput rate was nearly non-
existent since 2008. In fact, the throughput rate of the 311 students enrolled from 2005 to
2014 was a mere 1%, while the graduation rate was only 8.4% (Ngele, 2019:7 8–80). This
was indeed a dismal situation calling for a decisive choice between either the termination
of this qualiﬁcation or the transformation of it.
The MPA qualiﬁcation has been offered by Unisa for four decades. It is therefore not
only a typical case of an MPA offering, but it also has some unique institutional- and
context-speciﬁc attributes, such as its e-learning nature, that make it worthwhile to study
from an insider’s perspective.
Research design
A single case design was used to provide a personal exploratory account of the trans-
formation of the mode of teaching and learning of the MPA programme offered by Unisa
for a changing world of work. As indicated byFlyvbjerg (2006: 225), a single case design
is not appropriate for generalisation to an entire population; this design was selected to
obtain context-speciﬁc information on and insights into the transformation of a speciﬁc
MPA programme for a changing world of work. This study draws from the insider’s
memory of the researcher (seeHaug, 1987, 2008) of the process, consisting of several
workshops and individual discussions, supported by textual data such as notes gathered
Wessels 23
<<<PAGE=10>>>
during these workshops, reports on these workshops, ofﬁcial documentation, curriculum
documentation and the content of the 2020 online module sites. What follows is the
insider’s account of the researcher of the development of the transformation process
drawing from the above-mentioned sources.
Preparation to transform the offering of the MPA at Unisa
The transformation project on which this article reports was preceded by several studies
on the qualiﬁcation. Theﬁrst study was done to clarify the implications of the publication
of the Higher Education Qualiﬁcations Framework in 2007 for MPA programmes in
South Africa and speciﬁcally at Unisa (Wessels, 2009). This study found that most South
African programmes need to increase the exit level of their coursework modules to NQF
Level 9 (master’s level) and the weight of the mini-dissertation to at least 33% of the total
weight of the qualiﬁcation (Wessels, 2009: 517). This was followed by a comparative
study of MPA programmes in South Africa, Australia and New Zealand (Wessels, 2010).
This study recommended that South African higher education institutions learn from the
experiences in Australia and New Zealand in revising“their programmes in advance in
order to provide the high quality professional MPA programmes needed by the South
African government” (Wessels, 2010: 193).
In a subsequent exploration of the implications of the developmental state as context
for the selection of core modules for the MPA, several themes were identiﬁed (Wessels,
2012: 170). Theﬁrst theme, namely government in a developmental state, refers to the
context within which public administration managers perform their functions. The other
themes articulate certain broad functions to be performed by public administration
managers, namely leadership and people management, publicﬁnancial management,
public policy implementation and research methodology. These themes directly informed
the inclusion of the coursework modules in the revised MPA curriculum, which was
introduced in 2012 (Unisa, 2010). In addition to the above-mentioned studies, a master’s
student who conducted a study on the MPA qualiﬁcation recommended“a fundamental
integration of all the curriculum elements (e.g. students, lecturers, subject matter and
professional practice” in the offering of the qualiﬁcation (Ngele, 2019: 95). This rec-
ommendation amounts to an increased interconnectedness among all stakeholders in the
MPA programme.
Furthermore, members of the Department of Public Administration and Management
at Unisa became involved in an international scholarly network, the Copenhagen Forum,
with a strong research and practice focus on mid-career education for the public sector
through, inter alia, the MPA programme. Participation in two of their forum sessions in
2017 (Limerick, Republic of Ireland) and 2018 (Vienna, Austria) provided the oppor-
tunity to share their experiences and research on the MPA programme with other spe-
cialists and to obtain their considered feedback. Similar enriching scholarly interactions
on the MPA programme occurred in working groups of the International Association of
Schools and Institutes of Administrative Sciences (IASIA) and the International Institute
of Administrative Sciences in 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019. These interactions resulted in
publications on public administration knowledge and skills (Van Jaarsveldt, 2018) and
24 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=11>>>
challenges that may inform the curricula of MPA programmes (Wessels, 2020). Van
Jaarsveld (2018: 43) concluded that students are not adequately prepared for a fast-
changing world of work and emphasised the need for public administrators to com-
municate and work within diverse multi- and international teams.Wessels (2020: 160)
argues that as the traditional MPA curricula have become obsolete for preparing public
administrators for the emerging challenges in their world of work, a gradual paradigm-
shift towards the capability approach to teaching and learning, and an ongoing re-
designing of MPA curricula seem to be imperative.
Following wide-ranging international networking, the Department of Public Ad-
ministration and Management invited a past president of IASIA and member of several
national and international accreditation agencies for public administration education to
visit Unisa in March 2017. He conducted a seminar and workshop on 13 March 2017 on
the MPA offering for the Department. Following suggestions made by him and informal
consultations with a curriculum expert at Unisa’s Academy for Applied Technology
Innovation (AATI), the Department decided on 11 April 2017 to transform the current
MPA offering to become fully online. This decision provided the project team with the
opportunity to utilise the beneﬁts of an online learning environment for making a par-
adigm shift towards a capability approach to teaching and learning.
The transformation project commenced informally with a consultative process within
the Department and the broader structures of the University. The assistance of an internal
curriculum expert attached to the AATI was obtained to facilitate the project. The project
team, consisting of the four leaders of the coursework modules, a tuition expert within the
Department and a research expert, met for theﬁrst time on 3 August 2017. To enhance a
shared vision and commitment for this project among the team members, several other
meetings (on 18 September 2017, 20 October 2017 and 21 November 2017) followed.
Becoming a formal teaching and learning transformation project
The project was formally registered within the University as a teaching and learning
transformation project with subsequent ofﬁcial institutional support. Hence, a project
leader attached to the Directorate Curriculum Development and Transformation joined the
project team with theﬁrst scheduled meeting of the team on 16 March 2018. The subject
librarian who was responsible for curating relevant reading materials and ensuring the
availability of these materials in the library became an ad hoc team member. Other
specialists who supported the team on an ad hoc basis included a design artist, who
designed appropriate visuals appropriate for the learning material and obtained Shut-
terstock licenses for graphics. The team was also supported by a language practitioner
who ensured the appropriateness of the language used in the study material.
Several multi-day workshops were conducted in July 2018, August 2018, September
2018, October 2018 and November 2018. Although a major part of the transformational
shift during this project occurred in the minds of individual team members, it was also
demonstrated in the interconnectedness among team members during the project. While a
major part of the work was done by individual team members working on their own, this
individual work was preceded and informed by various collaborative and interactive
Wessels 25
<<<PAGE=12>>>
sessions among team members themselves. These work sessions provided for a creative
environment to reconceptualise the teaching and learning of this qualiﬁcation.
The project manager for this project had the task to ensure that all the institutional
deadlines and requirements necessary for the successful and timely implementation of the
new modules were met. She subsequently assisted the team with meticulous planning,
scheduling and controlling of activities. She had to adjust the project plan when necessary
to accommodate challenges related to the availability of resources and team members.
Several adjustments and provisions were made to the project plan along the way (Venter,
2020).
This transformation project occurred within a speciﬁc regulatory and curriculum
context with a shared philosophical, curriculum and learning perspective emerging from
the project team’s interactions in 2017.
Regulatory context of the project
Since 2009, all academic qualiﬁcations offered by institutions for higher education in
South Africa have to be submitted for accreditation to the Council on Higher Education
(CHE, 2013: 9), which serves as quality council for higher education. Subsequently, the
approval of a Higher Education Qualiﬁcations Sub-Framework (HEQSF) for integrating
all higher education qualiﬁcations into the NQF (CHE, 2013: 11). This framework
provides for two types of master’s degrees, namely a general (research) master’s degree
and a professional master’s degree (CHE, 2013:3 6–39). The main difference between the
two is the minimum credits allocated for the research component, namely 33% for the
general master’s and 25% for the professional master’s. The framework also provides for
two types of general (research) master’s, namely a master’s degree by dissertation and a
master’s degree by coursework and mini-dissertation (CHE, 2013: 36). The MPA offered
by Unisa is a research master’s by coursework and mini-dissertation and is pitched on
Level 9 of the HEQSF. In the document titledLevel descriptors for the South African
National Qualiﬁcations Framework by the South African Quali ﬁcations Authority
(SAQA, 2012:5 –6), 10 distinct level descriptions of the learning achievements deemed
appropriate for students at Level 9 are given. These level descriptors directly informed the
work of the project team by articulating the certiﬁcation and learning purposes of the
qualiﬁcation.
Strategic decisions by the project team
As the initial intention was to complete this project in the shortest possible time, the
project team made a strategic decision not to follow a lengthy and timeous fully-ﬂedged
curriculation exercise, but to use the current structure of the qualiﬁcation as approved in
2010 and implemented in 2012. The implication of this decision was that the project team
focused primarily on optimising the learning of students through the transformation of the
pedagogy and the utilisation of online delivery platforms. The existing modules included
in this transformation project were the following:
26 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=13>>>
· PUB5970 Policy Studies
· PUB5971 Public People Management
· PUB5972 Public Leadership
· PUB5973 Public Finance Management.
Considering the historic low throughput and graduation rates of this qualiﬁcation, the
project team envisaged that the transformed pedagogy would reduce the completion time
of students. Although the research component (the research proposal and mini-
dissertation) was excluded in the initial phase of the project, the project team took
note of research indicating that a key factor in the inadequate throughput rate of MPA
students was their inability to complete their research proposal and mini-dissertation
within 2 years (Ngele, 2019: 95). However, the team decided to extend the transformation
project to the research component as soon as the coursework part had been completed.
Therefore, this account excludes the research component of the qualiﬁcation.
Philosophical assumptions
Our transformed approach to teaching and learning is founded on the idea of“being-in-
the-world”, coined by the German philosopherHeidegger (1962: 79). Assuming that our
students are situated in the world of public administration, namely the“organised, non-
political, executive functions of the state” (Pauw and Louw, 2014: 16) within the South
African context, it makes sense to also assume that they are in the best possible position to
know that world from their situatedness within a municipality or government department
in South Africa, and by implication in Africa. Therefore, we decided to transform our
mode of teaching and learning from a mode that expects students to study (not necessarily
context-speciﬁc) textbooks and to be assessed on their ability to reproduce the content of
those textbooks to a mode expecting students to study and reﬂect on their practice and
utilise a variety of knowledge sources (colleagues, fellow students, social media, non-
formal sources, myths and scholarly sources), values and ethos to make sense of this
reality and the problems within it. With this approach the team intended to move away
from an epistemology referred to bySch¨on (1995: 34) as technical rationality to an
extended epistemology (Cary, 1999: 419) that includes all forms of knowing necessary for
meaningful knowledge about public administration. Hence, by assuming that an extended
epistemology is the most appropriate for meaningful knowledge about public admin-
istration, the team set out to design the online interaction with students accordingly to
enhance optimal participation and interaction in collaborative and interconnected
learning, thoughtful action, a plurality of knowing, thoughtful engagement with their
relevant and important work, and professional inquiry (cf.Jakubik, 2011:7 1–72).
Assumptions on how people learn
Let us turn to our assumptions on how people learn. These assumptions are informed
mainly by the worksHow people learn: Bridging research and practiceby the National
Research Council (NRC) (1999) in the USA, Promoting professional inquiry for
Wessels 27
<<<PAGE=14>>>
improved outcomes for students in New Zealandby Timperley et al. (2009)and The
meaning of doing: Reﬂective practice in public administration education by Harper
(2018). For this project, we departed from the following assumptions on how people
learn:
Assumption 1: Our students are situated within the world of public administration and are
academically qualiﬁed (at least a 4-year higher education qualiﬁcation) with considerable
experience in and preconceptions of public administration. Our students draw their
preconceptions about the working of the complex world of public administration from
their authentic situated experiences of this world (NRC, 1999: 10). These preconceptions
serve as points of departure for their learning. Hence, the facilitation of learning has to
engage with these preconceptions (Harper, 2018: 147;NRC, 1999: 10;Timperley et al.,
2009: 229). The implication of this assumption is that learning departs primarily from an
ontological point and not from the so-called“foundational theories and seminal literature
of the ﬁeld” (Kearns and Kearns, 2022: 150). This is an important deviation from
conventional strategies.
Assumption 2: To perform public administration management functions, our students
require a sound foundation of comprehensive knowledge organised within conceptual
frameworks serving as mental maps for understanding and performing their functions
(Guy and Sahraoui, 2022: xx;Harper, 2018: 149;NRC, 1999: 12;Timperley et al., 2009:
230). Comprehensive knowledge includes tacit, experiential, anecdotal, institutional,
constitutional, legislation, professional and theoretical knowledge.
Assumption 3: Students need to take control of their own learning through metacognitive
and self-regulating processes (NRC, 1999: 13;Timperley et al., 2009: 229). ForHarper
(2018: 147), this metacognitive learning implies the instilling and practising of a reﬂective
inquiry into practice (including new concrete experiences, observations and meaningful
concepts) to improve the habitual actions of students as future professional practitioners.
Timperley et al. (2009: 227) refer to this mode of learning as collaborative reﬂective
inquiry into practice. This assumption has direct implications for the selection of an
appropriate learning strategy, which is discussed next.
Learning strategy: Inquiry-driven learning
The project team decided on an inquiry-driven learning strategy for building the capacity
of students to learn those capabilities (reﬂexivity, resilience, responsiveness, reciprocity,
revitalising and rescaling) deemed appropriate for dealing with emerging public ad-
ministration challenges and for meeting our philosophical, curriculum and learning
assumptions. The inquiry learning strategy consists of seven attributes, namely collab-
orative interconnectedness, engagement with authentic experiences, an act of posing
provocative questions, theoretical sense making, self- and co-regulated learning, com-
prehensive knowledge construction and improved performance or practice (cf.Wessels
et al., 2021b: 358). This learning strategy, simultaneously introduced in all four cour-
sework modules (PUB5970, PUB5971, PUB5972 and PUB5973), consists of the fol-
lowing core attributes: collaborative interconnectedness, engagement with authentic
experiences, provocative questions or signposts to deeper understanding, theoretical
28 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=15>>>
sense making, self- and co-regulated learning (agency), comprehensive knowledge
construction, improved performance or practice, and learning-oriented assessment.
Collaborative interconnectedness: The collaborative attribute of inquiry-driven
learning is founded on the learning assumptions of situatedness and self- and co-
regulation. In fact, situatedness implies an interconnectedness among all participants
in the inquiry process, such as students, practitioners, decision-makers, policymakers and
community members (Kearns and Kearns, 2022: 155; Wessels, 2021a: 439). In this
regard, Raadschelders and Whetsell (2018: 1138) refer to the so-called triple helix of
collaboration among the academic sector, industry and government for producing
knowledge for dealing with public administration challenges. Considering the un-
predicted nature of public administration challenges, collaboration seems to be a pivotal
attribute of a learning strategy preparing future public administration managers for
conceptualising these challenges and dealing with them.
The four module sites are used as home for the practice of the students enrolled for the
modules. The respective module leaders serve as hosts for the four communities of
practice. Hence, each of them welcomes the student members to these sites and provides a
brief overview of the learning process and information on how their learning will be
assessed. The ﬁrst lesson in each module is titled“Onboarding” and leads the students
through the purpose of the respective module within the context of the MPA programme,
the various support facilities available and a roadmap for the way forward. Through a
dedicated activity, students are invited to introduce themselves to the other students by
providing “a short background on who you are and what you do in the context of the
public service” and to “indicate what your expectations are in respect of this module”
(excerpt from the module site of PUB5970). This conﬁrms to the students that they are not
only members of a speciﬁc group of students, but that they are also situated within
different public sector institutions. This situatedness provides them with an inter-
connected interest in the different foci of each of the modules. The interconnected nature
of these module sites is further imparted in the various lessons of each module through
learning activities and discussions posted on the module site, ultimately to cultivate the
capability of reciprocity (state of interconnectedness with one another), as suggested by
Herrington and Herrington (2005: 201).
Engagement with authentic experiences:This attribute refers to the students’authentic
experiences as university students and future graduates, as well as their current or future
communities of professional practice (Butler and Schnellert, 2012: 1206;Van der Meer
and Marks, 2013: 43). The situatedness of students serves as foundation for the inquiry-
driven learning strategy by enriching the learning process with diverse situations, per-
spectives, problem deﬁnitions and actor deﬁnitions (Van der Meer and Marks, 2013: 43).
Acknowledging the situatedness of our students constitutes a radical narrowing of what
Mudida refers to as a gap between the teaching and the practice of public administration
within the African context (Mudida, 2022: 135–136). The inquiry process learned by
students while situated in the MPA programme is, inter alia, aimed to cultivate the
capability of resilience (adaptability) for dealing with unpredictable, intrinsically un-
certain and interconnective public administration (and, for that matter, student)
challenges.
Wessels 29
<<<PAGE=16>>>
The learning of the inquiry process is facilitated through a distinct authentic scenario
for each module, such as the National Health Insurance (NHI) as a case of public policy
(PUB5970), Eskom as a case of negative consequences of ﬂouting public people
management practices and processes (PUB5971) and the Merafong Local Municipality as
a case of publicﬁnance management (PUB5973). These scenarios serve to cultivate the
capability of responsiveness among students by contextualising their preconceptions
about and experiences in each area of inquiry as a point of departure for responding to
challenges inherent to these scenarios. Their situated preconceptions are furthermore used
to instil critical concepts such as‘sustainable policy design’, ‘problem structuring’ and
‘root cause analysis’(PUB5970) as thinking strategies for the outlining and structuring of
problems, and to cultivate the capability of rescaling (Termeer et al., 2016: 16). The latter
capability is especially relevant within the multi-sphere cooperative government system
in South Africa. These scenarios furthermore serve as common ground for asking
provocative questions towards deeper understanding, which is discussed next.
Provocative questions or signposts to deeper understanding:The act of questioning as
attribute of inquiry-driven learning is founded on the Socratic paradigm, being an“escape
from pseudo-certain knowledge” (Partenie, 1997: 1). Socrates allegedly asked questions,
letting the other person do most of the talking while keeping the course of the con-
versation under his control (Delic, 2016:5 1 1–517). Goldman et al. (2010: 297) articulate
this act of questioning as Socrates’attempt “to prove to his students that anything worthy
of the name knowledge had to be constructed by the learner through processes of
questioning and answering [as] teaching-as-telling could produce imitation, but not real
knowledge”. ForHarper (2018: 147), the implication of this act of questioning as part of a
learning strategy is that future public administration managers will not necessarily“make
effective arguments but… will [rather] seek truth”. Through the act of questioning, the
capability of revitalising is cultivated (Termeer et al., 2015: 686): Students are encouraged
to deal with stagnations, powerplays and deadlocks of their situation- and scenario-
speciﬁc challenges by questioning and reﬂecting on their own and other’s preconceptions
about an issue, and to clarify the knowledge necessary for formulating plans for re-
vitalising a process.
Students in this MPA programme are encouraged to, provocatively:
· identify issues within their immediate context and narrow them down to ill-deﬁned
and complex problems that could be solved;
· undertake problem structuring to determine what the causes and consequences of
the policy issues are;
· identify various options that would solve these ill-deﬁned and complex policy
issues (PUB5970); and
· draw from their own experiences and perspectives as well as from various
knowledge sources to make sense of wicked problems (PUB5971 and PUB5972).
Theoretical sense making:While the previous attribute draws primarily from students’
own, situated experiences, the attribute of theoretical sense making entails the intro-
duction of theoretical concepts and frameworks to ill-structured problems (Butler and
30 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=17>>>
Schnellert, 2012: 1210). This attribute serves to cultivate the capability of reﬂexivity
necessary for students and practitioners to question and reframe their perspectives on an
issue (Quinn, 2013: 7). TheNRC (1999: 13) speciﬁcally mentions the importance of a
conceptual framework for the understanding of societal problems and learning new ways
of doing things. In this regard,Harper (2018: 147) emphasises that lecturing staff should
link students’ practice reﬂections with theoretical constructs to effect meaningful
learning. This view is related to theﬁnding of theNRC (1999: 16) that lecturing staff
“must teach some subject matter in depth, providing many examples in which the same
concept is at work and providing aﬁrm foundation of factual knowledge”. Harper (2018:
147) refers to this as a process of meaningful learning that transpires through the practice
of habitual actions of concrete experience, observation, reﬂection and the forming of
abstract (theoretical) concepts.
Each of theﬁelds covered by the four modules has its own set of theoretical traditions
to build on students’ pre-scientiﬁcr eﬂections on wicked problems. These traditions,
concepts and theoretical voices are introduced to students using relevant key concepts,
scholarly articles and relevant scholarly books. Furthermore, students are urged to identify
root causes of issues, reﬂect on them and test their perspectives by consulting speciﬁc
theoretical work (PUB5970, section 4.6). Informed by the fusion between practice ex-
perience and the theoretical understanding of ill-structured problems, students are en-
couraged to creatively conceptualise tentative solutions to identiﬁed problems (PUB5970
and PUB5973).
Self- and co-regulated learning (agency):Drawing from the third philosophical as-
sumption discussed earlier, this attribute of fostering self-regulation among students is at
the heart of inquiry-driven learning (Butler and Schnellert, 2012: 1208). Butler and
Schnellert (2012: 1207) articulate self-regulation as constituting“a recursive cycle of
goal-directed, strategic activities that include deﬁning problems or expectations, setting
goals, selecting, adapting, or inventing task appropriate strategies, self-monitoring
outcomes, and revising goals or approaches to better achieve desired outcomes”. This
approach entails, inter alia, that students and, by implication, future public administrators,
take control of their own learning, practice and career (Timperley et al., 2009: 231). In
addition to self-regulation,Butler and Schnellert (2012: 1208) refer to co-regulation as a
form of‘scaffold’, where students or colleagues demonstrate the capability of reciprocity
by engaging with one another and relevant stakeholders and by providing support to one
another in the inquiry process.
All four modules in this MPA programme are designed to enhance self-and co-
regulated learning by providing for a collaborative learning environment and setting
learning outcomes and learning tasks, with due dates, for each module. Learning tasks
include the drafting of a policy assessment paper in the form of a cabinet memorandum, a
professional report on real-life wicked problems (PUB5970, Lesson 7), an assessment
paper on a proposed turn-around-strategy for a state-owned enterprise (PUB5971, Lesson
1), a report on a personal leadership inventory (PUB5972, Lesson 6) and a business report
on improving the supply chain management framework for a public sector institution
(PUB5973, Lesson 6). These tasks are performed either as learning activities posted in the
Wessels 31
<<<PAGE=18>>>
discussion forum to be challenged by co-students or as part of the summative assessment
for feedback by the lecturer.
Comprehensive knowledge construction: This attribute of inquiry-driven learning
about a speciﬁc practice or authentic scenario of public administration is aimed at
comprehensive knowledge construction. It draws from various sources, such as students’
preconceptions about the world of public administration works (NRC, 1999: 10), a
diversity of inquiry frameworks, knowledge structures and theoretical lenses to co-
construct authentic knowledge about multi-layered challenges (Wessels et al., 2021b:
359). Comprehensive knowledge construction therefore draws from different ways of
knowing, such as multi-disciplinary propositional knowledge, action-related knowledge,
experiential knowledge (things as actually experienced) and presentational knowledge
(Jakubik, 2011:4 ;Kakabadse and Kakabadse, 2003: 368–369). In this regard, a Public
Leadership (PUB5972) student described her daily duties as establishing comprehensive
plans, engaging various stakeholder groups from different backgrounds. Therefore, it
makes sense that one of the learning tasks in the module Policy Studies (PUB5970) entails
the comprehensive knowledge construction through the population of a log frame matrix
with implementation details such as project activities, indicators, sources of veriﬁcation
and risks.
Improved performance or practice: The ultimate purpose of the inquiry-driven
learning strategy is to contribute to“meaningful, actionable knowledge” (Ospina and
Dodge, 2005: 152) necessary for improved performance or practice. Furthermore, this
attribute is aligned with the purpose of the capability approach, namely that students and
future public administration managers achieve those functionings they“have reason to
value” (Sen, 1994: 334).
The facilitation of learning speciﬁcally encourages students to adopt a habit of re-
ﬂecting on their performance (the capability of reﬂexivity) and improving and revitalising
their practice (capabilities of resilience and responsiveness) through actively participating
in all the student-related activities (capability of reciprocity) and dedicatedly performing
all their cognitive and practice-related learning tasks (e.g. designing a competency model
for selecting appropriate policy options). The summative assessments of these modules
are therefore integrated learning activities aimed at the improvement of practice, such as
the submission of a cabinet memorandum for approval of a policy to improve practice
related to a speciﬁc policy issue (PUB5970), a core people management challenge in a
public institution (PUB5971), the drafting of a personal leadership inventory (PUB5972)
or drawing up a business plan for improving the current supply chain management
framework for the public service (PUB5973). Core to the inquiry-driven learning strategy
is the learning-oriented assessment strategy, discussed next.
Learning-oriented assessment: An inquiry-driven learning strategy implies a radical
transformation of assessment, namely replacing the traditional assessmentof learning
with assessment for learning. The learning-oriented assessment strategy is informed by
the rich scholarly works of David Boud, David Carless, Jaclyn Broadbent, Elizabeth
Molloy, Claus Nygaard and others (Boud and Molloy, 2013; Broadbent et al., 2018;
Carless, 2007, 2020; Carless and Boud, 2018). Carless (2007: 57) identiﬁed three deﬁning
attributes of learning-oriented assessment, namely assessment tasks as learning tasks,
32 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=19>>>
student involvement and feedback as feedforward. Learning-oriented assessment implies
the design of assessment tasks to“stimulate sound learning practices amongst students”,
actively involving students in engaging with the criteria and quality of their own and their
peers’performance, and supporting current and future student learning through“timely
and forward-looking” feedback (Carless, 2007: 57). The latter notion of feedback, re-
ferred to in the literature as‘feedforward’, implies a key role for students in providing
feedback to fellow students, and the obligation on the lecturing staff to provide explicit
feedback on formative learning tasks and exemplars to develop students’understanding of
quality for future learning tasks (cf. Broadbent et al., 2018). The project team im-
plemented the learning-oriented assessment strategy in the four MPA modules as follows:
Assessment tasks as learning tasks:The assessment strategy, assessment tasks and
learning tasks for each module include learning through formative assessment activities
and discussions among students, as well as through a summative assessment task
consisting of a professional report documenting the learning the students had achieved.
Both the formative and the summative assessment tasks are designed to enable students to
meet the respective module’s envisaged learning outcomes and learning tasks.
The formative assessment in the module Policy Studies (PUB5970) includes learning
activities that require students to utilise the online forums to share their own comparisons
of political parties’manifestos, their views on the proposed NHI policy (which serves as
authentic scenario for this module), as well their perception of the role of the media in the
setting of policy agendas. These activities provide the opportunity for students to give
feedback, learn from one another and develop their distinct views on the topic as
preparation for the summative assessment. For the summative assessment, students must
draw from their formative learning activities and related feedback, as well as from detailed
guidance to perform authentic learning tasks such as drafting a policy assessment paper
and evaluating its impact.
Student involvement:The involvement of students in learning-oriented assessment is
necessary for developing their understanding of the learning goals they have to achieve as
well as the criteria and standards indicating the quality of achievement (Carless, 2007:
59). Students are therefore encouraged to actively participate in the discussion forums on
the learning sites, to provide feedback on one another’s writings in individual blogs, to
share views on assessment tasks (PUB5973) and to submit position papers on identiﬁed
topics (PUB5970).
Feedback as feedforward:Following the advice ofBroadbent et al. (2018), the format
of the summative assessment tasks on the module sites is outlined by providing a broad
structure of the respective reports, a word count limitation as well as an indication of the
cumulative weight of the different components– hence, feedforward.
The above personal exploratory account of the insider’s experience and observations
of the researcher of the transformation of the learning strategy for the MPA qualiﬁcation at
Unisa does not include an assessment of the success or of the implementation process.
This will be done in a follow-up study.
Wessels 33
<<<PAGE=20>>>
Reﬂection and conclusion
As public administration managers are constantly confronted with emerging challenges
within their complex and context-speciﬁc worlds of work, they need appropriate ca-
pabilities for dealing with them. I set out to explore how they can learn those capabilities
through an MPA programme.
Public administration challenges are emerging and context-speci ﬁc human con-
structions. Dealing with these challenges constitutes a legitimate core of the functions of
public administration managers. To capably deal with these challenges, they need the
capabilities of reﬂexivity, resilience, responsiveness, reciprocity, revitalising and re-
scaling to convert their diverse resources into productive functionings. The MPA
qualiﬁcation is therefore an appropriate vehicle for learning these capabilities.
The South African e-learning case was used for a personal exploratory account of the
transformation of the mode of teaching and learning of an MPA programme for students to
learn these capabilities. The online learning environment of this case has shown to
enhance the paradigm shift towards a capability approach to teaching and learning.
The transformation process was founded on three assumptions on how people learn:
ﬁrstly, that students enter the MPA programme with preconceptions about how the world
of public administration works, and therefore, the facilitation of learning must engage
with these ontological preconceptions; secondly, that students require a sound foundation
of comprehensive knowledge organised within conceptual frameworks for understanding
and performing their functions; and thirdly, that students need to take control of their own
learning through metacognitive and self-regulating processes for improving their habitual
actions as future professional practitioners. These assumptions also served as the
foundation for implementing an inquiry-driven learning strategy.
The inquiry-driven learning strategy implemented in the four coursework modules
aimed at collaborative interconnectedness among students, their engagement with au-
thentic experiences, a deeper understanding of issues through the posing of provocative
questions, theoretical lenses for sense making, self- and co-regulated learning (agency),
comprehensive knowledge construction, improved performance or practice, and learning-
oriented assessment. This learning strategy is aimed at improving their habitual actions,
both as students and as future professional practitioners. It entails them learning habits to
deal with ill-structured problems and unknown futures while performing the functionings
they value.
Public administration managers are indeed confronted by the rapid emergence of
complex challenges within their respective functional areas. This study has shown that by
transforming MPA curricula to provide for the learning of those capabilities necessary for
dealing with the complexity of unknown futures, public administration managers can be
adequately prepared to perform their respective functions in dealing with those
challenges.
While this article provides an exploratory personal account of the transformation of the
mode of teaching and learning of the MPA programme offered by Unisa, this account does
not include an assessment of quality and the success of the transformed learning offerings.
A follow-up study to evaluate the quality of the programme is therefore necessary.
34 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=21>>>
Declaration of conﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/
or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received noﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
ORCID iD
Jacobus S Wessels https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5472-7921
Notes
1. This article would not have been possible without the work of the curriculum transformation
team consisting of Werner Webb, Londoloza Luvuno, Sinval Kahn, Eric Nealer, Liza van
Jaarsveldt, Mari´eN ¨othling and Anneke Venter.
2. The percentage of a speciﬁc student cohort completing their qualiﬁcation within four academic
years.
References
ANZSOG (The Australia and New Zealand School of Government) (2021)Executive Master of
Public Administration: Annual Academic Governance Report. Available at: https://www.
anzsog.edu.au/preview-documents/publications-and-brochures/5655-anzsog-empa-report-v6/
ﬁle (accessed 29 April 2022).
Aristotle and Barnes J (1995)The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation
(Barnes J, ed). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
AUC (African Union Commission) (2015) Agenda 2063: The Africa we want: Framework doc-
ument. Available at: https://au.int/s ites/default/ ﬁles/documents/33126-doc-framework_
document_book.pdf (accessed 26 February 2019).
Auriacombe CJ (1988)Die ontstaan en ontwikkeling van die vakgebiede publieke administrasie en
munisipale regering en administrasie aan die Universiteit van Suid-Afrika. Universiteit van
Suid-Afrika.
Boud D and Molloy E (2013) Rethinking models of feedback for learning: the challenge of design.
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education38(6): 698–712. DOI: 10.1080/02602938.
2012.691462
Bourgon J (2010) The history and future of nation-building? Building capacity for public
results. International Review of Administrative Sciences 76(2): 197–218. DOI: 10.1177/
0020852309365666
Broadbent J, Panadero E and Boud D (2018) Implementing summative assessment with a formative
ﬂavour: a case study in a large class.Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education43(2):
307–322. DOI: 10.1080/02602938.2017.1343455
Wessels 35
<<<PAGE=22>>>
Brusca I and Mart´ınez JC (2016) Adopting international public sector accounting standards: a
challenge for modernizing and harmonizing public sector accounting.International Review of
Administrative Sciences 82(4): 724–744. DOI: 10.1177/0020852315600232
Butler DL and Schnellert L (2012) Collaborative inquiry in teacher professional development.
Teaching and Teacher Education28(8): 1206–1220. DOI: 10.1016/j.tate.2012.07.009
Carless D (2007) Learning-oriented assessment: conceptual bases and practical implications.In-
novations in Education and Teaching International 44(1): 57 –66. DOI: 10.1080/
14703290601081332
Carless D (2020) From teacher transmission of information to student feedback literacy: activating
the learner role in feedback processes.Active Learning in Higher Education: Onlineﬁrst. DOI:
10.1177/1469787420945845
Carless D and Boud D (2018) The development of student feedback literacy: enabling uptake of
feedback. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education43(8): 1315–1325. DOI:10.1080/
02602938.2018.1463354
Cary LJ (1999) Unexpected stories: Life history and the limits of representation.Qualitative Inquiry
5(3): 411–427. DOI: 10.1177/107780049900500307
CHE (Council on Higher Education) (2013)The Higher Education Qualiﬁcations Sub-Framework.
Available at: https://www.gov.za/sites/default/ﬁles/gcis_document/201410/38116gon819.pdf
(accessed 28 April 2022).
Christensen T, Laegreid P and Rykkja LH (2015) The challenges of coordination in national security
management – the case of the terrorist attack in Norway.International Review of Adminis-
trative Sciences 81(2): 352–372. DOI: 10.1177/0020852314564307
Cloete JJN (1988) The development of public administration in South Africa. In: Gildenhuys JSH
(ed) South African Public Administration: Past, Present and Future. Pinetown: Owen Burgess,
80–105.
Constantin D-L, Mitrut C, Grosu RM, et al. (2018) Municipal real properties and the challenges of
new public management: a spotlight on Romania.International Review of Administrative
Sciences 84(1): 122–143. DOI: 10.1177/0020852315596212
D’Agostino M, Levine H and Sabharwal M (2019) Gender in negotiation: Preparing public ad-
ministrators for the 21st century workplace.Journal of Public Affairs Education6803: 1–21.
DOI: 10.1080/15236803.2019.1579594
Dall’Alba G (2009) Learning professional ways of being: ambiguities of becoming.Educational
Philosophy and Theory41(1): 34–45. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-5812.2008.00475.x
Delic H (2016) Socratic method as an approach to teaching. European Researcher 111(10):
511–517. DOI: 10.13187/er.2016.111.511
Divay G (2015) Public performance and the challenge of local collective action strategies: Quebec’s
experience with an integrated territorial approach.International Review of Administrative
Sciences 82(3): 472–489. DOI: 10.1177/0020852315578411
Eppel EA and Rhodes ML (2018) Complexity theory and public management: a‘becoming’ﬁeld.
Public Management Review20(7): 949–959. DOI: 10.1080/14719037.2017.1364414
Flyvbjerg B (2006) Five misunderstandings about case-study research.Qualitative Inquiry12(2):
219–245. DOI: 10.1177/1077800405284363
36 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=23>>>
Goldman SR, Radinsky J, Tozer S, et al. (2010) Learning as inquiry. In: Peterson P, Baker E and
McGaw B (eds)International Encyclopedia of Education. Oxford: Academic Press, 297–302.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-044894-7.00495-4
Govender P, Subban M and Wessels JS (2021) Implementation of a national school nutrition
programme: The case of selected South African schools. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and
Naidoo T (eds)Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 79–98.
Guy ME and Sahraoui S (2022) Foreword. In: Bottom KA, Diamond J, Dunning OPT, et al (Eds.)
Handbook of Teaching Public Administration. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, xx-xxi.
Harper RA (2018) The meaning of doing: reﬂective practice in public administration education.
Teaching Public Administration36(2): 143–162. DOI: 10.1177/0144739418770486
Haug F (1987)Female Sexualization: A Collective Work of Memory. London: Verso.
Haug F (2008) Memory work. Australian Feminist Studies 23(58): 537–541. DOI: 10.1080/
08164640802433498
Head BW and Alford J (2015) Wicked problems: implications for public policy and management.
Administration & Society47(6): 711–739. DOI: 10.1177/0095399713481601
Heidegger M (1962)Being and Time(Macquarrie J and Robinson E, transl). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hellevik SB (2012) The pattern and challenges to multisectoral HIV/AIDS coordination in Tan-
zania. International Review of Administrative Sciences 78(3): 554–575. DOI: 10.1177/
0020852312447060
Herrington A and Herrington J (2005) Authentic learning environments in higher education.
Hersey: Information Science. DOI: 10.4018/978-1-59140-594-8
Hiedemann AM, Nasi G and Saporito R (2017) A public service-dominant logic for the executive
education of public managers.Teaching Public Administration35(1): 66–87. DOI:10.1177/
0144739416665881
Hobbes T (1651)Leviathan, or The Matter, Form, & Power of a Common-Wealth, Ecclesiastical
and Civil. London: Andrew Crooke.
Jakubik M (2011)Becoming to Know: Essays on Extended Epistemology of Knowledge Creation.
Helsinki: Hanken School of Economics.
Kakabadse NK and Kakabadse A (2003) Developing reﬂexive practitioners through collaborative
inquiry: a case study of the UK civil service.International Review of Administrative Sciences.
69(3):365–383.
Kearns KP and Kearns LR (2022) Planning for midcareer MPA program: pedagogical and strategic
considerations. In: Bottom KA, Diamond J, Dunning OPT, et al. (Eds.)Handbook of Teaching
Public Administration. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 148–156.
Knassmüller M and Meyer RE (2013) What kind of reﬂection do we need in public management?
Teaching Public Administration31(1): 81–95. DOI: 10.1177/0144739413479199
Knassmüller M and Veit S (2016) Culture matters: the training of senior civil servants in Austria,
Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland.Teaching Public Administration34(2): 120–149.
DOI: 10.1177/0144739415620949
Krishnan HB and Subban M (2021) Co-operativeﬁnancial governance: a case study of the dis-
tressed Mpofana Local Municipality in South Africa. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T
(eds) Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 227–244.
Wessels 37
<<<PAGE=24>>>
Mudida R (2022) The teaching of public administration in Africa. In: Bottom KA, Diamond J,
Dunning OPT, et al (Eds.)Handbook of Teaching Public Administration. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, 135–136.
Laegreid P, Randma-Liiv T, Rykkja LH, et al. (2015) Emerging coordination practices of European
central governments.International Review of Administrative Sciences81(2): 346–351. DOI:
10.1177/0020852315579398
Latib S (2016) Accommodating academic diversity and autonomy in public administration syllabi.
Administratio Publica 24(3): 74–91.
Loxton A (1993)A Criteriological approach to the Functional Structure of Central Government
administration in South Africa. Pretoria: University of Pretoria.
Loxton A (1994) Public functions and public institutions: a criteriological approach to the functional
structure of central government administration in a liberal democracy, with particular reference
to South Africa.Journal of Public Administration29(2): 87–147.
Mischke G (2010) Towards effective curriculum design in ODL.Progressio 32(2): 145–163.
Myrberg G (2017) Local challenges and national concerns: municipal level responses to national
refugee settlement policies in Denmark and Sweden.International Review of Administrative
Sciences 83(2): 322–339. DOI: 10.1177/0020852315586309
Ngele DTL (2019) Throughput Rate of the Master of Public Administration Students at the
University of South Africa from 2005–2014. Dissertation for the degree Master of Admin-
istration in Public Administration. University of South Africa.
Notten T (2016) Teaching, researching and innovation: an appetising programme.Teaching Public
Administration 34(1): 70–82. DOI: 10.1177/0144739415598366
NRC (National Research Council) (1999)How People Learn: Bridging Research and Practice
(Donovan MS, Bransford JD and Pellegrino J, eds). Washington, DC: National Academies
Press. DOI: 10.17226/9457
Nundkumar A and Subban M (2021) Sustainable risk management in the TVET sector: The case of a
typical college. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds) Public Administration
Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 313–328.
Nussbaum M (1999) Women and equality: the capabilities approach.International Labour Review
138(3): 227–245. DOI: 10.2307/2701518
Nussbaum MC (1997) Capabilities and human rights.Fordham Law Review66(1): 273–300. DOI:
10.3868/s050-004-015-0003-8
Oldﬁeld C (2017) Changing times: a changing public sector may require changes to public
management education programmes.Teaching Public Administration35(1): 8–21. DOI:10.
1177/0144739415617150
Ospina SM and Dodge J (2005) Catching method up to meaning: the usefulness of narrative inquiry
in public administration research.Public Administration Review65(2): 143–157.
Pacheco RS and Franzese C (2017) Executive programs for Brazilian mid-career public managers:
pitfalls and challenges. Teaching Public Administration 35(1): 38–49. DOI:
10.1177/
0144739416686652
Partenie CD (1997) The Socratic locus of certainty.Echinox (Cluj) 4–6: 34–35.
Pauw JC and Louw VN (2014) The concept‘public administration’. In: Wessels JS, Pauw JC and
Thani XC (eds)Reﬂective Public Administration: Context, Knowledge and Methods. Pretoria:
Unisa Press, 7–18.
38 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=25>>>
PSC (Public Service Commission) (2016) Building a capable, career-oriented and professional
public service to underpin a capable and developmental state in South Africa. Discussion
document. Available at:http://www.psc.gov.za/conferences/dev-state-conference/ﬁnal reports/
PSCRECOMMENDATIONS.pdf (accessed 28 April 2022).
Quinn B (2013) Reﬂexivity and education for public managers.Teaching Public Administration
31(1): 6–17. DOI: 10.1177/0144739413478961
Raadschelders J (2003) Domestic reform in sub-Saharan African governments under international
inﬂuence. Public Administration Review60(4): 376–382. DOI: 10.1111/0033-3352.00100
Raadschelders J and Whetsell T (2018) Conceptualizing the landscape of decision making for
complex problem solving.International Journal of Public Administration41(14): 1132–1144.
DOI: 10.1080/01900692.2017.1347946
Raadschelders JCN (2020)The Three Ages of Government: From the Person, to the Group, to the
World. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Raelin JA (2007) Toward an epistemology of practice.Academy of Management Learning &
Education 6(4): 495–519. DOI: 10.5465/AMLE.2007.27694950
Ramaphosa C (2019)Address by President Ramaphosa on The Presidency Budget Vote 2019/20,
National Assembly, Cape Town.
Robson IH (2006)The assignment of Responsibilities for the Performance of Public Functions to
Levels or Spheres of Government in South Africa. Thesis for the degree Doctor of Literature
and Philosophy in Public Administration University of South Africa. Available:http://hdl.
handle.net/10500/2356 (accessed 28 April 2022).
Rosenbaum A (2014) Puttingﬁrst things ﬁrst: critical issues for public administration education.
Teaching Public Administration32(1): 80–94. DOI: 10.1177/0144739414523286
Rousseau J-J (1762) The Social Contract and Discourses. JM Dent. Available at: https://oll-
resources.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/oll3/ store/titles/638/Rousseau_0132_EBk_v6.0.pdf
(accessed 28 April 2022).
Ry Nielsen J and Quinn B (2016) A practical note on transferring ideas and methods from con-
sultancy practice to the MPA classroom.Teaching Public Administration34(1): 83–95. DOI:
10.1177/0144739415615662
Sambo V (2021) Governance and accountability in public-sector procurement: the case of procuring
a service-provider for social grant payments. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)
Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 205–226.
SAQA (South African Qualiﬁcations Authority) (2012)Level Descriptors for the South African
National Qualiﬁcations Framework. Pretoria.
Sch¨on DA (1995) Knowing-in-action: the new scholarship requires a new epistemology.Change:
The Magazine of Higher Learning27(6): 27–34. DOI: 10.1080/00091383.1995.10544673
Schwab K (2016)The Fourth Industrial Revolution. Geneva: World Economic Forum.
Sen AK (1994) Well-being, capability and public policy.Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di
Economia, Nuova Serie53(7/9): 333–347.
Stats SA (Statistics South Africa) (2021)Mbalo Brief: The Missing Piece of the Puzzle. Pretoria.
Stout M (2018) The impossibility of a universal public service perspective.Teaching Public
Administration 36(3): 222–236. DOI: 10.1177/0144739417738953
Tandoh-Ofﬁn P, Osei V , Mawuko-Yevugah LC, et al. (2021a) Democratic governance and de-
velopment: the case of public toilet provision in district communities in Ghana. In: Wessels JS,
Wessels 39
<<<PAGE=26>>>
Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds) Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa.
Claremont: Juta, 147–162.
Tandoh-Ofﬁn P, Osei V , Mawuko-Yevugah LC, et al. (2021b) The political-administrative interface
and unintended consequences of public policy: the case of the Ghana School Feeding Pro-
gramme. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)Public Administration Challenges:
Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 99–115.
Tempelhoff JWN, Ginster M, Mahabir S, et al. (2021) Perspectives from below on Emfuleni’s
wastewater woes: In search of resolving a wicked problem. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and
Naidoo T (eds) Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta,
121–146.
Termeer CJA, Dewulf A, Karlsson-Vinkhuyzen SI, et al. (2016) Coping with the wicked problem of
climate adaptation across scales: the Five R Governance Capabilities.Landscape and Urban
Planning 154: 11–19. DOI: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2016.01.007
Termeer CJAM, Dewulf A, Breeman G, et al. (2015) Governance capabilities for dealing wisely
with wicked problems. Administration & Society 47(6): 680 –710. DOI: 10.1177/
0095399712469195
Timperley HS, Parr JM and Bertanees C (2009) Promoting professional inquiry for improved
outcomes for students in New Zealand. Professional Development in Education 35(2):
227–245. DOI: 10.1080/13674580802550094
Unicef (2019) For every child, reimagine: UNICEF annual report, 2019. Available at:https://www.
aidsdatahub.org/sites/default/ﬁles/resource/unicef-annual-report-2019.pdf (accessed 28 April
2022).
Unisa (University of South Africa) (2010) College of Economic and Management Sciences:
Postgraduate PQM & Teach out Plan. Pretoria.
Unisa (University of South Africa) (2021) The leading ODL university. Available at:https://www.
unisa.ac.za/sites/corporate/default/About/The-leading-ODL-university (accessed 22 October
2021).
Van der Meer FB and Marks P (2013) Teaching and learning reﬂection in MPA programs: towards a
strategy. Teaching Public Administration31(1): 42–54. DOI: 10.1177/0144739412470839
Van Jaarsveldt LC (2018) Knowledge and skills required by public servants in a fast-changing world
of work. Administratio Publica 26(2): 43–64.
Venter A (2020)Reﬂections about the Curriculum and Learning Development of the Masters in
Public Administration (MP A). Pretoria.
Wessels JS (2009) Implications of the South African higher education qualiﬁcations framework for
the Master of Public Administration.Journal of Public Administration44(3.1): 506–519.
Wessels K (2010) A core curriculum for the Master of Public Administration: lessons from Australia
and New Zealand.Administration Publica 18(3): 172–194.
Wessels JS (2012) A core curriculum for a Master of Public Administration (MPA) qualiﬁ
cation:
some considerations for a developmental state.Administratio Publica 20(2): 157–175.
Wessels JS (2020) Challenges to inform the curricula of Master of Public Administration pro-
grammes. Teaching Public Administration38(2): 144–167. DOI:10.1177/0144739419864130
Wessels JS (2021a) A policy instrument to relieve child poverty: the case of the child support grant
in South Africa. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)Public Administration
Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 59–78.
40 Teaching Public Administration 42(1)
<<<PAGE=27>>>
Wessels JS (2021b) A rapid change in public policy: the case of access to higher education in South
Africa. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)Public Administration Challenges:
Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 163–182.
Wessels JS (2021c) Meaningful knowledge about public administration: Ontological and situated
antecedents. Administrative Theory & Praxis43(4): 431–446. DOI:10.1080/10841806.2021.
1920813
Wessels JS, Kwaza MH and Ijeoma E (2021a) Sustained poor audit outcomes: The case of the
Amathole District Municipality. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)Public Ad-
ministration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 246–274.
Wessels JS and Naidoo T (2021a) Employment equity and an improved quality of life: The case of a
white women and the South African Police Service. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T
(eds) Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 275–294.
Wessels JS and Naidoo T (2021b) The management of a policy implementation project: The
disastrous Gauteng Mental Health Project. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)
Public Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 25–58.
Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (2021b) Researched cases: Authentic scenarios as a way of
learning for public administrators. In: Wessels JS, Potgieter T and Naidoo T (eds)Public
Administration Challenges: Cases from Africa. Claremont: Juta, 353–368.
Wooldridge B (2004) Preparing public administrators for an era of globalization and decentral-
ization: a strategic-contingency approach.International Review of Administrative Sciences
70(2): 385–403. DOI: 10.1177/0020852304044263
WRR (Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid) (2013)Naar een Lerende economie:
Investeren in het verdienvermogen van Nederland. Amsterdam.
Yeung JFY , Chan APC and Chan DWM (2012) Deﬁning relational contracting from the Witt-
genstein family-resemblance philosophy.International Journal of Project Management30(2):
225–239. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2011.06.002
Ysa T, Hammerschmid G and Albareda A (2017) Executive programs for the public sector: Tacking
stock and future perspectives. Teaching Public Administration 35(1): 3–7. DOI: 10.1177/
0144739417698198
Wessels 41