<<<PAGE=1>>>
COMMENTARY
DOI 10.1007/s40037-017-0344-2
Perspect Med Educ (2017) 6:144–145
Kolb, integration and the messiness of workplace learning
Tim J. Wilkinson 1
Published online: 20 March 2017
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is available at SpringerLink with Open Access.
‘I don’t know what’s wrong with our students. We’ve taught
them all they need to know but they just can’t seem to
remember any of it when they’re at work’. This paraphrase
may be a familiar call of some teachers bemoaning how
students have difﬁculty in applying their learning.
Linking classroom theory to workplace practice is the
focus of a systematic review in this issue of Perspectives
on Medical Education [ 1], but let’s start with a brief, and
idiosyncratic, history of learning.
People have been learning from work and from expe-
rience since the earliest days of our evolution. Some time
ago we must have decided it was a good idea to separate
theory from practice so that we would teach the theory and
that presumably would make the practice more robust. The
dark days of the 19th century, factory style schooling attests
to this philosophy: students in darkened classrooms being
taught but not necessarily learning. Flexner had the best of
intentions to link medical practice to theory but even here
this was translated into doing the theory ﬁrst and the prac-
tice later [ 2]. Then we must have realized that we needed
to put the theory closer to practice and integrate.
Within medical education, integration became the next
buzzword but there was potential for confusion. We realized
that learning anatomy separately from physiology made it
difﬁcult for students to make the links between structure
and function – so we invented horizontal integration where
we combined previously separa ted disciplines in our teach-
ing. Next came early clinical contact so that practice can
be brought earlier into our curriculum – so called vertical
/envelopebackTim J. Wilkinson
tim.wilkinson@otago.ac.nz
1 Medical Education Unit, University of Otago, Christchurch,
New Zealand
integration. The next challenge is ‘upward’ vertical integra-
tion of theory into the later stages of our curricula so that
theory becomes better linked to practice.
The irony here is we had integration of theory with prac-
tice before schools were created, and then we separated
them and now we’re putting it all back together again. At
least we’re trying to.
Kolb had useful views on learning from experience or
linking theory to practice and his learning cycle has be-
come part of most education courses [ 3]. It’s simple but
also effective. In short, he describes a cycle whereby learn-
ers make links between theory and practice (or experience)
in a number of ways. They can start with the theory and
then apply this into practice. Or they can start with practice
and reﬂect on how it might link to theory. Either way there
is a cycle of initial theory preparation/brieﬁng, experience,
reﬂection/debrieﬁ ng, modiﬁcation of theory. With each cy-
cle, and with ongoing experience and reﬂection, learners
modify their views of the world. In short, they learn.
In our attempt to make learning more efﬁcient and to pro-
vide more guidance and control, we’ve also invented learn-
ing outcomes – these are what we would like our learners to
learn. They provide guidance to students and are generally
seen as a very good thing.
Apprenticeship went through some phases too. Initially
seen as a good thing where the protégé learns from the mas-
ter, it then fell into disfavour, as it all seemed to be about
practice without relevant theory. Within the health profes-
sions, working without theory is seen as a bad thing. The
emergence of evidence-based medicine was one response to
this. Another response was to suggest that apprenticeships
are too uncontrolled.
We’ve now entered the next age of learning where we
think workplace learning is good but we need to understand
it better. We also need to link workplace-based learning
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Kolb, integration and the messiness of workplace learning 145
more explicitly to theory. A laudable goal, and the focus of
the systematic review in this issue [ 1].
There are many reasons why workplace learning is to
be encouraged. We know that seeing the whole task helps
a learner know where the component parts might ﬁt [ 4].
We know that seeing role models and the actual doing of
work helps frame learning, helps show what is relevant and
helps in professional identity formation. We also know that
learning in context makes it easier to apply that learning
back into that context. Workpl ace learning is back and it’s
here to stay.
However, workplace learning is also very messy. What
is learnt is unpredictable and learning is not the prime ac-
tivity as it takes second place to doing the work – in clin-
ical settings, the patient is the focus not the student. The
curriculum is not as well deﬁned; it is more serendipitous.
Learning outcomes are harder to control and predict. Some-
times learners do not feel welcomed in workplaces and this
sense of alienation can inhibit learning.
What helps learning in workplaces and the linking of
theory with practice? The ﬁrst component of dealing with
the messiness and unpredicta bility is to recognize it. Focus-
ing on the process of learning, not just the outcomes, is an
important ﬁrst step [ 5]. To do this, we should explain the
opportunities available but acknowledge that different learn-
ers will all have different experiences and take up different
opportunities. We can’t control that, and shouldn’t try. We
also need to acknowledge the social process of learning.
The work of Lave and Wenger has been very inﬂuential
here highlighting how a sense of belonging emerges from
concepts of communities of practice and legitimate periph-
eral participation [ 6].
Linking theory to practice in the workplace is the
focus of the systematic review in this issue [ 1] and it’s
here where Kolb re-emerges because the components of
effective activities seem to mirror his learning cycle [ 3].
The systematic review showed that effective interventions
offered ‘just in time’ information prior to an experience or
task, included effective brieﬁng, provided well supervised
and observed practice with immediate feedback, and fol-
lowed it with time for reﬂection and good debrieﬁng. This
means the learner can consider how the experience links
to existing learning and how that learning might then be
modiﬁed so that the outcome is even better the next time
it is put into practice. Deliberate supervised practice, with
effective brieﬁng and debrieﬁ ng, seem core elements of the
effective learning strategies that were identiﬁed.
We also see that people learn in workplaces despite us.
The systematic review found no intervention was worse
than control, and there were some where people learned
just as well from the control group as the intervention.
Linking theory (or the classroom) to practice requires
conscious application of a cycle of learning, while attend-
ing to the important social and professional identity com-
ponents offered by workplace learning – the need for the
learners to feel welcome, for them to have opportunities to
observe the whole task, to observe role models and to have
supervised opportunities for practice preceded by brieﬁng
and followed by debrieﬁng. This structure does not imply
formality. Such structure can be used in informal supporting
ways. Workplaces do not respond well to imposed formal-
ity – we cannot easily control what people learn at work
but we can help them recognize and use the learning oppor-
tunities, we can help them make sense of their experiences
and most of all we can help them feel they are allowed to
be there.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
1. Peters S, Clarebout G, Diemers A, et al. Enhancing the connection
between the classroom and the clinical workplace: a systematic re-
view. Perspect Med Educ. 2017. doi: 10.1007/s40037-017-0338-0
2. Bonner TN. Iconoclast: Abraham Flexner and a life in learning.
Baltimore: Th e Johns Hopkins Univ ersity press; 2002.
3. Kolb D. Experiential learning: experience as the course of learn-
ing and development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall;
1984.
4. Billett S. Learning th rough health care work: premises, contribu-
tions and practices. Med Educ. 2016;50:124–31.
5. Sheehan D, Wilkinson TJ, Billett S. Interns’ participation and learn-
ing in clinical environments in a New Zealand hospital. Acad Med.
2005;80:302–8.
6. Lave J, Wenger E. Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral partici-
pation. New York: Cambridge University Press; 1991.
Tim J. Wilkinson MBChB, MClinEd, PhD, MD, FRACP , FRCP , is di-
rector of the MBChB programme, professor in Medicine and associate
dean (Medical Education) at the University of Otago, New Zealand