<<<PAGE=1>>>
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
 
Report No: ICR00006287 
 
IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION AND RESULTS REPORT 
ON A 
LOAN 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$1 BILLION 
TO THE 
 
 FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL  
FOR THE 
BRAZIL: INCOME SUPPORT FOR THE POOR AFFECTED BY COVID-19 PROJECT 
  
June 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice 
Latin America and Caribbean Region 
 
  
 Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
<<<PAGE=2>>>
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
(Exchange Rate Effective May 18, 2023) 
 
Currency Unit =                   Brazilian Real (R$) 
R$ 4.97= US$1 
 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 1 - June 30 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AB Auxilio Brasil 
AE  Emergency Aid (Auxilio Emergencial)  
APL  Adaptable Program Lending  
ASA  Advisory Services and Analytics  
BE Extraordinary Benefit (Benefício Extraordinário) 
BEm  Emergency Employment and Income Maintenance Program (Benefício Emergencial de 
Manutenção do Emprego e da Renda)  
BF  Family Allowance Program (Bolsa Familia)  
CCT  Conditional Cash Transfer  
CPF  Country Partnership Framework  
EFO Externally Financed Outputs 
ESF  Environmental and Social Framework  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GoB  Government of Brazil  
GRM  Grievance Redress Mechanism  
ICR  Implementation Completion and Results Report  
IFI  International Financial Institution  
IFR  Interim Financial Report  
ISR Implementation Status and Results Report 
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
MIS  Management Information System  
MoC  Ministry of Citizenship  
MoE  Ministry of Economy  
PAD Project Appraisal Document 
PDI Project Development Objective Indicator 
PDO  Project Development Objective  
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PLR Performance and Learning Review
<<<PAGE=3>>>
PNAD-C Continuous National Household Sample Survey (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de 
Domicílios Contínua) 
POF Household Budget Survey (Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares) 
POM  Project Operations Manual  
SD  Unemployment Insurance Program (Seguro Desemprego)  
SENARC  National Secretariat for Citizen Income (Secretaria Nacional de Renda de Cidadania)  
TA  Technical Assistance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo 
Country Director: Johannes Zutt 
Regional Director: Luis Benveniste 
Practice Manager: Pablo Gottret 
Task Team Leader(s): Matteo Morgandi, Gabriel Lara Ibarra, Liliana Sousa 
ICR Main Contributor: Theresa Jones
<<<PAGE=4>>>
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATA SHEET .......................................................................................................................... 1 
I. PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ....................................................... 4 
A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL ................................ ................................ ................................ .........4 
B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION ................................ ................................ 7 
II. OUTCOME ...................................................................................................................... 8 
A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............8 
B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY) ................................ ................................ ........................ 9 
C. EFFICIENCY ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  12 
D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING ................................ ................................ .... 12 
E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS ................................ ................................ .........................  13 
III. KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME ................................ 14 
A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION ................................ ................................ ................... 14 
B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION ................................ ................................ ............. 15 
IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME .. 16 
A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E) ................................ ............................  16 
B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE ................................ ..................... 18 
C. BANK PERFORMANCE ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 19 
D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME ................................ ................................ ....................... 20 
V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................. 21 
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS ........................................................... 23 
ANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION ......................... 35 
ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT ........................................................................... 38 
ANNEX 4. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ........................................................................................... 39 
ANNEX 5. BORROWER COMPLETION REPORT....................................................................... 42 
ANNEX 6. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON SELECTED SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS 68 
ANNEX 7. SELECT ADVISORY SERVICES AND ANALYTICS ....................................................... 72
<<<PAGE=5>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 1 of 71 
   
 
 
       
 
DATA SHEET 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 
Product Information 
Project ID Project Name 
P174197 Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 
Country Financing Instrument 
Brazil Investment Project Financing 
Original EA Category Revised EA Category 
  
 
 
Organizations 
Borrower Implementing Agency 
Federative Republic of Brazil Ministry of Social Development 
 
Project Development Objective (PDO)  
Original PDO 
The objective of the project is to mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on income and 
risks of damaging human capital of poor families.
<<<PAGE=6>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 2 of 71 
   
 
FINANCING 
 
 Original Amount (US$)  Revised Amount (US$) Actual Disbursed (US$) 
World Bank Financing    
 
IBRD-91720 1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 
Total  1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 
Non-World Bank Financing    
 0 0 0 
Total    0    0    0 
Total Project Cost 1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 1,000,000,000 
 
  
KEY DATES 
 
 
Approval Effectiveness MTR Review Original Closing Actual Closing 
29-Oct-2020 02-Jul-2021 24-Aug-2022 31-Dec-2022 31-Dec-2022 
 
  
RESTRUCTURING AND/OR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
 
Date(s) Amount Disbursed (US$M) Key Revisions 
 
 
KEY RATINGS 
 
 
Outcome Bank Performance M&E Quality 
Satisfactory Satisfactory Substantial 
 
RATINGS OF PROJECT PERFORMANCE IN ISRs 
 
 
No. Date ISR Archived DO Rating IP Rating 
Actual 
Disbursements 
(US$M) 
01 04-Feb-2021 Moderately Satisfactory Satisfactory 0 
02 07-Aug-2021 Moderately Satisfactory Satisfactory 0 
03 25-Feb-2022 Moderately Satisfactory Satisfactory 200.00 
04 06-Oct-2022 Satisfactory Highly Satisfactory 997.50
<<<PAGE=7>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 3 of 71 
   
 
 
SECTORS AND THEMES 
 
 
Sectors 
Major Sector/Sector (%) 
 
Social Protection  100 
Social Protection 100 
 
 
Themes  
Major Theme/ Theme (Level 2)/ Theme (Level 3) (%)  
Social Development and Protection 100  
Social Protection 100  
Social Safety Nets 100 
 
 
  
Human Development and Gender 100  
Disease Control 100  
Pandemic Response 100 
 
 
  
Environment and Natural Resource Management 25  
Climate change 25  
Adaptation 25 
 
 
 
 
ADM STAFF 
 
Role At Approval At ICR 
Regional Vice President: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo Carlos Felipe Jaramillo 
Country Director: Paloma Anos Casero Johannes C.M. Zutt 
Director: Luis Benveniste Luis Benveniste 
Practice Manager: Pablo Gottret Pablo Gottret 
Task Team Leader(s): Matteo Morgandi, Liliana Do 
Couto Sousa 
Matteo Morgandi, Gabriel Lara 
Ibarra 
ICR Contributing Author:  Theresa Jones
<<<PAGE=8>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 4 of 71 
   
 
I. PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES 
 
A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL 
 
1. Brazil entered the COVID -19 crisis still recovering from the 2014 –2016 recession, with slow 
poverty reduction and economic growth.  Since the peak of the recession in 2015 –2016, economic 
recovery had remained weak, with only 1 percent growth of gross domestic product (GDP) over 2017 –
2019. The income of the poorest 40 percent remained below the pre-2014 crisis level. In 2018, about 20 
percent of the population lived on less than US$5.50 per day, including 9.3 million people on less than 
US$1.90 per day—the World Bank global reference for extreme poverty. Thus, as Brazil entered COVID -
19, large segments of the population were highly vulnerable.  As a result of the dramatic decrease in 
domestic and international demand caused by the pandemic, Brazil was expected to fall into a deep 
recession with a drop in GDP of 8 percent projected for 2020 with acute implications for poverty and 
employment. 
2. The coverage of Brazil ’s social protection system was notably skewed toward the elderly and 
families of formal workers, even if reaching about 75 percent of the population before the COVID -19 
crisis. Before COVID -19, expenditures on social protection in Brazil were large by international 
benchmarks (estimated at 15 percent of GDP in 2015), dominated by old age and disability pensions.  
Unless they qualified for Bolsa Familia  (BF), informal workers and their households  were largely 
unprotected.  
3. Social protection measures were at the center of the fiscal package to respond to COVID -19 in 
Brazil. The social protection measures adopted by the Government of Brazil (GoB) had two objectives: (a) 
to make social distancing possible for the economically affected and (b) to mitigate the negative impacts 
of the crisis on welfare and human capital. In April 2020, t he Government introduced Emergency Aid 
(Auxílio Emergencial, AE), a generous temporary program for the self-employed and families working in 
the informal economy who became temporarily poor; for formal workers at risk of losing their income if 
dismissed, the Government introduced a wage subsidy, Emergency Employment and Income 
Maintenance Program (Benefício Emergencial de Manutenção do Emprego e da Renda , Bem).1 Among 
existing programs, the Unemployment Insurance Program (Seguro Desemprego, SD) was financed to meet 
increasing claims by formal dismissed workers, and BF was used to reach in scale the pre-pandemic poor, 
which is o f interest to this project. The expansion was both ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’:  BF increased its 
coverage by incorporating in March 2020  an additional 1.2 million eligible families , who had been on a 
waitlist before the COVID-19 due to budget constraints of the program .2 The value of the transfer of BF 
was also temporarily raised to match at least the amount received by families covered by the AE benefit, 
which was more than three times the size of pre-COVID BF. The benefits evolved during the life of the 
project are further described in Annex 6.  
4. The Ministry of Economy (MoE) of the GoB requested the World Bank and five other 
international financial institutions  (IFIs) to finance the social protection  measures th at would be 
 
1 The AE provided cash transfers to people outside formal wage employment but not eligible for social assistance. The BEm 
aimed to maintain employment relationships by introducing a system of short-time work. 
2 During 2017 and 2018, extreme poverty continued to increase in spite of the timid recovery. As a result of the exhaustion of 
efficiency savings, the BF started to build up a ‘waiting list’ of uncovered poor families in 2019.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 5 of 71 
   
 
deployed to respond to the COVID -19 crisis . Six IFIs, including the World Bank ,3 coordinated their 
financing over BF, SD, AE, and B em, based on institutional experience and prior engagements with the 
GoB, for a total of more than US$4 billion. The World Bank took the lead in  several aspects during the 
process: it prepared a  common interim financial report (IFR) framework for all donors ( to avoid double 
counting of financed expenditures), and two  bilateral financers also adopted part of the W orld Bank 
Results Framework and Project Operations Manual (POM). 
5. The rapid expansion of social protection was possible due to the investments made by the GoB, 
including with World Bank support, in the two previous decad es. This included a physical network of 
social assistance offices, a sophisticated and well-updated social registry of applicants to social assistance 
(Cadastro Único ) and digital delivery and payment systems .4 Since 2003, the World Bank had been  
engaged in supporting the expansion of the  social protection system  for the poorest , including two 
operations to develop BF since its inception and the Cadastro Único (BR Bolsa Familia 1st APL, P087713, 
and the Second Bolsa Familia Project, P101504), as well as providing for years Advisory Services and 
Analytics (ASA) across the social protection spectrum . Hence, in 2020, the World Bank chose to finance 
the expansion of BF,  considering its past financial and analytical support and the strateg ic value of the 
benefits for the World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach. Other donors focused on AE, BEm, 
and SD though three IFIs also co-financed the budget line for BF families. Other IFIs financed the stock of 
beneficiaries already in the BF program, while the World Bank financing was provided conditional on being 
used for beneficiaries added since the pandemic. Designed as such, the W orld Bank loan ensured the 
countercyclical policy choice to grow BF, after years of zero real growth and mounting waiting lists.  
6. The World Bank devoted a  new ASA associated with th is operation. Its ob jectives included  
assisting the GoB in adapting the design of the BF program to meet the additional challenges posed by the 
COVID-19 pandemic ,5 rethink how social protection should evolve in the post -pandemic era , and  
document the lessons learned from Brazil’s response for other co untries (Lara de Arruda, Pedro; Marina 
Lazarotto De Andrade; Tiago Falcao Silva; Diana Teixeira Barbosa; and Matteo Morgandi. 2022a. Sharing 
Lessons Learned from Brazil's Social Protection Response to COVID-19: The Auxílio Emergencial Program. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group ). The World Bank Group Board approved the project with a near -
unanimous statement of support, emphasizing the importance of donor-coordinated response and of the 
ASA associated with the loan.  Annex 7 describes a sample of the World Bank ASAs on social protection 
developed before and during the pandemic. 
Theory of Change (Results Chain) 
7. The Theory of Change was that the BF expansion would lead to two outcomes explicitly derived 
from the Project  Development Objective (PDO) . One, the transfer would protect  beneficiaries of the 
program against shortfalls in income. This would help mitigate welfare losses due to income shocks with 
long-term implications, including malnourishment and school dropouts. Two, these families would be 
incentivized to keep children in school and attend regular  health checks because the program monitors 
compliance with human capital conditionalities. The expected impacts were for beneficiary families to 
 
3 The other five institutions were the Interamerican Development Bank (BID), the New Development Bank (NDB), Agence 
Francaise de Developpement (AFD), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) Development Bank, and Cooperacion Andina de 
Fomento (CAF). 
4 See annex 6 for more detailed information. 
5 See annex 7 for detailed information on the ASA.
<<<PAGE=10>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 6 of 71 
   
 
reduce the risk of adopting negative coping strategies, including children dropping out of school, not 
receiving recommended vaccines , or not attending regula r health checks (once services became 
available).  
Figure 1. Results Chain in Project Appraisal Document 
Problem Statement: Economic losses induced by COVID-19 adversely affect poor and vulnerable families’ welfare including 
malnourishment and increased youth school dropouts. 
 
Critical Assumptions: (1) The BF program will continue to be adequately funded in 2021 and (2) COVID-19 pandemic 
infection rates slow down and by January 2021, education will have resumed and health centers will remain 
operational. 
Project Development Objectives (PDOs) 
8. The PDO was to mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on income and 
risks of damaging human capital of poor families. 
Key Expected Outcomes and Outcome Indicators 
9. The project had four outcome indicators to measure progress toward achieving the development 
objective. 
• Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program threshold with project 
financing (Number; disaggregated by sex and by vulnerable group category of direct 
recipient) 
• Mean income support received with project fi nancing by families as a share of the income 
at the time of application (Percentage) 
• Children 6–17 benefiting from CCT6 with project financing whose school attendance is being 
monitored by the program (Percentage; disaggregated by vulnerable group category) 
 
6 CCT = Conditional cash transfer. 
Activities
Provide financing of BF expansion
Registration of applicants
Beneficiary eligibility verification 
system with cross-check of other 
databases
Implement the Comunication 
Strategy
Implement the grievance redress 
mechanism (GRM)
Outputs
Cash transfers are paid to 1.2 
million BF beneficiary families
Beneficiary elegibility confirmed
Applicants' complaints and 
questions are addressed
Citizens have clarity on elegibility 
and criteria for inclusion
Outcomes
Poor families'income and human 
capital are protected from 
negative economic effects 
associated with COVID-19:
Poor and extreme poor families 
are protected against further 
shortfall in income after COVID-19 
through CCT
CCT families are incentivized to 
maintain children in education and 
health checks through monitoring
Impacts
CCT beneficiary children reduce 
risks of dropping out of school, not 
receiving recommended vaccines, 
or not having health check, when 
services are available
Beneficiary families reduce risk of 
adopting negative coping 
strategies due to livelihood losses 
associated with COVID-19
<<<PAGE=11>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 7 of 71 
   
 
• Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with project financing, who are being 
monitored by the program for compliance with health check-ups (Percentage; disaggregated 
by vulnerable group category). 
Components 
10. The project had a single component: Conditional Cash Transfers for poor and extreme poor 
families. Project financing would cover the cost of BF transfers corresponding to its countercyclical 
expansion as a response to the COVID -19 pandemic. The BF expansion was defined as the increase in 
coverage of the BF compared to a baseline value of 13.05 million families, the number in the program up 
to March 2020. At that point, 1.2 million families on a waitlist were authorized to enter the BF. These 
families had been found eligible for the BF before the COVID-19 crisis, but they could not be added to the 
beneficiary rosters because of budget restrictions. The project would reimburse the average value of BF 
benefits paid to the number of families in excess of the baseline  coverage level pre-pandemic.7 The 
number of covered families could exceed 1.2 million depending on the 2021 budget, revisions in the 
benefit level, and percentage and duration of World Bank financing.  
B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION  
Revised PDOs and Outcome Targets  
11. The PDO was not revised. 
Revised PDO Indicators 
12. The PDO indicators (PDIs) were not revised. 
Revised Components 
13. The single component was not revised. 
Other Changes 
14. During project implementation , the GoB replaced BF with AB.  On August 9, 2021, the GoB 
replaced BF with AB through Provisional Measure 1061, later converted to Law 14.284 (December 29, 
2021). According to a provision in the Project Loan Agreement (paragraph 5 of the appendix), the 
definition of BF included “any successor acceptable to the B ank.” The Ministry of Citizenship (MoC) and 
the World Bank team confirmed the equivalence of AB and BF during the February 2022 supervision 
mission and the POM was revised accordingly.8 BF families migrated automatically to AB. Operational and 
institutional arrangements did not change.  
 
7 In addition to the ‘BF’ benefit, most BF families received additional benefits, which varied over time, during project 
implementation. These benefits were not financed by the project (see annex 6 for detailed information). 
8 Since AB benefits maintained the BF objectives— to support the basic income of poor and extremely poor families through 
cash transfers and to stimulate access to public policies to improve their welfare through monitoring of conditions related to 
health and education—the World Bank mission concluded that AB qualified as a “successor acceptable to the Bank.”
<<<PAGE=12>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 8 of 71 
   
 
Rationale for Changes and Their Implication on the Original Theory of Change 
15. The replacement of BF by AB did not modify the original Theory of Change. The substitution of 
the BF program was necessitated by the decision of the GoB to replace it with the AB program. Based on 
the analysis that BF and AB were ‘equivalent’ programs in their objectives, the replacement was judged 
acceptable to the World Bank and thus eligible for the same project financing as BF, according to the 
provisions of the Loan Agreement.9 
II. OUTCOME 
 
A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs 
 
Assessment of Relevance of PDOs and Rating 
Rating: High 
 
16. The relevance of the PDO is rated as High, as it supported the objectives of the GoB’s National 
Contingency Plan for Human Infection by COVID -19, as well as the W orld Bank Country Partnership 
Framework (CPF) objectives. The project supported the GoB’s efforts to address the economic 
consequences of the COVID -19 pandemic by financing social protection responses that support 
households’ welfare and mitigate risks of loss of human capital. The project contributed to measures 
protecting the poor and vulnerable, particularly women, from income shocks related to COVID-19.  
17. The original CPF for Brazil for FY18–FY23 (Report No. 113259-BR) was in place from the time the 
project was appraised to when it closed, but its focus was adjusted in the interim to respond to COVID-
19. A Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF was carried out in 2022 (Report No. 143636-BR) 
with the aim to assess implementation of the CPF until January 2022 and propose adjustments up to June 
2023 (CPF Realignment). The latter included the  countercyclical emergency support to protect the poor 
and vulnerable to address the impacts of the pandemic. The support provided by the project was captured 
under CPF Focus Area 1: Fiscal Consolidation and Government Effectiveness for Sustainable, Inclusive and 
Efficient Service Delivery.  Under specific Objective 1.2, the PLR added a supplementary indicator to 
capture the shift in World Bank Group emphasis ( ‘new families who are maintained above extreme 
poverty with conditional cash transfer program supported by the Bank ’), which mirrored a PD I. The PLR 
notes that the long -standing dialogue in social protection and just -in-time technical assistance ( TA) 
provided by the World Bank to Brazil allowed for rapid and effective lending when the GoB requested it. 
The ASA associated with the project was also central to the CPF realignment as it would support the GoB 
in facilitating economic recovery, by informing reforms to the social protection system. The PLR also 
highlighted the World Bank’s role in coordinating the joint response of six IFIs, which together accounted 
for two-thirds of the GoB’s response to the pandemic through new spending in 2020.  
 
9 While AB’s poverty-focused benefits were eligible for project financing, other AB categorical benefits were not (bonuses for 
athletes, winners of academic competitions and individuals entering formal employment, and daycare transfers) nor was the 
Extraordinary Benefit Program’ (Benefício Extraordinário, BE) designed to bring all AB recipients to a minimum benefit amount 
of R$400 or the temporary Benefício Complementar program to bring recipients to a minimum benefit of R$600.
<<<PAGE=13>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 9 of 71 
   
 
B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY) 
Rating: Substantial 
18. According to the PDO, the project had two objectives: 1. Mitigate the negative economic effects 
associated with COVID-19 on the income of poor families and 2. Mitigate the risks of damaging human 
capital of poor families. The achievement of each objective is evaluated below.  
Assessment of Achievement of Each Objective/Outcome 
19. Objective 1: Mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on the income of 
poor families was fully achieved. There were two PDIs to measure the achievement of this objective: the 
number of families and the income support received. The first indicator was surpassed by a large margin, 
while the second indicator was largely achieved with the actual result only marginally below the target. 
20. The expansion of BF/AB significantly exceeded even the higher estimates of program 
beneficiaries stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) while the income gains for families were 
slightly lower than expected. At the end of 2021, BF had expanded to include nearly 1.9 million families, 
already above the planned 1.2 million. The successor AB, however, raised both eligibility thresholds and 
the generosity of benefits which had declined in real terms. Those reforms, combined with a removal of 
budget constraints, led to a substantial growth in Program coverage by roughly an additional 6 million 
families by June 2022, by which date the project was completely disbursed.  By the project closing date 
(December 2022), nearly 10 million families had been added. Given the larger-than-expected expansion 
in BF/AB, the disaggregated targets for PDI1 (by gender and vulnerable group) were also exceeded by a 
large margin (see paragraph 44). The income support indicator for BF/AB ended up slightly below the  
target of 55 percent  (53.33 percent) at the time of project closure  (Table 1) and at 54.5 percent at the 
time of the last disbursement in June 2022. Importantly, all beneficiary families for the project in the same 
period received a significantly higher amount than what this indicator accounts for, due to complementary 
transfers via Auxilio Emergencial in 2021 and Beneficio Extraordinario in 2022,10 which were mechanically 
providing top-ups to any recipient of AB/BF during the project period (see annex 6 for details). 
Table 1. Results for PDIs 1 and 2  
PDI1 Families who are maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold with project financing11 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1,200,000 
Actual: 9,959,838 (December 2022) 
PDI2 Mean income support received with project 
financing by families as a share of the income at the 
time of application (Percentage)12 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 55.0 
Actual: 53.32 (December 2022) 
 
10 This indicator depends both on the declared income level of applicants and on the generosity of the benefit. The average 
income of applicants likely increased after 2020 as the program raised its eligibility thresholds by about 10 percent in November 
2021 (to account for inflation). The program also experienced a moderate increase in the average benefit, and the cost-of-living 
increase was largely addressed through the complementary benefit to all AB/BF recipients—Beneficio Extraordinario. However, 
the positive effect on mitigating poverty of this top-up is not visible in PDI 2. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) computed 
that, when accounting for both AB and BE, PDI2 would surpass 70 percent in 2022 (See Government Completion Report).  
11 For the calculation of the indicators related to the first PDO objective, “with project financing” was defined as the difference 
between the March 2020 baseline of 13.05 families and the updated coverage of BF/AB. 
12 The indicator was computed only for the AB benefit, and it does not include BE (see annex 6), which families also received at 
the time. The PIU computed that, if BE was considered, this PDI would rise to above 70 percent.
<<<PAGE=14>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 10 of 71 
   
 
21. Objective 2: Mitigate the risks of damaging human capital of poor families was partially 
achieved. As shown in the Theory of Change and the selection of PDIs, the PDO is highly specific and thus 
intentionally conservative monitoring of compliance with education and health conditions provided 
incentives to CCT families to maintain school attendance and health checks for children . At preparation, 
it was expected that production of data by line ministries regarding compliance with health and education 
conditionalities would resume during the implementation period of the project. The targets set for both 
PDIs were equivalent to the pre -pandemic shares of children being monitored by the BF program. The 
monitoring of co mpliance with conditions did resume in 2022 and achieved a substantial coverage of 
children in the Program. However, it did not fully reach pre -pandemic monitoring levels for either 
education or health due to several reasons . In the case of education, publ ic schools remained closed on 
average for about 9.5 months, with those in the northeast region closing even longer (nearly a year). The 
Ministry of Education began to monitor school attendance only in February/March 2022, introducing a 
new system to record  school attendance. The system suffered some operational glitches and gaps in 
availability, problems that were compounded by  the learning curve for municipal staff to use the new 
system. As a result, the MoC was not able to report complete results until the third quarter of 2022. In 
the case of health, from the beginning of the pandemic until mid-2021, the Ministry of Health suspended 
the obligation of health authorities to record information on health visits  of children and pregnant 
women, as well as discouraged health visits by these groups to reduce the chance of contagion and permit 
health staff to concentrate efforts on addressing the pandemic . Targets for the related disaggregated 
indicators were only met for compliance monitoring of health conditions for the subgroup of Quilombola 
(afro-descendants living in traditional areas). Compliance monitoring of education conditions for 
indigenous children had the largest relative gap compared to the target (63.32 percent versus 85 percent) 
(see annex 1B).  
22. While targets for the resumption of monitoring of compliance with health and education 
conditions we re not reached, the achievement of Objective 1 of the project likely contributed to 
mitigating the risks of damage to the  human capital of poor families.  The two PDIs ‘mapped’ to the 
second PDO objective related to monitoring of health and education conditions by the program (Table 2). 
Nevertheless, the project’s Theory of Change correctly recognized the role of the cash transfer on its own 
to help achieve two outcomes (attendance at schools and health check-ups) to ultimately have a positive 
impact on protecting families’ human capital accumulation. This second order, yet key, outcome results 
from the fact that the additional cash can reduce household liquidity constraints, thus covering the direct, 
indirect, and opportunity costs associated with school enrolment, attendance , and retention as well as 
use of health services.13  
Table 2. Results for PDIs 3 and 4  
PDI3 Children 6–17 benefiting from CCT with project financing,14 
whose school attendance is being monitored by the 
program (Percentage) 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 85.0 
Actual: 70.5 (December 2022) 
PDI4 Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with 
project financing, who are being monitored by the 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 60.0 
 
13 Bastagli, F rancesca; Jessica Hagen-Zanker; Luke Harman; Valentina Barca ; Georgina Sturge and Tanja Schmidt, with Luca 
Pellerano.  2016. “Cash Transfers: What Does the Evidence Say? A rigorous review of programme impact and of the role of design 
and implementation features” Overseas Development Institute. 
14 In the case of the second PDO, the indicators are calculated for the entire BF/AB program, not just the expansion.
<<<PAGE=15>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 11 of 71 
   
 
program for compliance with health checkups (Percentage) Actual: 45.32 (December 2022) 
23. Moreover, data for late 2021 from a nationally representative phone survey provide suggestive 
evidence that children of BF families did not disproportionately reduce the utilization of health and 
education services during the pandemic.  
(a) Preliminary results from the Continuous National Household Sample Survey (PNAD-C)  2022 
also suggest that children in BF families in extreme poverty (those with an income per capita 
lower than R$  210) showed attendance rates of 96.5  percent, compared to 93.1 percent 
among those not receiving BF with similar income levels. Also, 96.6 percent of children in BF 
families attended school, compared to 95.7 percent among non -BF recipients in Cadastro 
Único (typically with higher income). 
(b) A survey collected by the W orld Bank team at the end of 2022 on a sample of 1,300 AB 
recipients, who enrolled in the program after December 2021, revealed that utilization of 
health and education services were sustained at high levels. In particular, 
• 95 percent of poor and extreme  poor15 children in AB visited a primary health unit 
within the previous 12 months. 
• 88 percent of extreme poor children and 92 percent of the poor children in AB received 
a vaccine in the previous 12 months.  
• 80 percent of pregnant women in extreme poor families and 90 percent of the women 
in poor families and in AB received prenatal checkups (though sample sizes were small 
for this indicator). 
• 89 percent of children in poor and in extreme poor families attended school.  
• 89 percent of enrolled children in extreme poor and 93  percent in poor families 
attended school in the previous week. 
Justification of Overall Efficacy Rating 
24. Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. The first objective is considered fully achieved, with one 
indicator surpassing by a large margin what it was originally intended to achieve and the other indicator 
achieving 97 percent . Although the PDIs for the second objective fell short of the targets, the data 
demonstrate that the program was monitoring health and education conditions for a substantial share of 
children in the program by the end of the project, even if not at the pre-pandemic level. Moreover, survey 
data demonstrate that a high proportion of BF children were attending school and going for health check-
ups, two actual intended outcomes of the project’s Theory of Change. Such behavior is consistent with a 
 
15 Poor and extreme poor families are defined according to the declared income before enrollment in the program in Cadastro 
Único, at the time the sampling for the impact study occurred. Poor families defined as with income below R$  210 per capita 
and extreme poor below R$ 105 per capita.
<<<PAGE=16>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 12 of 71 
   
 
positive incentive effect of the program’s monitoring of conditionalities.16 The overall rating of Substantial 
also factors in the likely contribution of the cash transfer on its own (Objective 1) to mitigate the risk of 
damage to human capital. 
C. EFFICIENCY  
Rating: High 
Assessment of Efficiency and Rating 
 
25. Efficiency is rated as High . At appraisal, the estimated economic efficiency for the project was 
measured by BF targeting performance and the impact of BF expansion on poverty reduction . For the 
Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR), these estimates were updated using PNAD-C 2022 
survey data  (see annex 4)  and show that Bolsa Familia’s successor, Auxilio Brasil, maintained strong 
targeting performance despite the rapid expansion (double the  pre-pandemic coverage): over three -
fourth of beneficiaries (76 percent) were in the bottom 30 percent of the income distribution, including 
37 percent in the bottom decile and 61 percent in the bottom quintile.17 Moreover, simulations using the 
BraSIM tool (the same as presented in the PAD) suggest that the benefits from the BF/AB program led to 
a decrease in extreme poverty of 3.6 percentage points in 2022. This implies that, in the absence of the 
program, extreme poverty would have been 10.3 percent (instead of a simulated 6.7 percent). Moreover, 
despite strong support from the BF/AB program, there is no evidence of negative impacts on beneficiaries’ 
attachment to the labor market, as was also expected in the original economic analysis. 
26. Project design and implementation aspects contributed to efficiency. The GoB made use of the 
provision for retroactive financing and the project fully disbursed six months before the closing date. The 
closing date was not extended, and staff turnover was not an issue. Operating costs were low, the PIU 
roles were fulfilled by existing staff in the ministry, trained by the World Bank fiduciary and Environmental 
and Social Framework (ESF) teams at the project onset. The common arrangements agreed among donors 
for financial reporting and audits also fostered efficiency and econom ies of scale  for the project (see 
paragraph 30 for more details). The actual financing provided by the six donors was broadly in line with 
PAD estimates, with only minor differences in the distribution of support by program and amount.  
D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING 
27. The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.  Based on the high relevance of PDO objectives, a 
rating of Substantial for efficacy and a rating of High for efficiency, the overall outcome rating is assessed 
as Satisfactory. 
 
16 While it is not possible to pinpoint the explanation for this result, there is international evidence that perceptions of conditions 
and messaging of prescribed behavior, alone or together with the monitoring of compliance, can promote desired behaviors 
(Bastagli, Francesca; Jessica Hagen -Zanker; Luke Harman; Valentina Barca; Georgin a Sturge and Tanja Schmidt, with Luca 
Pellerano.  2016. “Cash Transfers: What does the Evidence Say? ” Overseas Development Institute, p age 267). This would be 
expected given the long history and reputation of the BF program as a conditional transfer in Brazil. 
17 The 2022 distribution of beneficiaries is slightly less concentrated in the bottom 20 percent compared to 2019 but still very 
good targeting performance relative to other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) with significantly less 
ambitious levels of coverage.
<<<PAGE=17>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 13 of 71 
   
 
E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS  
Gender 
28. The project overachieved its gender -related targets mainly because of the much larger -than-
expected expansion of BF/AB, but the share of women enrolled in the expansion was less than PAD 
estimates. The project supported a reduction in gender gaps in earnings am ong the population eligible 
for BF, by supporting the expansion of a program that prioritized women as beneficiaries, as tracked by 
the gender disaggregation of enrollments for women in specific groups (indigenous and Quilombolas), as 
well as ‘other’ (the remainder of beneficiaries).18 Given that the expansion of BF/AB significantly exceeded 
what was expected in the PAD baseline, the three numerical targets set for women (indigenous, 
Quilombolas, and other) were exceeded by large margins (nearly five times higher in the case of the ‘other’ 
group). However, the share of women enrolled in BF/AB became lower by the end of the project than at 
the baseline (68 percent versus 82 percent for indigenous, 61 percent versus 73 percent for Quilombolas, 
and 76 percent versus 80 percent for other groups). A likely reason is the rise in single person families in 
AB, which are more dominated by men: this unexpected outcome was incentivized by the introduction of 
Beneficio Extraordinario , the top -up introduced in 2021 (and extinguished in 2023),  which gave an  
additional generous benefit per family regardless of household size , which led to incentives for men to 
register as separate entities than their (unmarried) partners.19 During the life of the project, the team also 
conducted two analytical studies that informed the ministry on constraints on the participation of women 
to work and determinants of their insertion in the labor market (see annex 7).  
Institutional Strengthening 
29. The project solely financed BF/AB cash transfers to beneficiaries, but parallel TA is likely to have 
contributed to institutional strengthening.  Implementation built on the sound experience of the 
Government in implementing cash transfer operations through established processes and systems that 
allowed for orderly implementation and eligibility controls. Prior World Bank operations had supported 
the strengthening of institutional capacity for the delivery of the BF program from its inception in 2003, 
first through the BR Bolsa Familia 1st Adaptable Program Lending (APL) (P087713) and between 2012 and 
2018 through the Second Bolsa Familia Project (P1 01504). Both projects included a large TA component 
to help build capacity of the BF delivery institution, the management model of Cadastro Único, and 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E). In the case of this project, parallel TA provided during implementation 
generated technical notes on the lessons learned from AE (Lara de Arruda  et al. 2022) and supported 
innovations to the AB benefit, in part incorporated in the new AB Law 2021.20  
 
18 The design of BF/AB incorporated a strong push to enroll women—overrepresented among poor household heads—as the 
household member who received the BF/AB beneficiary payment whenever possible. Targeting transfers specifically to women 
can partially reduce the impact of the labor market earnings gap, with positive impacts on empowerment and agency. 
19 Auxilio Emergencial gave a fixed transfer to families regardless of the family size and composition. This shift in the profile of 
beneficiary families has been acknowledged by the new administration, which has already identified several million families to 
be invited for verification of the family information in Cadastro Único. 
20 The studies informed the review of the exit rule from the program, the introduction of a saving component for 
beneficiaries that graduate from AB into a formal job, piloting of new modalities for the delivery of early childhood 
services, and introduction of financial rewards for excellence in education (Fietz, Katharina Maria; Tiago Falcao Silva; 
Maria Concepcion Steta Gandara; and Matteo Morgandi. 2021. “Balancing Stability and Transition: A First Assessment of 
Regra de Permanência in Bolsa Familia.” Policy Note no. 162843, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.).
<<<PAGE=18>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 14 of 71 
   
 
Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity 
30. The project had a direct positive impact on increasing household income of poor beneficiaries. 
As noted by PDI2 (table 1 above), the benefit received among project beneficiaries amounted to an 
average of 53.3 percent of their reported income at the time of registration.21 In addition, as noted in the 
efficiency section, the AB program was well targeted and the benefits provided by the program led to a 
decrease in poverty in 2022, with a particular effect on extreme poverty. 
31. Simulations in annex 4 suggest that the benefits provided by the AF program led to a decrease 
in poverty in 2022, with a particular effect on extreme poverty. More specifically, simulations show that 
in the absence of the program , the share of Brazilian families in extreme poverty would have been 10.3 
percent, whereas extreme poverty decreases to 9.7 percent (equivalent to a 1.1 million change), owing to 
the core BF program (co-financed by the loan) and further drops to 6.6 percent when including the effects 
of the ge nerous temporary top -up BE. As further discussed in annex 4, the benefit s provided by the 
program achieved the outcomes efficiently, being strongly targeted to the bottom quintile.  
Climate Change 
32. BF, and its successor AB, supported by the project helped increase the resilience of the poor to 
climate-related extreme events. Using data from Cadastro Único, the June 2022 AB payment list and the 
World Bank 2021 Disasters Risk Index by Capacity (IRDC),22 it is estimated that 29  percent (5.3 million 
families) of AB’s total beneficiary families live in municipalities considered high or very high risk of climate 
disaster. The high proportion of families’ exposure to risk denotes the important protective factor of the 
cash transfer program for households if enrolled in AB. Moreover, engaging with the Ministry of Social 
Development in the initial estimate of  climate co-benefits led to a  fruitful policy dialogue  to further 
develop protocols for adaptive social protection, now part of a separate TA line.23  
III. KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME 
A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION 
 
33. The project benefited from a simple design and readiness for implementation.  Financing for 
BF/AB cash transfers was the only project component. Technical assistance, which had been a component 
of previous World Bank operations supporting BF (P087713 and P101504) related to the continuing 
Government efforts to strengthen and reform  BF, was handled in a parallel program of ASA, funded by 
externally financed outputs (EFOs). The Results Framework focused on the main outcomes expected from 
the project. In the case of the human capital objective, the Results Framework intended to focus on what 
 
21 As families who are eligible for BF can only earn less than R$210 per capita, a simple back-of-the-envelope would suggest 
that, on average, the benefit funded by the project was about R$112 per person (equivalent to 53.3 percent of R$210).  
22 The IRDC uses Brazilian data from the Center of Natural Disaster Prevention to estimate the extent of risk exposure to natural 
disasters of Brazilian municipalities and the municipalities’ capacity to respond. Classified in five groups, the municipalities in 
classes D and E are considered at high or very high risk of disasters, mainly climate related, due to a combination of high 
exposure and low capacity to respond to them. In Brazil, 1,591 out of 5,570 municipalities were classified in 2021 as at high or 
very high risk, meaning that these areas are both at high risk of facing a climate-related distress and have a low capacity to act 
and protect its population before and upon the effects. 
23 The World Bank organized a conference on climate and social protection in Florianopolis and prepared a policy note ‘Towards 
Shock Responsive Social Protection in Brazil’. https://urpartner.io/event/towards-shock-responsive-social-protection-in-brazil/.
<<<PAGE=19>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 15 of 71 
   
 
the project could be held accountable for  within its short implementation period —the monitoring of 
compliance with health and education conditions—although the policies of educational and health sector 
authorities had a large influence on this indicator. The Results Framework monitoring plan was based on 
well-established systems in the MoC. The project was ready for implementation, since BF was an existing 
program using robust Government systems. 
34. The risks identified were accurate but skewed toward possible reductions in the BF budget and 
the number of BF beneficiaries. Contrary to the concerns identified in the PAD, the expansion of the 
BF/AB programs exceeded the PAD estimates by a very large margin, even in its higher-case scenario. The 
main mitigation measure identified that related to possible changes in the BF program parameters was 
the continuous engagement of the World Bank with the Government through the ASA/TA. A risk correctly 
identified was the possibility that COVID -19 could result in a reduction in the provision of health and 
education services for an extended period with a corresponding impact on the magnitude of the project’s 
impact on human capital and the ability to monitor compliance with health and education conditions. The 
main mitigation was trends at the time of PAD preparation: a drop in COVID -19 cases and the gradual 
reopening of schools in most Brazilian states. 
35. The World Bank played an important role in donor coordination. Led by the World Bank, the six 
donors across the four main social protection programs (BF/AB, AE, BEm , and SD) agreed on a common 
format for reporting, using the World Bank template for the IFRs as the model, and the terms of reference 
for a single audit. The arrangement reduced the potential duplication of efforts and the need for the PIU 
to handle many different procedures and requirements.  
B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION  
Factors Subject to Government/Implementing Agency Control 
36. The project benefited from established capacity and effective coordination arrangements 
within the MoC.  The MoC, together with the MoE, had the challenge of managing financing for BF/AB 
from six different donors. In addition, several units within the MoC (Cadastro Único, SENARC24, Ouvidoria), 
as well as the Treasury , had responsibilities in the implementation of the World Bank -financed project. 
The units worked well together and internal communication was good , enabling speedy project 
preparation and timely disbursements. The PIU was well organized and possessed the required human 
resources, as well as the full support of the MoC management. The POM was prepared on time, with 
World Bank approval in December 2020. The PIU coordinated the necessary dialogue with the World Bank, 
on both technical and administrative topics.  There were no issues with basic logistics.  The legislation 
governing BF was in place at the beginning of the project, later replaced by a new legal framework for AB. 
The World Bank consistently rated Fiduciary and Environmental and Social Safeguards compliance as 
Satisfactory. High-quality progress reports were delivered on time and contained the required information 
on monitoring indicators. 
 
24 National Secretariat for Citizen Income (Secretaria Nacional de Renda de Cidadania).
<<<PAGE=20>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 16 of 71 
   
 
Factors Subject to World Bank Control 
37. On the side of the World Bank, an important contribution to the project was its coordination of 
other donors financing BF/AB and the provision of advice during implementation through 
complementary ASA/TA. At the stage of resource mobilization, through the leadership of the World Bank, 
the multiple donors financing BF/AB  agreed on common standardized reporting. Despite the short 
duration of the project, conditions changed substantially. AB replaced the BF and in May 2022 , the GoB 
initiated BE.25 World Bank staff adapted appropriately to these changing conditions, principally by 
assessing AB as equivalent to BF and therefore eligible for financing under the loan and by not constraining 
the faster disbursement of project funds. The same task team leader, and by and large the broader World 
Bank team, was in place during project implementation and provided appropriate advice and support to 
M&E. A parallel ASA carried out by the World Bank during the period of the project was crucial in providing 
evidence to inform the discussion and decisions on design changes and improvements in BF. Examples of 
topics included an analysis of  international experience in  financial incentives to stimulate education 
outcomes, leading to the incorporation o f financial rewards to low-income students with extraordinary 
achievements in the AB Law. A study on mobility and exit patterns of families in BF informed the review 
of the exist rules for the new AB benefit (Fietz et al. 2021). A study on patterns on savings and the use of 
financial instruments by BF families informed parts of the AB legislation that included financial education 
as an objective of complementary activities for beneficiaries and opened space to design a precautionary 
saving instrument for graduates of AB that entered in a formal job (World Bank 2021). In addition, World 
Bank staff carried out simulations of the impact of possible reforms on BF on poverty, equity and targeting, 
ahead of the AB reform (Morgandi et al. 2019). The study on experience of AE served to inform an internal 
agenda of modernization of verification and controls of income declarations of AB beneficiaries (Morgandi 
et al. 2021). The policy note that benchmarked Brazil with other countries in adaptive social protection is 
now informing a dialogue with the Ministry of Social Development to review its protocols to intervene in 
disaster-affected areas (Ed, Malin; Alejandro Gonzalez; and Renata Ferreira. 2023. “Climate Change and 
the Role of Social Protection in Brazil.” Washington, DC: The World Bank Group).  
Factors outside the Control of Government and/or Implementing Agencies 
38. The reopening of schools and the resumption of monitoring of compliance with education and 
health conditions were outside the control of the MoC. The resumption of monitoring of the health and 
education conditions of BF/AB depended on decisions of state governments to reopen schools post  
COVID-19 and the decisions of the national Ministries of Health and Education to again requir e health 
centers and schools to record the required information. In the case of education, additional delays were 
experienced due to the launch of a new information system to record school attendance information. 
IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME 
A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E) 
 
M&E Design 
 
 
25 BE is a top-up for AB recipients so that all families would receive at minimum amount.
<<<PAGE=21>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 17 of 71 
   
 
39. The M&E design for the project was well aligned with its focus on financing cash transfers for 
the BF/AB expansion.  The indicators followed directly from the two PDOs to mitigate the negative 
economic effects associated with COVID-19 on income and the risks of damaging human capital of poor 
families. The Theory of Change linked the receipt of the cash transfers with th e expected objectives, 
supported by a large body of international evidence. While the Results Framework was concise, the 
indicators covered both objectives and had clear targets. Information was to be drawn from established 
information systems in the MoC and consolidated by the PIU. One moderate shortcoming was the use of 
the terminology “with project financing”  since it was difficult to accurately measure the indicators only 
for the share of total transfers or beneficiaries that the loan financed . For the PDIs mapped to the first 
objective (mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID -19 on the income of poor 
families), indicators were calculated for the entire expansion of BF/AB above the 13.05 million March 2022 
baseline. For the PDIs mapped to the second objective (mitigate the risks of damaging human capital of 
poor families), indicators were calculated for the entire BF/AF program. Another moderate shortcoming 
was a misunderstanding on the specification and internal government procedures  related to the 
indicators for the grievance redress mechanism  (GRM), reported in the final is(October 2022).  The 
definition of the indicator in the PAD referred to “cases being resolved within 30 days”, while the 
applicable regulations required “cases to be replied to within 30 days” with additional time allowed if 
necessary to obtain more information or other reason. 
M&E Implementation 
40. Monitoring data w ere generally of high quality and reliable.  The MoC team collected and 
analyzed monitoring data using several information systems in the MoC related to BF/AB, including the 
system to follow conditionalities, the Cadastro Único, and the GRM system. Overall, they followed the 
robust methodology agreed  upon during project preparation. The PIU effectively consolidated the 
required information into the progress reports. Project M&E was rated as Moderately Satisfactory in two 
out of four Implementation Status  and Results Report  (ISRs) (ISRs 2 and 3) because of the delays in 
reporting on the indicators related to monitoring of compliance with conditions as well as in finalizing the 
arrangements for the planned impact evaluation (see the following paragraph). Delays in the former were 
due to the issues discussed earlier in the section on the achievement of the second PDO and beyond the 
MoC’s control. The moderate shortcoming mentioned above on the definition of the indicator on the GRM 
was addressed by the Government providing information for both cases ‘resolved’ and cases ‘replied to’ 
within 30 days .  In addition, due to a change in the information system of the unit responsible for the 
GRM, it was not possible to track results related to the GRM for the Quilombolas.  
41. An impact evaluation  survey to measure effects of AB was carried out ; however, its 
implementation did not occur according to the intended design , limiting the ability to  draw causal 
inference from the results. The World Bank team had planned to conduct an impact evaluation of the 
expansion of BF/AB as part of the parallel ASA/TA. The evaluation was meant to provide additional 
evidence on the impact of the project on the development objectives. The collection of such information 
went well beyond what was committed to be measured  in the PAD and the Results Framework. The 
evaluation design was going to rely on a comparison of beneficiary families to a random sample of families 
registered in Cadastro Único but who were just above the eligibility cutoffs defined in December 2021 and 
expected not to receive the benefit over 2022 (that is, the control group). The survey was piloted in May 
and fielded and completed by November 2022, and it provided data on human development outcomes 
experienced by families who applied and received BF/AB, as described in the Outcomes section above.
<<<PAGE=22>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 18 of 71 
   
 
However, after the sample was drawn, many sampled families shifted from control to treatment status  
due to their re-applications to BF after the new eligibility thresholds were announced; this greatly reduced 
the availability of households in the control group. Thus, the outcomes here reported for AB beneficiary 
families cannot be compared with similar non-beneficiary families.26  
M&E Utilization 
42. The ministry regularly uses the wealth of data produced by the registry and the management 
information system to make decisions on refining design , as well as implementation. For instance , the 
reform of AB was entirely simulated with the social registry data mu ltiple times to identify the impact, 
and the World Bank used its own methodologies to complement on the MoC’s estimates of  potential 
poverty incidence. The social registry data were used to identify the potential challenges related to 
introducing new education conditionality for age group below 6 and above 18 years.  
Justification of Overall Rating of Quality of M&E 
43. The quality of M&E is rated as Substantial based on the ratings for the three dimensions. Based 
on moderate shortcomings in M&E design  and implementation and good utilization of M&E data, the 
overall rating is Substantial. 
B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE 
44. The project complied with the five applicable World Bank Environmental and Social Standards 
(ESS). The applicable ESS were ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts, ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions, ESS4: Community Health and Safety, ESS 7: Indigenous 
Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities, and ESS10: 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure. The P IU in the MoC fulfilled its responsibilities to 
report on and monitor E nvironmental and Social Commitment Plan measures and actions throughout 
project implementation, with specific authorities responsible for each ESS. For instance, the MoC 
Ombudsman (Ouvidoria) was responsible for ESS10, the National Secretariat of the Single Registry 
(Secretaria Nacional do Cadastro Único, SECAD) and SENARC were responsible for ESS4, 7, and 10, while 
ESS2 was the responsibility of only SENARC. During project implementation, no issues were reported by 
any of the aforementioned authorities, and all associated rep orting obligations were completed and 
delivered on time.  
45. The project provided financial support to expand a well -established cash transfer program, 
resulting in negligible negative social impacts and no adverse environmental impacts, as there were no 
construction activities or other services that directly or indirectly affected the environment.  BF had 
installed capacity to promote participation by vulnerable groups. To increase coverage of the most 
vulnerable population, the BF operating rule prioritized c ertain groups to enter the program based on 
 
26 Two factors affected the eligibility status of many families originally assigned to the ‘control group’ in the study. First, the 
additional expansion of AB and an increase of the program generosity raised incentives for families to recertify over the cou rse 
of a few months their declared income, which was the basis to construct the sample for the study. Second, the eligi bility 
thresholds to enter the program increased two months after the AB Law was passed, around February 2022 , causing many 
families in the control group to become eligible and receive the benefit. These changes greatly reduced the number of families 
in the study’s control group.
<<<PAGE=23>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 19 of 71 
   
 
their degree of vulnerability. These priority groups included indigenous peoples, Quilombolas, families 
with children in child labor situations, families with individuals working in situations of slavery, and 
recyclable material collectors, in that order. For example, once identified, indigenous families were 
enrolled in BF within 30 days. Furthermore, the MoC developed tailored guidance materials for traditional 
populations to facilitate their access to the benef it and financial inclusion through the new payment 
modality through banks. These materials were distributed to state coordinators who were in direct 
contact with these populations to support the dissemination of the program. The ministry organized 
‘Auxílio Brasil Journeys’ to disseminate information on the AB program and engage with local managers 
of Cadastro Único, who are responsible for enrolling and following up with AB beneficiaries. The MoC also 
conducted two surveys to identify the special needs of indigenous peoples for enrollment and to ensure 
their full participation in the AB program.  
46. The project surpassed , by a large margin , the disaggregated first PDI targets in the Results 
Framework related to vulnerable groups, mainly because of the larger -than-projected expansion of 
BF/AB. The disaggregated targets for the indicator “families who are maintained above extreme poverty 
program threshold with project financing (number)” were 1,800 indigenous women and 400 indigenous 
men and 1,100 women and 400 men from Quilombola communities. As of November 2022, actual values 
were as follows: 39,984 indigenous women, 24,190 indigenous men, and 35,365 women and 28,583 men 
from Quilombola communities. This overachievement was driven by the greater-than-expected expansion 
of BF/AB. 
47. Reporting on the intermediate indicators relating to the GRM was affected by some initial 
confusion on the definition.  As mentioned in the preceding section on M&E, th ere was some initial 
confusion on the definition of the GRM indicator, namely cases ‘resolved’. The project relied on the 
existing system of the MoC ombudsman ( ‘Ouvidoria’), regulated by Law 13.460/2017. The GRM -related 
target was that the Ouvidoria would resolve claims within 30 days (Cases from the BF program grievance 
redress mechanism resolved in 30 days.) However, as reported in the final ISR, according to the applicable 
legal regulation, the Ouvidoria was obligated to respond (address), but not necess arily resolve, an issue 
that had been raised because some cases required additional information to be provided.  In addition, 
citizens have the right to appeal, which could prolong the time required for total resolution of a case.  In 
addition, due to changes in the Ouvidoria information system during project implementation, it was not 
feasible to monitor cases specifically from the Quilombola individuals. Data on cases from the BF program 
grievance mechanism and their handling according to both definitions are contained in annex 1.B.  
48. The project complied with all fiduciary requirements. Since there were no procurement activities 
under the project, fiduciary requirements covered solely financial management. Fiduciary management 
was rated as Satisfactory throughout the duration of the project. All IFRs submitted were satisfactory, 
with only occasional small delays. Audit reports were unqualified by the auditors, acceptable to the World 
Bank, and received with only small delays. 
C. BANK PERFORMANCE 
Quality at Entry 
49. Quality at entry is rated Highly Satisfactory. The approach of the project to finance a horizontal 
expansion of BF by incorporating eligible families on the waiting list in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic
<<<PAGE=24>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 20 of 71 
   
 
was highly relevant for poverty reduction. The project was prepared at record speed, with Government 
request reaching financers in early April, a Regional Operations Committee Decision Review held in early 
July, and Operations Committee Decision Review in August 202027. The main delay in approval was due to 
protracted negotiations in the ESF documentation, introduced for the first time in Brazil with this project.28 
Robust technical and economic analysis, the handling of social safeguards, and financial management all 
built on the history of World Bank support for the development of BF and Cadastro Único from its 
inception in 2003 to 2018 through two lending operations (P087713 and P101504) and thereafter through 
ASA/TA services. Implementation arrangements were appropriately embedded in the existing structure 
of the MoC. As mentioned earlier , the assessment of risks skewed toward possible reductions in the BF 
budget and number of BF beneficiaries, the opposite of what occurred in practice. World Bank inputs and 
processes made a positive contribution to quality, for example, refining the PDOs and associated 
indicators, including explicit mention of the flexibility of the loan to accommodate additional eligible 
families and the incorporation of specific mechanisms to ensure that the loan would not finance 
expenditures covered by other donors. 
Quality of Supervision 
50. The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory. The focus of supervision was on the development 
impact of the project through the expansion of BF/AF as well as the resumption of monitoring of 
compliance with health and education conditions. The World Bank team also monitored financial 
management and ESF aspects closely and reported on developments in the ISRs. Four ISRs were prepared, 
sufficient given the 24-month project duration. Given the products available in the parallel ASA/TA, 
supervision inputs were well above the norm. Reporting on project performance was candid . The ISRs 
included reporting of changes in the country context including the extension of AE. The ISRs also included 
the issues around the delays in the resumption of monitoring of compliance with education and health 
conditionalities and the misunderstanding on the definition of the GRM indicator. World Bank staff were 
clear in the ISRs that the reforms in BF represented by AB and the expansion of the program beyond initial 
estimates did not pose a risk to the PDO. 
Justification of Overall Rating of Bank Performance 
51. The overall rating of  World Bank Performance is Satisfactory.  Based on the rating of Highly 
Satisfactory for quality at entry and Satisfactory for the quality of supervision, the overall rating for World 
Bank performance is Satisfactory. 
D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME 
52. The risk to development outcome is considered low.  The recently elected administration 
launched a reformulated Bolsa Familia Program on March 2, 2023.  The most important development in 
comparison with AB relates to the consolidation in a single budget line and a single program what used to 
be two benefits: Auxilio Brazil and ‘Beneficio Extraordinario’ (the top-up that significantly increased the 
AB value). The new BF thus resembles in structure and generosity the transfer that beneficiaries received 
 
27 The higher than average preparation costs noted in annex were due to incorrect posting of supervision staff time 
expenditures for some months after approval to the preparation code. 
28 This was the first investment project in Brazil since the adoption of the ESF, which was more comprehensive than the framework 
adopted by other donors, and this was also one of the first loans approved during the COVID-19 period.
<<<PAGE=25>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 21 of 71 
   
 
in 2022, as  do the institutional and implementation arrangements. Importantly, the centrality of 
monitoring compliance with health and education conditionalities and of following  up with families 
experiencing difficulties remains a principle of the new Bolsa Familia. One of the priorities recognized by 
the Ministry of Social Development (the renamed MoC) in the context of the current program is to renew 
efforts with municipalities to increase the share of children for whom compliance is monitored, including 
by restoring the value of block grants for the municipal social assistance network closer to pre-pandemic 
years in the next budget.  
53. The one risk, however, is that administrative budget for the new BF program had not matched 
its expansion  in 2023 . With a much larger number of beneficiaries, the new BF program reached an 
unprecedented scale, but the administrative budget in the last year  did not grow commensurably . The 
2023 budget was inherited from the previous administration and the current government recognized the 
importance of increasing investment in the central administrative structure, including delivery systems, 
Cadastro Único, and the social assistance network (this will likely pay for itself through reduced inclusion 
errors). 
V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
54. Investing in a solid social protection delivery system reduces the costs and time needed to roll 
out an efficient crisis response. Scaling up in time of need is far more feasible under those circumstances, 
and the prior inclusion of vulnerable families in the social registry, even if not all could be attended to, 
allowed to scale up BF quickly in the crisis.  
55. Maintaining a robust analytical program, policy dialogue and just-in-time TA can enable a strong 
and speedy response by the World Bank in case of a need for financing  as well as other benefits . The 
last World Bank project related to BF before this project had closed at the end of 2018. Nevertheless, 
because the World Bank had continued an active dialogue with the Government related to social 
protection, including BF, staff were able to respond quickly to the emergency need for financing given 
their strong knowledge, technical expertise, and history of cooperation with the MoC. TA can also play a 
strategic role by maintaining the policy dialogue across different administrations, helping to maintain the 
institutional memory, and contributing to the maintenance of effective programs and policies. 
56. Incorporating a mechanism to assess and accommodate changes which do not affect the project 
rationale can reduce possible delays and time spent restructuring the project. The World Bank team 
correctly anticipated that changes could occur in BF during project implementation and incorporated an 
assessment and approval mechanism within the Loan Agreement.  When the change occurred (the 
replacement of BF by AB), the World Bank team responded quickly, carried out an assessment in 
collaboration with  the Government, and maintained financing, avoiding interruptions and time to 
restructure the project.  
57. The definition and targets for indicators in the Results Framework need to be fully consistent 
with national regulations. As discussed in the sections o n M&E and compliance with social safeguards, 
the initial definition and thus the targets set for cases handled in the grievance redress system were not 
consistent with national regulations.
<<<PAGE=26>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 22 of 71 
   
 
58. Strong complementarity between W orld Bank-financed ASA, Government programming, and 
World Bank financing can serve to reduce the risk to development outcomes of the project. The 
diagnostics developed through ASA during the course of the project remain relevant to support 
implementation of the new  BF benefit. With an average benefit value above R$ 600, the program is 
expected to continue to receive high pressure in 2023 from potential applicants to enter and for existing 
beneficiaries to remain. Continued analysis of benefit incentive design and mo nitoring of 
sociodemographic characteristics of beneficiaries and households will be important to identify incentive 
issues that could be corrected through further parametric changes.  
59. The prospect of receiving high-quality tailored TA can be a major facto r leading a government 
to seek financing by the World Bank. Clients can access a range of development financing options, such 
as those mobilized during the COVID -19 pandemic, at similar conditions of those offered by the World 
Bank. World Bank teams ’ acces s to resources , including through trust fund s and EFOs , which allows 
supporting borrowers via ASAs for important reforms has proven important for the World Bank to remain 
a partner of choice in middle-income countries.  
60. Clients can coordinate donors financing for common crisis response. The Government guidance 
to all development banks to prepare their operation  under a single  project financing proposal (Carta 
Consulta) generated a collaborative dynamic . In this environment, the World Bank was able to take the 
lead in several operational aspects that generated efficiency, included IFRs, draft audit terms of reference, 
and a Results Framework followed by at least two other organizations.  
 
 
 .
<<<PAGE=27>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 23 of 71 
   
 
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS 
 
 
 
     
 
A. RESULTS INDICATORS 
 
A.1 PDO Indicators 
  
 
  
 Objective/Outcome: Mitigate negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on income of poor families 
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Families who are maintained 
above extreme poverty 
program threshold with 
project financing 
Number 0.00 1,200,000.00  9,959,838.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Indigenous Female 
Number 0.00 1,800.00  39,984.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Number 0.00 400.00  24,190.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022
<<<PAGE=28>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 24 of 71 
   
 
 
Indigenous Male 
 
  
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Quilombola Female 
Number 0.00 1,100.00  35,365.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Quilombola Male 
Number 0.00 400.00  28,583.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Other Groups Female 
Number 0.00 936,300.00  7,078,828.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Families who are 
maintained above extreme 
poverty program threshold 
with project financing - 
Other Groups Male 
Number 0.00 233,000.00  2,752,888.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):
<<<PAGE=29>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 25 of 71 
   
 
 
   
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Mean income support 
received with project 
financing by families as a 
share of the income at the 
time of application 
Percentage 0.00 55.00  53.32 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):  
 
    
 Objective/Outcome: Mitigate risks of negative economic effects of COVID-19 on human capital of poor families 
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Children 6-17 benefiting from 
CCT with project financing, 
whose school attendance is 
being monitored by the 
program 
Percentage 0.00 85.00  70.56 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Children 6-17 benefiting 
from CCT with project 
financing, whose school 
attendance is being 
monitored by the program - 
Indigenous 
Percentage 0.00 85.00  63.32 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022
<<<PAGE=30>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 26 of 71 
   
 
 
Children 6-17 benefiting 
from CCT with project 
financing, whose school 
attendance is being 
monitored by the program - 
Quilombola 
Percentage 0.00 85.00  76.30 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Children 6-17 benefiting 
from CCT with project 
financing, whose school 
attendance is being 
monitored by the program - 
Other groups 
Percentage 0.00 85.00  70.61 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):  
 
   
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Children under 7 years old 
benefiting from CCT with 
project financing, who are 
being monitored by the 
program for compliance with 
health checkups 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  45.32 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Children under 7 years old 
benefiting from CCT with 
project financing, who are 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  45.24 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022
<<<PAGE=31>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 27 of 71 
   
 
 
being monitored by the 
program for compliance 
with health checkups - 
Indigenous 
 
  
Children under 7 years old 
benefiting from CCT with 
project financing, who are 
being monitored by the 
program for compliance 
with health checkups - 
Quilombola 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  59.81 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Children under 7 years old 
benefiting from CCT with 
project financing, who are 
being monitored by the 
program for compliance 
with health checkups - 
Other groups 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  45.18 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):  
 
 
 
 
A.2 Intermediate Results Indicators     
 Component: Conditional Cash Transfers for poor and extreme poor families 
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  Actual Achieved at
<<<PAGE=32>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 28 of 71 
   
 
 
Target Completion 
Beneficiaries of social safety 
net programs 
Number 0.00 2,900,000.00  20,252,936.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Beneficiaries of social safety 
net programs - Female 
Number 0.00 2,320,000.00  11,556,819.00 
     
 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):  
 
   
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Cases from the BF program 
grievance redress 
mechanism resolved in 30 
days 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  93.98 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
Cases from the BF program 
grievance redress 
mechanism resolved in 30 
days - Indigenous 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  100.00 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
  
Cases from the BF program 
grievance redress 
mechanism resolved in 30 
days - Quilombolas 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  0.00 
 30-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022
<<<PAGE=33>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 29 of 71 
   
 
 
Cases from the BF program 
grievance redress 
mechanism resolved in 30 
days - Other groups 
Percentage 0.00 60.00  93.80 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Dec-2022 
 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):  
 
   
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target Formally Revised  
Target 
Actual Achieved at 
Completion 
Adoption and improvement 
of communication strategies 
with specific channels for 
vulnerable groups of BF, 
which increase awareness of 
the availability of Fala BR for 
claims related to BF 
Yes/No No Yes  Yes 
 31-Mar-2020 30-Dec-2022  30-Jun-2022 
 
Comments (achievements against targets):
<<<PAGE=34>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 30 of 71 
   
 
B. KEY OUTPUTS BY COMPONENT 
 
Objective/Outcome 1 Mitigate negative economic effects associated with COVID-19 on income of poor families 
 Outcome Indicators 
1. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing 
The December 2022 value (9,959,838) significantly exceeded the 
target of 1.2 million. 
2. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (indigenous female) 
The December 2022 value (39,984) signficantly exceeded the target 
of 1,800. 
2. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (indigenous male) 
The December 2022 value (24,190) signifcantly exceeded the target 
of 400. 
3. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (Quilombolas female) 
The December 2022 value (35,365) significantly exceeded the trget 
of 1,100. 
4. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (Quilombolas male) 
The December 2022 value (28,583) significantly exceeded the target 
of 400. 
5. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (other groups female)
<<<PAGE=35>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 31 of 71 
   
 
The December 2022 value (7,078,828) significantly exceeded the 
target of 936,300. 
6. Families who are maintained above extreme poverty program 
threshold with project financing (other groups male) 
The December 2022 value (2,752,888) significantly exceeded the 
target of 233,000. 
2. Mean income support received with project financing by families 
as a share of the income at the time of application 
The December 2022 value (53.32 percent) represented a 97% 
achievement of the target of 55 percent. 
Intermediate Results Indicators 
1. Beneficiaries of social safety net programs 
The December 2022 value (20,252,936) surpassed by a large margin 
the target of 2,900,000. 
2. Beneficiaries of social safety net programs (females) 
While the December 2022 value (11,556,819) was surpassed by a large 
margin the target of 2,320,000, the proportion of female beneficiaries 
(57 percent) is less than the share implied in the target (80 percent) 
due to a change in eligibility criteria for the AB program. 
3. Cases from the BF program grievance redress mechanism resolved 
in 30 days 
As of December 2022, 93.98 percent of cases were responded to 
within 30 days. 
As of June 2022, 41 percent of cases were resolved within 30 days. 
Cases from the BF program grievance redress mechanism resolved in 
30 days (Indigenous)
<<<PAGE=36>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 32 of 71 
   
 
As of December 2022, 100 percent of cases from BF program 
indigenous beneficiaries were responded to within 30 days 
As of June 2022, 38 percent of cases from BF program for indigenous 
beneficiaries were resolved within 30 days. 
Cases from the BF program greivance redress mechanism resolved in 
30 days (Quilombolas) 
Because of a change in the grievance redress mechanism system it 
was not possible to monitor cases from Quilombolas beneficiaries. 
Cases from the BF program greivance redress mechanism resolved in 
30 days (other groups) 
As of December 2022, 93.8 percent of cases were responded to in 30 
days for BF beneficiaries of “other groups”. 
As of June 2022, 42 percent of cases were resolved within 30 days for 
BF beneficiaries of “other groups”. 
7. Adoption and improvement of communication strategies with 
specific channels for vulnerable groups of BF, which increase 
awareness of the availability of Fala BR for claims related to BF 
Improved communication strategies were adopted. 
Key Outputs by Component 
(linked to the achievement of the Objective/Outcome 1) 
Component 1 
1. Cash Transfers paid to BF/AB beneficiary families. 
2. Applicants’ complaints and questions are answered (See 
intermediate indicators 3-6 above). 
3. Improved communications strategy adapted for vulnerable groups 
of BF implemented.
<<<PAGE=37>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 33 of 71 
   
 
Objective/Outcome 2 Mitigate risks of negative economic effects of COVID-19 on human capital of poor families 
 Outcome Indicators 
1. Children 6-17 benefiting from CCT with project financing, whose 
school attendance is being monitored by the program 
The December 2022 value (referring to 3rd period 2022) was 70.56 
percent, below the target of 85 percent. 
2.Children 6-17 benefiting from CCT with project financing, whose 
school attendance is being monitored by the program (Indigenous) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 3rd period 2022) was 63.32 
percent, below the target of 85 percent. 
3. Children 6-17 benefiting from CCT with project financing, whose 
school attendance is being monitored by the program (Quilombolas) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 3rd period 2022) was 76.3 
percent, below the target of 85 percent. 
4. Children 6-17 benefiting from CCT with project financing, whose 
school attendance is being monitored by the program (Other groups) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 3rd period 2022) was 70.61 
percent, below the target of 85 percent). 
5. Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with project 
financing, who are being monitored by the program for compliance 
with health checkups 
The December 2022 value (referring to 1st period 2022) was 45.32 
percent, below the target of 60 percent. 
6. Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with project 
financing, who are being monitored by the program for compliance 
with health checkups (Indigenous) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 1st period 2022) was 45.24 
percent, below the target of 60 percent.
<<<PAGE=38>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 34 of 71 
   
 
7. Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with project 
financing, who are being monitored by the program for compliance 
with health checkups (Quilombolas) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 1st period 2022) was 59.81 
percent, virtually meeting the target of 60 percent. 
8. Children under 7 years old benefiting from CCT with project 
financing, who are being monitored by the program for compliance 
with health checkups (other groups) 
The December 2022 value (referring to 1st period 2022) was 45.18, 
below the target of 60 percent. 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators N/A 
Key Outputs by Component 
(linked to the achievement of the Objective/Outcome 2) 
Component 1  
1. Cash transfers paid to BF/AB families 
2. Compliance monitoring system for health and education 
conditionalities in operation
<<<PAGE=39>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 35 of 71 
   
 
 
ANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION 
 
TASK TEAM MEMBERS 
 
Name Role 
Preparation 
Matteo Morgandi, Liliana Do Couto Sousa Task Team Leader(s) 
Sinue Aliram De Souza Procurement Specialist(s) 
Fernanda Balduino de Oliveira Financial Management Specialist 
Katharina Maria Fietz Team Member 
Fabio Saia Cereda Team Member 
Matheus De Mello de Assuncao Team Member 
Maria Ines Miranda Ramos Environmental Specialist 
Barbara Segato Monteiro Team Member 
Federico Antonio Beckley Gonzalez Team Member 
Rafael Amaral Ornelas Team Member 
Fabiano Silvio Colbano Team Member 
Gabriela Geraldes Bastos Team Member 
Miriam Muller Team Member 
Augusto Ferreira Mendonca Environmental Specialist 
Gabriel Lara Ibarra Team Member 
Pablo Ariel Acosta Team Member 
Rafael Munoz Moreno Team Member 
Graciela Sanchez Martinez Social Specialist 
L. Keta Ruiz Team Member
<<<PAGE=40>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 36 of 71 
   
 
Supervision/ICR 
Matteo Morgandi Task Team Leader 
Gabriel Lara Ibarra Task team Leader 
Fernanda Balduino de Oliveira Financial Management Specialist 
Silmara Moreira Da Silva Financial Management Specialist 
Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa Social Specialist 
Pablo Ariel Acosta Program Leader 
Augusto Ferreira Mendonca Environmental Specialist 
Tiago Falcao Silva Team Member 
Federico Antonio Beckley Gonzalez Team Member, Program Assistant 
Barbara Segato Monteiro Team Member, Program Assistant 
Caio Cicero De Toledo Piza  Impact Evaluation lead 
Rafael Dantas Impact Evaluation consultant 
Theresa Penelope Jones ICR Lead author 
Tamires Amorim ICR Social Protection consultant 
Ricardo Campante Vale ICR Poverty consultant 
                  
 
       
 
A. STAFF TIME AND COST 
  
Stage of Project Cycle 
Staff Time and Cost 
No. of staff weeks US$ (including travel and consultant costs) 
Preparation 
FY20 8.223 49,067.39 
FY21 88.340 390,690.07 
FY22 0    0.00 
Total 96.56 439,757.46  
Supervision/ICR 
FY21 11.850 49,905.11
<<<PAGE=41>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 37 of 71 
   
 
FY22 57.178 270,558.15 
FY23 22.571 161,058.94 
Total 91.60 481,522.20
<<<PAGE=42>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 38 of 71 
   
 
ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT 
 
Components 
Amount at 
Approval 
(US$, millions) 
Actual at Project 
Closing 
(US$, millions) 
Percentage of 
Approval 
Conditional Cash Transfers for poor and 
extreme poor families 997.50 997.50 100 
Total 997.50 997.50 100
<<<PAGE=43>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 39 of 71 
   
 
ANNEX 4. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
 
1. This annex presents an update of the economic analysis conducted at preparation ; it estimates 
the impacts of the financed program on poverty reduction and assesses its targeting efficiency through a 
fiscal incidence analysis.  
2. The BF program has long been considered one of the most progressive fiscal policies in Brazil . 
Higgins and Pe reira29 (2014) estimated its concentration coefficient was −0.58 using Household Budget 
Survey (Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares  - POF) 2008/2009 data, the most progressive policy in the 
country among cash and in -kind transfers, direct taxes, and indirect taxes. Silveira and Palomo 30 (2023), 
using the more recent POF 2017/2018, reiterate the earlier finding. They also suggest that BF was one of 
the main factors driving the decrease in inequality in the 2000s. Finally, Lara Ibarra et al.31 (forthcoming), 
building upon PNADC 2019 data, estimated BF’s marginal contribution to inequality reduction was equal 
to 0.011 Gini points, while it was 0 .4 percentage points on poverty reduction, one of the most pro -poor 
policies in Brazil. 
Figure 4.1. Share of Benefits of BF/AB by Decile of Pre-
BF Income 
 
Figure 4. 2. Average Per Capita Benefit by Decile of 
Pre-BF Income 
 
Source: PNAD-C 2022.  
Note: The period of analysis was restricted to the first semester —when the World Bank’s financing was in place. 
Pre-BF income is defined by household’s income (without BF transfers) per capita.  
3. Specific to the period covered by the project, the recently released PNADC 2022 data suggest 
that BF’s successor, AB, maintained very strong targeting performance , despite experiencing a rapid 
 
29 Higgins, S ean, and Claudiney Pereira. 2014. “The Effects of Brazil’s Taxation and Social Spending on the Distribution of 
Household Income.” Public Finance Review 42 (3): 346–367. 
30 Silveira, Fernando Gaiger, and Theo Ribas Palomo. 2023. “The Brazilian State’s Redistributive Role: Changes and Persistence at 
the Beginning of the 21st Century.” Discussion Paper/Institute for Applied Economic Research (IPEA). 
31 Lara Ibarra, G., M. Cabrera, O. Conceição, and R. Campante Vale. Forthcoming. “Poverty and Inequality Implications of Fiscal 
Policies: The Case of Brazil.” 
37%
24%
16%
9% 8%
3% 2% 1% 1% 0%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
<<<PAGE=44>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 40 of 71 
   
 
growth in coverage , and Bolsa Familia remains among the programs in Latin America with the best 
targeting performance, despite being larger than most programs. The survey data suggest that in 2022, 
over three-fourth of beneficiaries (76 percent) were in the bottom 30 percent of the population and 86 
percent of beneficiaries were in the bottom 40 percent . This denotes only a minor deterioration in  
targeting performance compared to the one  observed in the 2019 national household panel survey (86 
percent versus 89 percent),32 though the number of beneficiaries in 2019 was about sixty five percent 
smaller. Moreover, when comparing Brazil with other CCT programs in Latin America, it is also important 
to highlight how Bolsa Familia continues to be among the programs wi th highest quality of targeting, 
according to estimates based on harmonized household surveys and methodology in the World Bank Atlas 
for Social Protection (ASPIRE), while also being one of the programs with the highest level of coverage of 
the population (Table 4.1) 
Table 4.1. Distribution of Conditional Cash Transfer Beneficiaries by Quintiles of Pre-Transfer Welfare and 
Coverage 
Country Program Year Targeting Coverage Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 
Panama Red de Oportunidades; SENAPAN 2019 83 13 2 2 0 6 
Peru Programa Juntos 2019 65 23 8 3 1 12 
Brazil Bolsa Familia 2019 64 26 8 2 0 18 
El 
Salvador 
Comunidades Solidarias Rurales; 
Comunidades Solidarias Urbanas 2019 62 23 9 5 1 1 
 
Paraguay Tekopora 2019 57 27 14 3 0 11 
Uruguay Asignaciones Familiares 2019 56 28 11 4 1 25 
Ecuador Bono de Desarrollo Humano 2019 51 25 14 7 2 20 
Costa Rica Ayuda monetaria IMAS 2019 49 31 16 4 0 18 
Colombia Jóvenes en Acción 2019 49 29 15 6 1 15 
Mexico Prospera (Oportunidades, Progresa) 2018 47 26 16 8 2 21 
Honduras Bonos PRAF; Bono Vida Mejor 2017 47 29 14 6 4 13 
Chile 
Subsidio Familiar (SUF); Bono de 
Protección Familiar y de Egreso; Bono por 
control del niño sano; Bono por asistencia 
escolar; Bono por logro escolar 
2017 43 28 15 8 5 17 
Jamaica Programme of Advancement Through 
Health and Education (PATH) 2017 35 29 18 14 3 28 
Bolivia Bono Juancito Pinto; Bono Juana 
Azurduy_madre; Bono Juana Azurduy_hijo 2019 27 25 22 18 8 57 
Dominican 
Republic 
Incentivo a la Asistencia Escolar; Bono 
Escolar Estudiando Progreso; Incentivo a la 
Educacion Superior, con Tarjeta Solidaridad 
2019 27 24 23 18 8 26 
Source: ASPIRE - www.worldbank.org/aspire. 
Notes: Coverage is: (Number of individuals in a given group [i.e. total population or poorest quintile] who live in a 
household where at least one member receives the transfer)/(Number of individuals in the group) The poorest 
quintile is calculated using per capita pre-transfer welfare (income or consumption). 
 
 
 
32 The Continuous National Household Sample Survey (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra do Domicílios - Contínua (PNAD-C)).
<<<PAGE=45>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 41 of 71 
   
 
4. Comparing this with the program eligibility rules, 78.2 percent of the reported beneficiaries had 
their pre-BF income below the national social registry (Cadastro Único) eligibility line (R$606 per capita in 
2022). Moreover, the Cadastro Único eligibility line is very close to R$599, the value estimated (in 2022 
prices) as the poverty line using the cost of basic needs approach with the most recent data available for 
Brazil (Lara Ibarra, Paffhausen , and Duque 2021 33). When translated in international terms,  Cadastro 
Único’s eligibility line corresponds roughly to the 6.85 US  dollar per day 2017 purchasing power parity 
(PPP) poverty line used for upper-middle-income countries. 
5. Simulations using BraSIM (the same tool used at appraisal) suggest that the benefits from the 
program led to a decrease in poverty in 2022. The outcomes of a microsimulation based on the PNADC 
household data suggest that 1.1 million people would fall into extreme poverty in the absence of the 
children and youth benefits. Without the full program, the extreme poverty rate would increase, by 3.6 
percentage points, from an estimated 6.6 percent baseline. The increase is equivalent to 7.7 million more 
individuals in extreme poverty. 
Table 4.2. Microsimulations on the Impacts of the Program 
Simulation Poverty Rate 
(%) 
Extreme Poverty Rate 
(%) 
Full program 27.6 6.7 
Subtracting early childhood and youth components only 27.7 7.2 
Subtracting BE only 29.0 9.7 
Subtracting the Full Program 29.2 10.3 
Source: BraSim 2.0 simulations prepared by the World Bank Poverty team.  
Note: Poverty rate calculated at half a minimum wage per capita (R$606) and extreme poverty at AB upper 
eligibility line (R$210). 
6. Survey data from 2022 provide suggestive evidence th at there were no negative impacts on 
beneficiaries’ attachment to the labor market . Among families earning less than R$210 per capita, 
individuals in the working -age population in BF families showed similar labor force participation rates 
(43.7 percent) and those in non -BF families (44.9 percent), while their employment rates were higher: 
26.8 percent and 17.8 percent, respectively. 
Table 4.3. Employment and Unemployment Statistics among Beneficiaries and Non-Beneficiaries (%) 
  Unemployment Rate Employment Rate Labor Force Participation Rate 
Other extreme poor 60.3 17.8 44.9 
BF family 38.7 26.8 43.7 
Total 45.0 24.3 44.1 
Source: PNADC 2022.  
Note: The period of analysis was restricted to the first semester of 2022 —when the World Bank’s financing was 
in place. Extreme poor are defined as those whose household per capita income (before BF benefits) are below 
the program line (R$210). Statistics based on population ages 15 to 64. 
 
 
33 Lara Ibarra, Gabriel, Anna Luisa Paffhausen, and Daniel Duque. 2021. “Estimating a Poverty Line for Brazil Based on the 
2017/18 Household Budget Survey.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 9878, World Bank, Washington, DC.
<<<PAGE=46>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 42 of 71 
   
 
 
ANNEX 5. BORROWER COMPLETION REPORT 
 
 
ImplementationCompletio
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
IBRD LOAN AGREEMENT 9172-BR:  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor  
Affected by COVID-19 Project  
  
Implementation Completion Report   
  
Ministry of Development and Social Assistance,  
Family and Fight against Hunger
<<<PAGE=47>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 43 of 71 
   
 
BRAZIL  
  
  
FINAL PROJECT REPORT 
 
Implementation Completion Report (ICR): Government 
 
“BRAZIL: INCOME SUPPORT FOR THE POOR AFFECTED BY COVID-19 PROJECT – 9172 – BR" 
 
Ministry of Development and Social Assistance, Family and Fight against Hunger (MDS)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brasília, February 2023.
<<<PAGE=48>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 44 of 71 
   
 
Summary  
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................. 44 
2. BRAZIL: INCOME SUPPORT FOR THE POOR AFFECTED BY COVID-19 PROJECT ............................................. 45 
2.1. RATIONALE FOR THE OPERATION .............................................................................................................45 
3. THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (IBRD) PROJECT ........................ 48 
3.1. IBRD LOAN AGREEMENT .............................................................................................................................48 
3.2. PROJECT OBJECTIVE.....................................................................................................................................48 
4. ASSESSMENT OF THE OPERATION'S RESULTS .............................................................................................. 49 
4.1. COMPONENT .................................................................................................................................................49 
4.2. DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS MATRIX .......................................................................................................50 
4.3. ESTABLISHED TARGETS ..............................................................................................................................52 
4.4. NON-REIMBURSABLE TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICES: WORLD BANK STUDIES IN PARTNERSHIP 
WITH THE IDB AND AFD .........................................................................................................................................55 
4.5. OTHER ACTIONS PRODUCED BY THE PARTNERSHIP ...............................................................................59 
5. ASSESSMENT OF THE MINISTRY'S PERFORMANCE DURING THE PREPARATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF 
THE OPERATION .................................................................................................................................................. 60 
5.1. LESSONS LEARNED .......................................................................................................................................60 
6. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE IBRD PROJECT ....................................................................................... 63 
7. PROJECT SUSTAINABILITY........................................................................................................................... 65 
8. AUDIT .......................................................................................................................................................... 66 
9. KEY TEAM: INDIVIDUALS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PROJECT ......................................................................... 66 
9.1. MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE, FAMILY AND FIGHT AGAINST HUNGER ......66 
10. ANNEX ......................................................................................................................................................... 67 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
This is a Final Progress Report, known to the funder as an Implementation Completion Report 
(ICR): Government, provided for in Loan Agreement No. 9172-BR-IBRD between the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the Federative Repub lic of Brazil, within 
the scope of the Brazil: Income Support for the Poor Affected by COVID-19 Project, which seeks to 
mitigate the negative economic effects associated with COVID -19 on income and the risks of it
<<<PAGE=49>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 45 of 71 
   
 
harming the human capital of poor households.  
 
The Loan Agreement signed on June 17, 2021, between the Federative Republic of Brazil, 
represented by the Ministry of Economy, and the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD) was in the amount of USD 1,000,000,000 (one billion US  dollars) to help 
finance the Programa Bolsa Família Expansion component carried out by the then Ministry of 
Citizenship, which has since been renamed to Ministry of Development and Social Assistance, 
Family and Fight against Hunger - MDS.  
 
This report en compasses the entire project implementation period until its completion. The 
Indicators Matrix is included as an annex to this report and covers the half-yearly reference period, 
with calculations using as reference the period from July to December 2022, a nd includes 
historical data from previous semesters.  
2. BRAZIL: INCOME SUPPORT FOR THE POOR AFFECTED BY COVID-19 PROJECT  
2.1. RATIONALE FOR THE OPERATION  
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) categorized COVID -19 - a disease 
caused by the novel Coronavirus (2019-n-CoV) that affects the respiratory tract - as a pandemic, 
after having declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).  
 
The necessary measures to slow down the spread of contamination by COVID -19, prevent the 
collapse of the health system and preserve lives directly affected the country's low -income 
population, as this was the segment of the population with the highest numbers of precarious and 
informal jobs and self -employed workers in the country. Faced with th e need to socially isolate, 
these workers became unemployed or were prevented from working. The Brazilian Government 
had to enact measures to ensure the social protection for these workers so they would be able to 
support themselves and their families while subjected to the collective health measures imposed 
on the population - particularly social isolation.  
 
With the aim of affording emergency social protection to informal workers and others affected by 
the economic crisis prompted by the novel Coronavirus, as well as contributing to collective health 
measures so that these workers could engage in social isolation without losing all of their income, 
the President of Brazil sanctioned Law 13,982 of April 2, 2020, which amended Law 8,742 of 
December 7, 1993,  to provide for additional parameters in defining the condition of social 
vulnerability for the purpose of eligibility to the Continuous Welfare Benefit for the Elderly and 
Disabled ( Benefício de Prestação Continuada , BPC) and establish exceptional social protection 
measures to be put in place during the span of the public health emergency of international 
concern stemming from the novel Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) that caused the 2019 outbreak, 
as referred to in Law 13,979 of February 6, 2020”.  
 
While distancing and isolation measures were indeed needed from a public health perspective, 
they also had immediate economic impacts and lasting consequences on countries. The behavioral 
changes needed to curb the transmission of COVID -19 were strongly influenced by the decisions 
of governments (to close schools, cancel public events, etc.), companies and institutions (to 
transition to a work-from-home model, adjust production levels, etc.) and consumers (to reduce
<<<PAGE=50>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 46 of 71 
   
 
social contact). Such changes led to a very significant economic contraction, with both immediate 
and long-term effects.  
 
In this sense, with a view to protecting the income of informal and self-employed workers during 
the pandemic, the government passed Law 13,982 of April 2, 2020, to create the Emer gency Aid 
initiative, meant to protect the workers most severely impacted by the economic effects of the 
COVID-19 pandemic - i.e., informal workers, Individual Microentrepreneurs and individual 
contributors to the general pension system for private sector workers ( Regime Geral da 
Previdência Social, RGPS).  
 
In view of the need to quickly implement actions to respond to the COVID -19 pandemic and its 
strong economic impact, the Brazilian Government sought credit from international institutions. 
This led to the creation of the Brazil: Income Support for the Poor  Affected by COVID-19 Project, 
aimed at contributing to and ensuring minimum levels of quality of life for vulnerable people in 
the face of the labor market crisis caused by COVID -19. The project supported and encouraged 
actions put in place by the Ministr y of Economy in priority areas to combat the economic effects 
of the pandemic.  
 
The Project was submitted for evaluation to the External Financing Commission ( Comissão de 
Financiamento Externo, COFIEX) by means of a Consultation Letter with a request for financing 
entirely with external funds, without any counterpart funding from the Brazilian Government. The 
financing operation was approved by COFIEX on May 25, 2020, by means of Resolution 1, and 
published in the Federal Official Gazette on May 29, 2020, in Section 1, Page 176 . The MDS, then 
known as the Ministry of Citizenship, was included and authorized as Program Executor by 
COFIEX Resolution 22 of July 29, 2020 (9003111), without prejudice to the other terms of 
Resolution 1.  
 
Funding was granted by the following financial institutions:  
 
• French Development Agency (AFD)  
• Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)  
• International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)  
• Andean Development Corporation (CAF)  
• KfW Entwicklungsbank (KfW)    
• New Development Bank (NDB).  
 
These financing institutions were chosen for having significant funding readily available for 
loaning, as well as for their broad expertise in executing and supporting highly complex projects 
that required increased technical and institutional capacity, skills and information, in addition to 
international references and experience. The MDS, then known as the Ministry of Citizenship, 
served as the beneficiary of all the financiers, with the exception of CAF, which reimbursed the  
expenses of the component under the scope of the Ministry of Economy (Ministério da Economia), 
now called the Ministry of Finance (Ministério da Fazenda).  
 
The Program was structured into four components, in accordance with Consultation Letter No.
<<<PAGE=51>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 47 of 71 
   
 
60723 (8832287):  
 
• Component 1: Emergency Basic Income  
• Component 2: Programa Bolsa Família Expansion  
• Component 3: Emergency Employment and Income Maintenance Program  
• Component 4: Unemployment Insurance Program  
Under this component structure, the Ministry of Citizenship would execute Components 1 and 2, 
and the Ministry of Economy would execute Components 3 and 4.  
  
Institution  Component  Target 
Population  
Amount  CURRENCY  
International Bank for 
Reconstruction and  
Development (IBRD);  
Bolsa Famí lia  Expansion  $ 1,000,000,000.00  US DOLLAR  
Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB)  
Emergency  
Aid  
Unified 
Registry  
$ 400,000,000.00  US DOLLAR  
Bolsa Famí lia  Inventory  $ 200,000,000.00  US DOLLAR  
New Development Bank (NDB)  Emergency  
Aid  
2020  
ExtraCad 
(App)  
$ 1,000,000,000.00  US DOLLAR  
French Development  
Agency (AFD)  
Emergency  
Aid 2020  
Bolsa Famí lia  € 130,000,000.00  EURO  
Bolsa Famí lia  Inventory  € 70,000,000.00  EURO  
KfW Entwicklungsbank (KfW)  Bolsa Famí lia  Inventory  € 350,000,000.00  EURO  
*Inventory: Number of beneficiary households before the pandemic (Ref.: PBF Payroll - March 2020)  
The distribution among funders of the estimated reimbursement of expenses incurred by each 
component was planned carefully to ensure no overlap in fund alloc ation, directing them to 
different target audiences and different payment installments.  
 
Resources Allocation 
Timeline of Refinancing of Program Expenditures by Funders  Allocation
<<<PAGE=52>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 48 of 71 
   
 
3. THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (IBRD) 
PROJECT  
3.1. IBRD LOAN AGREEMENT  
Prior to the signing of the Agreement with the IBRD, pre-negotiations took place from September 
24 to 30, 2020, and a negotiation mission occurred on October 1 and 2, 2020, with representatives 
of the Ministry of Citizenship (MC), the Office of the General Counsel for the National Treasury 
(Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional , PGFN/ME), the National Treasury Secretariat 
(Secretaria do Tesouro Nacional , STN/ME) and the International Economic Affairs Secretariat 
(Secretaria de Assuntos Econômicos Internacionais , SAIN/ME), as well as representatives of the 
IBRD. From the core team of the then-called Ministry of Citizenship, the meeting was attended by 
representatives from the Executive Secretariat, the Directorate o f International Affairs, the Legal 
Team, the National Secretariat of Citizenship Income (Secretaria Nacional de Renda de Cidadania, 
SENARC) and the General Coordination of Technical Cooperation, which at the time was part of 
the Secretariat for the Managem ent of Funds and Transfers ( Secretaria de Gestão de Fundos e 
Transferências, SGFT) under the Executive Secretariat.  
 
The Loan Agreement was signed on June 17, 2021, by and between the Federative Republic of 
Brazil and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) of the World Bank 
Group, for a global amount of US$ 1 billion, entirely financed by the Bank and executed until 
December 31, 2022.  
 
The Project funded conditional cash transfers to at least 1.2 million households (approximately 3 
million individuals in total) who were added to Programa Bolsa Família (PBF)/Programa Auxílio 
Brasil (PAB) in response to the COVID-19 crisis.  
 
It should be noted that, during the course of the referred project and due to the projected post -
pandemic scenario, Programa Bolsa Família (PBF) was extinguished by Provisional Presidential 
Decree 1,061 of August 9, passed into Law 14,284, Article 1, of December 29, 20 21. Programa 
Auxílio Brasil (PAB) was then created and replaced Programa Bolsa Família for all legal purposes 
and also in Loan Agreement No. 9127 – BR – IBRD. Thus, as of November 2021, PBF beneficiaries 
began to receive PAB benefits instead.  
 
The Project continued the Bank's long-standing partnership and operational support commitment 
to the Ministry regarding the development of the Unified Registry and Programa Bolsa Família 
until 2018, including analytical work led by the World Bank on social protection  in Brazil, which 
included Programa Bolsa Família. From the creation of Programa Bolsa Família in 2003 until 2018, 
the World Bank supported the development of PBF and the delivery infrastructure of the current 
Social Assistance System via the First Bolsa F amília Adaptable Program Loan (P087713) and, 
between 2012 and 2018, via the Second Bolsa Família Project (P101504).  
 
3.2. PROJECT OBJECTIVE  
The Project's Development Objective was to mitigate the negative economic effects associated 
with COVID-19 on the income and human capital of poor households, by financing the expansion 
of PBF/PAB to include eligible households that had not been covered by the Program before 
COVID-19.
<<<PAGE=53>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 49 of 71 
   
 
 
The health crisis caused by the COVID -19 pandemic was partially mitigated once vaccinat ion 
shifted into gear. Growth had recovered by 2021, but the scenario remained uncertain. Going into 
2022, it was expected that better control over the pandemic and the lifting of social distancing 
measures would continue to improve economic outcomes. Howe ver, the war waged by Russia in 
the Ukraine has affected global value chains and, by consequence, Brazil's economy. Domestic 
uncertainties about an upcoming - and highly polarized - election held back investment.  
 
It must be noted that the objective of th e operation remained of the utmost relevance even after 
the project with the World Bank had come to an end, as the pandemic has left behind lessons and 
long-term challenges for Brazil's population.  
4. ASSESSMENT OF THE OPERATION'S RESULTS  
4.1. COMPONENT  
The External Credit Operation included as a COMPONENT the Programa Bolsa Família conditional 
cash transfer program (PBF), later replaced by Programa Auxílio Brasil (PAB), and financed part 
of the transfers to poor and extremely poor households. The Project's sole component funded the 
Program's countercyclical expansion in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. PBF/PAB expansion 
is defined as all households eligible for PBF/PAB in addition to the 13.05 million households who 
were already in the program prior to the expansion. By April 2020, the expansion included 1.2 
million households (2.9 million individuals) amongst the poorest and most socially vulnerable in 
Brazil. The component also financed the inclusion of new households in the PBF/PAB, amounting 
to a total of 1.2 million households.  
 
Approximately 990,000 beneficiaries were children and youths who received financial support 
and had their school attendance and use of health services monitored as required by PBF 
protocols, which remained in place after the transition to PAB. These households had applied for 
- and had been considered eligible for - the PBF prior to the COVID -19 crisis but had not been 
receiving the benefit due to budget constraints that limited the program's growth. The component 
refers to t he reimbursement of federal government expenses with part of the conditional cash 
transfers in Programa Bolsa Família and its successor, Programa Auxílio Brasil, under the 
coordination, management and operation of this Ministry.  
 
Exceptional social protection measures were instituted to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on 
the most vulnerable segments of the population, the main ones being the Emergency Aid (paid 
from April to August 2020), the Residual Emergency Aid (paid from September to December 2020) 
and the Emergency Aid 2021 (paid from April to October 2021).  
 
When the Emergency Aid came to an end, the government decided to establish a new Program, 
entitled Programa Auxílio Brasil (PAB), by means of Provisional Presidential Decree 1,061 of 
August 9, 2021, which was passed into Law 14,284 on December 29, 2021.  
 
Provisional Presidential Decree 1,076, of 12/07/2021, converted into Law no. 14,342 on 
05/18/2022, added the Extraordinary Benefit to the basket of benefits. Intended for PAB 
beneficiary households, said benefit was equivalent to the amount necessary to re ach R$ 400.00
<<<PAGE=54>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 50 of 71 
   
 
transferred to each beneficiary household; as such, it is calculated as the sum of BPI, BCF, BSP and 
BComp benefits in the reference month.  
 
Additionally, Constitutional Amendment 123/2022, Art. 5, item I expanded Programa Auxílio 
Brasil to beneficiary households and provided for an extraordinary monthly add-on extending to 
December/2022 in the amount of R$ 200.00 (two hundred reais), spanning from August 1 to 
December 31, 2022, thus ensuring a minimum R$600.00 transfer to each household registered in 
the Program.  
 
4.2. DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS MATRIX  
The Ministry of Citizenship (as it was called at the time) was responsible for collecting and 
analyzing data about its respective indicators, in accordance with its own management and 
information systems for PBF and Emergency Aid beneficiaries. The achieve ment of the project 
development objective and the intermediate result indicators were monitored using 
administrative data at the baseline and a report was submitted to the funder, containing: (i) 
updated indicators; (ii) physical and financial results; (ii i) information on the Project's 
environmental and social management, among other information on Project implementation.  
 
o  Project Development Objective Indicators: Mitigate the negative economic effects 
associated with COVID-19 on the income of poor households  
  
1. Households kept above the extreme poverty line, as set by the program, with project 
financing (number);  
2. Support for the average income received from project financing by households as a 
share of total income at the time of application (Percentage);   
As for the number of households kept above the extreme poverty line, both in the general indicator 
(indicator 1) and in those tied to different groups and specific traditional peoples (indicators 1a 
to 1f), the numbers were substantially higher than the goals initially set by the project.  
The matrix shows two different calculations for indicator 2 in order to pr eserve comparability 
with previous measurements; one version includes the extraordinary benefit and the other does 
not. The extraordinary benefit was paid during the year 2022; the amount was initially equivalent 
to the amount necessary to reach R$ 400.00 (four hundred reais) per beneficiary household; 
subsequently, from August 2022 onwards, it was increased by R$ 200.00 (two hundred reais) 
monthly as an extraordinary measure so the total amount would reach a minimum of R$ 600.00 
transferred to each household.  
 
o  Project Development Objective Indicators: Mitigate the risk of negative economic effects 
of COVID-19 on the human capital of poor households
<<<PAGE=55>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 51 of 71 
   
 
3. Children aged 6 to 17 years who received CCTs from project financing and whose 
school attendance was monitored by the program (Percentage);  
4. Children under the age of 7 who received CCTs from project financing and whose 
attendance in health check-ups was monitored by the program (Percentage);  
As mentioned in previous reports, the COVID -19 pandemic had a profound impact on the 
monitoring of CCT conditionalities, especially in education, where face -to-face school activities 
were suspended in most state and m unicipal school networks, making it impossible to monitor 
school attendance between March 2020 and early 2022. The Ministry of Education (MEC) 
determined it would be impossible to monitor school attendance during that period.  
 
Monitoring of education conditionalities was scheduled to resume in early 2022; more specifically, 
monitoring would begin for the February/March 2022 bimester. However, due to many technical 
issues involving the validation of school attendance monitoring data, which had been collecte d 
with a new version of the Presença (Portuguese for “attendance”) system, consolidated results 
could only be obtained for the two -month period of June/July of 2022, which eventually came to 
be the first monitoring cycle conducted after the pandemic. These  results are shown in the 
indicators matrix, specifically in the form of indicators 3 and 3a to 3c.  
 
In addition to the issues mentioned in the previous paragraph that explain the difficulties faced 
from a technical and operational perspective, it has bec ome clear that the effects of the long 
suspension of face -to-face classes - namely, the significant increase in the number of school 
dropouts when face -to-face classes resumed - mainly in low -income households - and, in 
particular, among their youth, who c onstitute a focus group under the program - will constitute 
one of the major challenges for 2023 when it comes to monitoring conditionalities. In fact, 
overcoming this challenge will require strong mobilization by the states and municipalities, 
involving not only the National Citizenship Income Secretariat, but also the set of services and 
programs under the umbrella of Social Assistance and other public policy areas.  
  
o  Intermediate Results Indicators: Component - Conditional Cash Transfers for poor and 
extremely poor households  
  
5. Beneficiaries of social safety net programs (CRI, Number);  
6. PBF Grievance Mechanism cases resolved within 30 days (Percentage);  
7. Enactment and improvement of communication strategies with specific channels 
for vulnerable groups in PBF to inform of the existence of Fala BR, to be used for 
grievances pertaining to PBF  
In the realm of health conditionalities, there was no complete int erruption in the monitoring of 
conditions related to vaccination and the collection of anthropometric measurements (weight and 
height) of children and the monitoring of women. This means that, although the impacts of the 
pandemic were significant, they wer e not as devastating for health as they were for education 
conditionalities. Impacts were felt, however, from January to June 2020 (the 1 st term of 2020), 
which was when the Ministry of Health (MS) made health conditionality monitoring optional for
<<<PAGE=56>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 52 of 71 
   
 
municipalities as the focus shifted to combating the pandemic. Despite this specific guidance, the 
Ministry of Health also advised municipalities to keep the identification of pregnant women and 
prenatal care cases a priority, so that the Variable Benefit to Pregnant Women (Benefício Variável 
à Gestante , BVG) could continue to be paid out. These same procedures and guidelines were 
repeated for the two subsequent terms: the 2nd half of 2020 and the 1st half of 2021. The Ministry 
of Health decided to once again make it mandatory to record monitoring data on health 
conditionalities in the 2nd half of 2021.  
 
The Indicators Matrix spreadsheet used in this project is included in this report as an Annex.  
4.3. ESTABLISHED TARGETS  
Different project monitoring indicators were analyzed and, during the span of the project, those 
that sought to mitigate the negative econo mic effects of COVID -19 showed an upward trend (in 
the case of indicator 1 and its subcomponents) or remained stable (in the case of indicator 2), 
showing that the established targets had been reached and that the income of the beneficiary 
households had, indeed, been partially protected.  
 
For indicators associated to the mitigation of the pandemic's negative effects on the accumulation 
of human capital by poor households, the effects of the pandemic are substantially more negative.  
The trajectory over the span of the project, starting with the 1st measurement in April 2021 all the 
way to the current measurement relative to the 2 nd half of 2022 (Graph 1), leaves no doubt as to 
the increase in the number of households kept above the poverty line in all partial measurements 
as a result of the various waves of expansion: first within the scope of Programa Bolsa Família and, 
lastly (and particularly), in the last expansion phase under the scope of Programa Auxílio Brasil, 
starting in November 2021.  
  
Graph 1 – Evolution of indicator 1 – “Households kept above the extreme poverty line, as set by the 
program, with project financing”
<<<PAGE=57>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 53 of 71 
   
 
Indicator 2 showed fluctuations over the span of the project, reaching its lowest value in June 
2021, when the pandemic peaked in Brazil (chart 2). The numbers after this period seemed to be 
evolving positively, but then they declined during the year 2022, remaining below the established 
final target (55 percent) that year. Note that the numbers for June and November 2022 are the 
amounts without the extraordinary benefit - i.e., 54.54 percent and 53.32 percent, respectively. 
However, if we consider the extraordinary benefit as well, the numbers rise to 75.07 percent (June 
2022) and 75.84 percent (November 2022), which exceed the established target of 55 percent.  
 
Graph 2 – Evolution of indicator 2 - “Support for the average income received from project 
financing by households as a share of total income at the time of application”  
  
After the interruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, school attendance monitoring rates for 
June/July 2022 (Graph 3) revolved around 70 percent (indicator 3), much lower than pre -
pandemic monitoring levels, which were close to 90 percent. The indicator also showed that, even 
after a post-pandemic recovery, such rates have not yet reached the end target set for the project 
(85 percent), which is one of the challenges posed for the following year (2023).  
 
The latest monitoring results (June/July 2022) wer e undoubtedly strongly impacted by several 
factors, including 1) an interruption in monitoring for more than 2 years, which certainly 
disrupted the automated methods for collecting this information at the municipal level and, 2) the 
innovations introduced by the new Presença system, after reformulation by the MEC/INEP, and 
3) the new wave of beneficiaries aged 4 - 5 and 18 - 21 years who also had to be monitored.  
 
Graph 3– Evolution of indicator 3 - “Children aged 6 to 17 years who received CCTs from project 
financing and whose school attendance was monitored by the program (percentage)”
<<<PAGE=58>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 54 of 71 
   
 
  
Similar to the indicator for monitoring education conditionalities (indicator 3), indicator 4, which 
is tied to the monitoring of beneficiary children from a health per spective, also remained below 
the final target of 60 percent for the duration of the project (chart 4). The biggest impact happened 
in June 2021 - the peak of the COVID -19 pandemic in Brazil - and, after that, despite a clear 
recovery, pre-pandemic levels have yet to be reached.  
  
Graph 4 – Evolution of indicator 4 - “Children under the age of 7 who received CCTs from project 
financing and whose attendance in health check-ups was monitored by the program (percentage)”
<<<PAGE=59>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 55 of 71 
   
 
Graph 5 shows that the number of beneficiaries of social safety net programs (Indicator 5) follows 
the growing trend of the number of beneficiaries of Programa Auxílio Brasil (formerly Programa 
Bolsa Família) during the project, from the first until the fi nal measurement in November 2022. 
During this period, the program underwent several expansions in the number of beneficiaries, 
reaching more than 20 million households on the payroll for the month of November 2022, 
allowing it to exceed its initial target.  
 
Graph 5– Evolution of indicator 5 - “Beneficiaries of social safety net programs
   
4.4. NON-REIMBURSABLE TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICES: WORLD BANK STUDIES 
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE IDB AND AFD  
Partnerships with international organizations entered into by this Ministry within the scope of 
non-reimbursable technical advisory services have provided input for a discussion on - and review 
of - the policies offered to the population, such as Programa Bolsa Família/Programa Auxílio 
Brasil, the country's primary cash transfer program. Based on statistical evidence, academic 
analyses, comparisons with international experiences and input from behavioral science, the 
products developed were added to the technical expertise of social units and policies for citizens 
under the scope of Social Development.  
 
Those studies informed discussions about potential changes to several regulations and processes 
in the Brazilian government and were particularly relevant a t times when new policies were 
introduced.  
 
The main products obtained by means of technical advisory services were:  
 
o  Financial products to protect against income volatility
<<<PAGE=60>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 56 of 71 
   
 
For this technical assistance endeavor, in addition to the involvement of World Bank teams 
(particularly the social protection team), specialized consultancy services were also hired at no 
cost to the Ministry. Studies were conducted on i) Financial Behavior, ii) Financial Education and 
iii) Financial Citizenship Policies. Prior to his work with the World Bank, Prof. Marcelo Neri had 
also worked as a consultant with the Inter -American Development Bank (IDB), on the topic of 
"Bolsa Família and the use of pri vate insurance by the low -income population". This product 
developed by the IDB was entitled “Bolsa Família and the Use of Private Insurance by the Low -
Income Population”.  
 
Such products are about offering financial services to the low-income population, and, in the case 
of products financed by the World Bank, they are mainly about short -term savings and financial 
education. Quantitative baseline analyses were carried out (POF, PNAD, Findex, Lloyds) of the 
risks, access and use of financial products, of the economic and behavioral barriers for low-income 
households and of Programa Bolsa Família itself. Based on a detailed assessment of the financial 
behavior of households, the products show how savings were gathered and how quality of life has 
smoothed over time.  
 
This work also presented lessons from past experiences in Brazil in such areas as microcredit, 
financial education and incentives to saving, as well as international experiences involving 
financial products in risk management geared towards specific target audiences, combined with a 
review of behavioral literature associated with the topic.  
 
Evidence of the results helped inform public policy discussions and proposals to change the design 
of Programa Bolsa Família, as well as potential enhancements for the new social program.  
Initially, the studies pointed to limited savings capacity and freq uent use of more expensive 
products and credit, such as overdraft and credit cards. As such, a recommendation was made to 
expand the financial education strategy for the population covered by Programa Bolsa Família at 
the time, associating it with the potential for labor formalization and credit history generation.  
Additionally, it was recommended that the experience with virtual accounts acquired in the 
Emergency Aid program be used to design behavioral incentives for a savings instrument, 
associated with  a review of the permanence rule for that Program. Improvements were also 
suggested to the tools used to communicate with the population, including the modernization of 
the Unified Registry for Social Programs.  
 
After delivering the consultancy products a nd having discussions with the Ministry's technical 
team, the World Bank developed its own note on the role of financial inclusion in mitigating the 
income volatility of Unified Registry households. The discussions about this Report and the 
consultancy products were key in improving the government's new social program.  
 
o  Revision of the PBF Permanence Rule  
 
The permanence rule is a protection mechanism for Programa Bolsa Família beneficiary 
households that allowed them to continue to receive benefits even when their per capita income 
exceeded the Program's eligibility threshold. Programa Auxílio Brasil, which  replaced Programa 
Bolsa Família, later introduced the Emancipation Rule. According to this rule, even in the event of 
an increase in income, the household can still remain in Programa Auxílio Brasil for an additional
<<<PAGE=61>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 57 of 71 
   
 
2 years, provided that the monthly per  capita household income does not exceed two and a half 
times the poverty line amount - i.e., R$ 525.00. If the household is cancelled because it decides to 
leave Programa Auxílio Brasil of its own volition (voluntary termination) or because the 
Emancipation Rule has run its course, the household is allowed to return to the Program as a 
priority if it meets the requirements for Programa Auxílio Brasil benefits. Households were 
guaranteed a return to the program if their cancellation from the program was res cinded, which 
could happen in up to 36 months after the date of cancellation.  
 
A World Bank study delivered within the scope of non -reimbursable technical advisory services 
looked into whether the permanence rule was successful in achieving its objectives , considering 
the profile of Program beneficiaries who fit the permanence rule, their insertion in the formal job 
market and the impacts of income volatility. The study also included comparisons with other 
international experiences and reached conclusions that would later inform decisions about the 
design of the conditional cash transfer policy.  
 
An initial recommendation by the World Bank was to keep the Permanence Rule for variable 
benefits in the proposal to reform Programa Bolsa Família. The incentive to invest in human 
capital, which is part of the rationale of variable benefits and the monitoring of conditionalities, 
increases the chances of entering the labor market and ensuring higher incomes for children when 
they become adults.  
 
With regard to encouraging participation in the labor market, the World Bank study showed that 
the rate of participation in the labor market among households in the conditional cash transfer 
program was similar to that of the general population in Brazil, despite the forme r group facing 
more restrictions and greater poverty.  
 
According to the note by the World Bank, it would be beneficial to deem any income increase 
within the eligibility criteria as sufficient for the household to qualify for the Permanence Rule. 
During the period under analysis, only households that voluntarily updated their incomes entered 
this group. In tandem, the Bank also recommended that the group placed under the Permanence 
Rule group be provided with more information about this tool – for example,  they should be 
informed of the maximum income threshold to remain eligible for the Program or the 
opportunities associated with being under the Permanence Rule.  
 
The World Bank analysis also suggested that the Guaranteed Return policy be extended to all 
households placed under the Permanence Rule. Behavioral analyses indicated that doing so would 
reduce risk aversion, as a guaranteed return to the Program would be the closest thing to 
“unemployment insurance” available to this segment of the population and would thus mitigate 
the fear of exploring other possibilities in the formal labor market.  
 
Another recommendation in the study was that households with other sources of higher and more 
stable non-labor income - such as pensions or the Welfare Benefit for the Elderly and Disabled 
(Benefício de Prestação Continuada, BPC) - should spend less time under the Permanence Rule. If 
the household configuration changed and i t slipped back into poverty or extreme poverty, the 
Guaranteed Return mechanism would come into effect.  
 
Regarding the maximum income for the Permanence Rule, the Bank's assessment suggested that
<<<PAGE=62>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 58 of 71 
   
 
the amount be linked to Programa Bolsa Família's eligibilit y thresholds, and not to the minimum 
wage. According to the study, the Permanence Rule should strike a balance between smoothing 
the transition of households so that they will not have to experience a significant loss of income 
when the benefits are rescin ded immediately after they start earning more income from work, 
while also preventing households from spending too much time in this condition and thus 
preventing other households from joining the Program. It was therefore suggested that the Rule's 
income threshold be set by the same managers who set other parameters for this benefit.  
 
o  Studies and research on Programa Auxí lio Brasil (PAB)     
 
Two studies and surveys were conducted on PAB beneficiaries, focusing on (a) beneficiaries' 
length of stay in the program and (b) beneficiaries' insertion in the labor market:  
 
o  “Duration of Stay in Bolsa Família and Determining Factors: initial results”: this 
study was presented to the MC technical team in March 2022 and, among other 
findings, showed that between 2012 and 2019 beneficiary households had 
remained in the program for an average of 5 years. During that time, 49 percent 
of beneficiary households left the program and 51 percent either stayed or 
returned to it once or twice.  
o  “Labor Profile of Low -Income Households in Brazil and Economic Inclusion 
Policies (Perfil de T rabalho das Famílias de Baixa Renda no Brasil e Políticas de 
Inclusão Econômica)”: this study was presented to the MC technical team in May 
2022 and, among other findings, showed that, according to the National Survey 
by Continuous Household Sample ( Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra Domiciliar 
Contínua, PNDC), 77 percent of men and 41 percent of women beneficiaries of 
working age were indeed working, broken down as follows: 40 percent were 
informal employees, 32 percent were self -employed, 20 percent were forma l 
employees and 7 percent were self -employed and had their own formal 
businesses.  
 
Finally, the Note from the World Bank recommended that all the actions mentioned above be 
associated with initiatives that promote the formalization and financial education  of this 
population. Productive inclusion programs, for example, could focus on this population. Once 
again, the recommendations about this instrument helped improve the proposal for the new social 
program.  
 
o  Impact Assessment of the Programa Bolsa Famí lia Expansion    
 
For this study, the World Bank team worked in partnership with the French Development Agency 
(Agence Française de Développement , AFD) to develop a methodology to assess the impact of 
Programa Bolsa Família / Programa Auxílio Brasil on the protection of human capital and the use 
of health and education services during the pandemic.  
This work can influence government decisions on w hether to expand the Program to preserve 
human capital and avoid negative behaviors, in addition to pointing out possibilities and 
challenges in the reapplication of Bolsa Família conditionalities, and the impact of the Program 
even without conditionalitie s. The Methodological Note for this product was prepared by the
<<<PAGE=63>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 59 of 71 
   
 
World Bank to provide greater detail about the survey format.  
 
The World Bank team prepared a questionnaire, which was originally to be applied by call center 
operators, via the Ombudsman's Office and within the scope of this Ministry's contract. Faced with 
budget constraints, however, the Ombudsman's Office stated that there was no budget available 
for the Ministry's own staff to make the calls or to open service orders to apply the questionnaires 
under the scope of the Ministry's contract. As a result, Senarc, Conjur and the World Bank team 
devised strategies that would allow the study to be conducted and signed a Data Licensing 
Agreement for specific samples and in accordance with the General Personal Data Protection Law 
(Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados Pessoais , LGPD) so that the World Bank itself could perform the 
survey with its own contract and funding.  
 
The survey results had not yet been released at the time of this writing. They are ex pected to be 
released in the 2023 financial year.  
 
o  Systematization of the Emergency Aid (Auxílio Emergencial, AE) Experience     
 
During the time encompassed in this Report, the team hired by the World Bank conducted an 
analysis and systematization of  the entire Emergency Aid process, including policy design; 
eligibility criteria; ways to access the benefit; eligibility checks; payment methods; error and fraud 
control; grievance mechanisms; communication with beneficiaries; regulation of the use of 
databases; privacy control; coordination with other policies. The proposal was to have a case study 
to disseminate the lessons learned, especially amongst partners in Latin America, the Caribbean, 
Africa and Asia, in a way that would be both accessible and useful.  
 
At the time, interviews were conducted with the technical team and with the Ministry's top 
echelons, and the consultants worked with the documents they had received and the material they 
had collected in their interviews.  
 
o  Simulated changes to Bolsa Famí lia     
 
After working to develop educational incentive design options for PBF based on international 
experience, the World Bank team provided support to the National Executing Agency in the form 
of simulations of the impact of potential Program benefit reforms on poverty, equity and targeting. 
Such studies informed the discussions about revising the PBF and drafting the proposal for the 
new social program enacted by the Brazilian government.  
 
4.5. OTHER ACTIONS PRODUCED BY THE PARTNERSHIP   
The topic of Adaptive Social Protection was presented at a meeting on emergency and calamity 
scenarios held on July 18, 2022, with the World Bank. The results of the Stress Test were also 
presented, which was a study carried out by the Bank based on the Disasters and Calamities Risk 
Index (Índice de Risco à Desastres e Calamidades, IRDC).  
 
This Ministry, represented by the governance staff in office until the end of the 2022 financial year 
- the Executive Secretary, Deputy Secretary of the Special Secretariat for Social Development, and
<<<PAGE=64>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 60 of 71 
   
 
the National Secretaries in attendance (SECAD, SEISP, SENARC and SNAS) -, outlined the priorities 
of the administration and actions on this topic currently underway with local governments, as well 
as social protection policies directed at the population.  
 
The mission helped with internal discussions and informed the Bank about the types of assistance 
currently offered to households affected by disasters and calamities. Such input would also be 
used in future discussions about the enactment of a service protocol, which could perhaps be the 
subject of a potential new partnership with the Bank.  
 
In future projects, this and other topics may be addressed in light of new priorities set by the MDS 
when supporting quick responses to disasters and calamities by local teams.  
5. ASSESSMENT OF THE MINISTRY'S PERFORMANCE DURING THE PREPARATION 
AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE OPERATION  
 
5.1. LESSONS LEARNED  
The Ministry of Citizenship, as it was then called, in partnership with t he Ministry of Economy, 
known today as the Ministry of Finance, were faced the atypical situation of having to prepare a 
credit operation with not just one financier, but rather five Development Banks. These partners 
came into alignment vis -à-vis the rules  and guidelines that would guide the implementation of 
associated projects. Under the leadership of the World Bank, which played a key documentary 
role, each of them contributed with its share of resources to ultimately benefit a portion of the 
beneficiaries who were already served by the Federal Government. They also helped expand the 
network of beneficiaries when new households came to be assisted by social programs after the 
onset of the pandemic.  
 
All the Government's and the banks' project teams went above and beyond the line of duty in view 
of the urgency involved and the need to expedite the bureaucratic procedures inherent to pre -
negotiations, negotiations and approvals by all agencies inside and outside the Ministry of 
Economy (as borrower) and the Ministry of Citizenship (as executor). This joint effort culminated 
in key products to mitigate the effects that the pandemic was causing and would still cause.  
 
Government officials met using remote work platforms to ensure deadlines were met and to draft 
as many minutes as possible. That was the only way to obtain all the approvals and sign all the 
agreements with the financiers.  
Throughout the implementation of the COVID-19 Emergency Program, the challenges faced, and 
progress achieved were gauged every six months and compiled in half -yearly progress reports 
submitted, during the term of the agreement, to the World Bank and to the other funders.  
In the first ye ar of the pandemic, large AE transfers - along with other measures such as the 
expansion of then-called Programa Bolsa Família - were able to partially offset the drop in labor 
income. In fact, the poverty rate in 2020 was lower than in the year before the pandemic: in 2020, 
13.1 percent of the population lived on less than US$ 5.50 per day (PPP); in 2019 it was 20.6 
percent. The weak labor market recovery in 2021, however, was unable to compensate for the 
diminished role of emergency programs in income support. World Bank estimates based on data
<<<PAGE=65>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 61 of 71 
   
 
recently released by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics ( Instituto Brasileiro de 
Geografia e Estatistica, IBGE) suggest that, in 2021, 18.7 percent of the population was in poverty 
(US$ 5.50 PPP).  
 
The monitoring of conditionalities was made more difficult by pandemic, particularly in education, 
where face-to-face school activities had been suspended in most state and municipal education 
networks, which made it impossible to monitor school attendanc e. Consequently, the Ministry of 
Education (MEC) determined that it would not be possible to monitor school attendance during 
the pandemic (which spanned the entire period covered in the last report for 2021). The effects of 
school closures surfaced when schools reopened in 2022: namely, a significant increase in school 
dropouts when in -person classes resumed, mainly in low -income households and, in particular, 
amongst their youth (the program's target audience).  
 
The pandemic had severe effects on human c apital formation. School closures had an impact on 
the educational trajectory of most students, especially the most vulnerable. Brazil was one of the 
countries that kept schools closed the longest, for a total of 78 weeks. The pandemic has 
undermined learning and caused more students not to return to school.  
 
Evidence shows learning loss at all levels of education. Many students dropped out of school 
during the pandemic: There were 579 thousand fewer enrollments in basic education in 2020 than 
in the previ ous year. The problem of school dropout tends to be more serious among older and 
more vulnerable students, where there is greater pressure to look for a job when household 
income drops. Furthermore, according to a recent telephone survey conducted by the World Bank 
to monitor well -being in Brazil, in the first half of 2021 households continued to experience 
greater food insecurity than before the pandemic, and children continued to use health services 
less frequently. Dropping out of school is not detrimental to just children, it also affects women in 
the labor market.  
 
The drop in enrollment rates and the closing of schools meant that women had to spend more time 
at home to care for their children, thus remaining outside the labor market. In fact, 43 perce nt of 
inactive women in the potential workforce were not looking for a job in the last quarter of 2021 
due to household chores and caring for children and relatives.  
 
In 2022, education conditionalities experienced technical and operational inconsistencie s in 
Sistema Presença. As a result, the Ministry of Education (MEC) and the Anísio Texeira Institute of 
Educational Studies and Research ( Instituto de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Texeira , 
Inep) decided to disregard monitoring in the first term and, therefore, the repercussions for non-
compliance with conditionalities imposed in May 2022 were annulled; as there were no results to 
consider, it was impossible to determine whether the beneficiaries had met the conditionality 
criteria.  
 
In September 2022, repercussions were imposed based on information from the 3 rd monitoring 
term (June and July) for the education conditionality, and in the 1st half of 2022 for non-compliance 
with health conditionalities. In September 2022, all households in which on e or more members 
had failed to comply with the education and/or health conditionalities for reasons that caused 
repercussions were issued a warning.
<<<PAGE=66>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 62 of 71 
   
 
In health, the monitoring of conditionalities associated to vaccination and anthropometric 
measurements (weight and height) of children and the monitoring of women were never 
completely interrupted. However, the Ministry of Health ( Ministério da Saúde , MS) made it 
optional for municipalities to record monitoring data on health conditionalities. Meanwhile, th e 
Ministry of Health also advised municipalities to keep the identification of pregnant women and 
prenatal care cases a priority, so that the Variable Benefit to Pregnant Women (Benefício Variável 
à Gestante , BVG) could continue to be paid out. These same procedures and guidelines were 
repeated in the two subsequent terms: the 2 nd half of 2020 and the 1 st half of 2021. The Ministry 
of Health decided to once again make it mandatory to record monitoring data on health 
conditionalities in the 2nd half of 2021.  
 
There was no change in the prioritization system in effect for the registration of indigenous 
households into Programa Bolsa Família and its successor, Programa Auxílio Brasil. Two surveys 
were conducted to collect local experiences and identify actions  that could facilitate access to 
social assistance benefits by indigenous households. Project Supervision Missions discussed the 
need to implement actions to raise engagement and commitment to serving Traditional and 
Specific Population Groups ( Grupos Popu lacionais, Tradicionais e Específicos , GPTE), especially 
indigenous peoples.  
 
This Ministry's General Ombudsman's Office, in turn, received a record amount of feedback via its 
four official service channels: electronic form, telephone, letter and face-to-face.  
The program's scope included the establishment of indicators tied to the mechanisms for 
responding to complaints from Poor Populations Affected by COVID-19. As agreed, the indicators 
covered Programa Bolsa Família (PBF) complaints resolved within 30  days, broken down into 
indigenous peoples, quilombolas and other groups.  
 
It should be noted that when the indicators were first set, requests were received via two systems: 
the Request Management System ( Sistema de Gestão de Demandas , SGD) and the Integ rated 
Ombudsman and Information Access Platform – Fala.BR.  
 
In 2022, the Fala.BR Platform became the only channel to submit requests, giving rise to new 
challenges in extracting and tracking data, as a given request might be processed by multiple 
departments before finding its way to this Ministry, which impacts the average response time.  
In order to better ascertain the number of services provided to people with disabilities, the 
General Ombudsman's Office requested that the Federal Ombudsman's Office (Ouvidoria-Geral da 
União, OGU) improve the Fala.BR tool and enable reports to be generated about those segments of 
the population.  
 
The public ombudsman function is regulated by OGU/CGU Ordinance 581 of 2021, which states 
that requests can be addressed in up to 30 days, extendable for an additional 30 days upon 
reasonable justification. Due to their complexity, many of the requests rec eived required more 
than 30 days to be addressed, and this would not be treated as non -compliance with legally 
established deadlines.  
 
The reach of the agreed -upon indicators was strongly influenced by a more than 1,400 percent 
increase in the number of r equests compared to 2019 and 2020. This increase was prompted by 
requests about the Emergency Aid, COVID-19 and the Unified Registry.
<<<PAGE=67>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 63 of 71 
   
 
 
The new Emergency Aid scheme was confirmed by Provisional Presidential Decree 1,039 in 2021 
and, once payments began, there was a 166.17 percent in the number of requests received by the 
Ombudsman's Office in April compared to March.  
 
There was a significant improvement in the reach of the indicators in 2022 due to the gradual drop 
in the number of requests at the end of 2021.  
 
As such, the availability of categorized information that can be easily measured and monitored 
over the period must be considered when the indicators are first set. Furthermore, such indicators 
must comply with the governance and regulatory structure in place for the sector - in particular 
the deadlines and procedures for addressing the requests sent to the Ombudsman's Office.  
 
Throughout the Project's implementation, the commitments signed in the Project's Environmental 
and Social Management Plan were completely fulfilled vis -à-vis the agreed -upon actions and 
deadlines.  
 
6. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE IBRD PROJECT  
 
The Loan was denominated in US dollars with percentages for the PBF Transfers component and 
rates provided for in accordance with the general conditions of the Agreement.  
 
Category  Percentage of Expenditures to be 
Reimbursed or Financed (including 
taxes)  
Loan  
Amount 
 Allocated 
 (USD)  
(1) PBF Transfers for  
Part 1 of the Project  
100%  $997,500,000  
  
(2) Front-end Fee  
Amount payable under Section 2.03 of 
this Agreement, pursuant to Section 
2.07(b) of the General Conditions  
$2,500,000  
(3) Interest rate premium 
Interest rate caps and 
ranges  
Amount due under Section 4.05(c) of the 
General Conditions  
0  
Total amount    $1,000,000,000  
 
In line with the Operational Manual (OPM) agreed upon for the Project, SENARC's General 
Budgetary and Financial Execution Coordination produced all Financial Reports in a timely 
fashion. These were then submitted with comments to the National Treasury Secretariat 
(Secretaria do Tesouro Nacional, STN), which, in turn, issued formal disbursement requests to the 
Bank.  
 
Such requests (known as IFRs) were prepared in accordance with the model agreed upon with the 
Bank, in Brazilian Reais and US Dollars, based on information from SIAFI and Programa Bolsa 
Família and Programa Auxílio Brasil monitoring reports. For financial management reasons, the
<<<PAGE=68>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 64 of 71 
   
 
Ministry of Economy - by means of the National Treasury Secretariat (STN) - issued half-yearly 
consolidated IFRs and sent them to the Bank within the period set in the OPM, in up to 60 days 
after the end of each semester.  
 
The difference between the number of beneficiary households in Programa Bolsa Família, March 
2020 payroll, and the payroll used as a reference for requesting each disbursement was 
considered an eligible expense, thus comprising the totality of households that entered the 
program after the pandemic began.  
 
Table 1 (below) shows the budgets of Programa Bolsa Família (in effect until October 2021) and 
Programa Auxílio Brasil.  
 
Table 1 - Budget approved for the years 2020 to 2022 for Programa Bolsa Família and Programa 
Auxílio Brasil  
 
LOA 2020  R$ 29,484,920,000.00  
LOA 2021  R$ 34,858,183,958.00  
LOA + credit 2022  R$ 114,521,663,500.00  
 
The Bank made 2 disbursements. The first disbursement took place on August 16, 2021, and 
covered expenses incurred with Programa Bolsa Família benefits paid out before the loan 
agreement was signed; these were deemed expenses eligible for reimbursement und er the 
retroactivity clause of the loan agreement and were equivalent to 20 percent of the total amount 
of the credit operation.  
  
 
The Bank's second and final disbursement was against expenses incurred in the months of June 
2021 to March 2022; it was made effective on May 3, 2022, in the amount of U$ 797,500,000.00 
(seven hundred and ninety-seven million five hundred thousand dollars).
<<<PAGE=69>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 65 of 71 
   
 
Proof of the disbursement operation is available at Client Connection, as shown in the statement 
below.  
 
  
It should also be noted that the amount borrowed from the IBRD was fully repaid, as follows: U$ 
200,148,858.00 on August 16, 2021, and U$ 797,5 00,000.00 (seven hundred and ninety -seven 
million and five hundred thousand dollars) on May 03, 2022. The Loan Agreement signed with 
IBRD, known as CFA 011395, was audited by the Federal Comptroller General (Controladoria Geral 
da União, CGU). The CGU assessed the key accounting, financial and managerial clauses and found 
the Project executor to be in compliance. Disbursement request reports were submitted to the 
Bank and were supported by sufficient eligible expenditures to cover the disbursed amounts. The 
controls were also found to be adequately compliant with the conditions laid out in the Loan 
Agreements.  
7. PROJECT SUSTAINABILITY  
 
Now that the Income Support for the Poor Affected by COVID -19 Project has been fully 
implemented, the results of the actions - conducted in partnership by the World Bank's Social 
Protection team and specialists from this Ministry - show multiple opportunities for improvement.  
In terms of Project sustainability, many of PAB's new benefits and complementary programs still 
lack a more detailed design and proper implementation support. In addition, benefits that include
<<<PAGE=70>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 66 of 71 
   
 
conditionalities for age groups will req uire the implementation of specific arrangements to 
monitor them, and a balance will need to be struck between providing incentives and maintaining 
coverage. The Project's notes and contributions will inform the discussions and decisions about 
continuing i mprovements and enhancements in social protection policies put in place by the 
Ministry.  
 
The technical assistance provided by the World Bank's Social Protection team enabled access to 
international experiences and specialized consultancy services funded by the Bank, at no cost to 
the Ministry, offered in quantities that would not have been possible unless tied to a credit 
operation. This led to inputs that can be used in future adaptations of the Conditional Cash 
Transfer Program and the Unified Registry of Social Programs used by the Federal Government to 
collect data and select beneficiaries. These inputs still need to be organized, monitored and 
assessed following the end of the Project.  
 
There was no shortage of challenges in the transition from a consolidated program like Programa 
Bolsa Família to a new program like Programa Auxílio Brasil. Many challenges remain for 
Programa Auxílio Brasil to overcome going forward. They include: maintai ning zero backlog, 
implementing new benefits, inter -sector and federative coordination, resumption of monitoring 
and imposition of repercussions for missed conditionalities and the new registry project.  
8. AUDIT  
 
The Federal Comptroller General (CGU) is cur rently auditing the expenses incurred in the 2022 
fiscal year, which was when the Project's second and final disbursement took place.  
 
9. KEY TEAM: Individuals responsible for the project  
9.1  MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 
National Treasury Secretariat 
 
Rafael  Mesquita Camargo: rafael.camargo@tesouro.gov.br; 
 
Borrower's representative; Financial Management; and Disbursements.  
 
9.1. MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE, FAMILY AND FIGHT 
AGAINST HUNGER   
General Coordination of the Project: Silvânia Freire de Queiroz: cgct@cidadania.gov.br  
 
National Secretariat of Citizenship Income  
Financial Management: Sérgio Monteiro: sergiomonteiro@cidadania.gov.br   
Environmental and Social Management : Maria Carolina Prado Lage; Sheila Benjuino de 
Carvalho: sheila.carvalho@cidadania.gov.br
<<<PAGE=71>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 67 of 71 
   
 
 
Management Monitoring and Evaluation (indicators):  Hugo Miguel Pedro Nunes: 
hugo.nunes@cidadania.gov.br;  
Evaluation, Information Management and Unified Registry Secretariat  
Unified Registry Indicators: Jennifer Carla: jennifer.carla@cidadania.gov.br ;  
Environmental and Social Management Support (GPTE-Indígenas): José Roberto Frutuoso: 
jose.frutuoso@cidadania.gov.br  
General Ombudsman  
Grievance Mechanism Indicators and Support for Environmental and Social Management : 
Moises Paes Landim Placido: moises.placido@cidadania.gov.br  
10. ANNEX  
1) Results Indicator Matrix  
 
  
Indicadores de Objetivo de Desenvolvimento do Projeto
Nome do Indicador Linha de base Meta Final Ref.: Folha pagto PBF ABRIL 2020 Relatório Julho 2021 / Ref: folha 
PBF junho 2021
Relatório Final Fev 2022 / Ref: 
folha PBF Dezembro 2021
Relatório Final jul 2022 / Ref: 
folha PAB junho 2022
Relatório Final Dezembro 2022 / 
Ref: folha PAB novembro 2022
Relatório Final Dezembro 2022 - 
Atualização Maio 2023 / Ref: 
folha PAB dezembro 2022
Mitigar efeitos econômicos negativos associados ao COVID-19 sobre a renda de famílias pobres 
1. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto (Número) 0.00 1.200.000 1.200.000 1.855.924 1.875.736 6.269.044 9.959.838 10.195.769 (1)
1.a. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Mulheres Indígenas Female 
(Número) 0.00 1.800 1.883 8.099 16.516 26.833 39.984 40.823 (1)
1.b. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Homens Indígenas (Número) 0.00 400 492 2.908 6.400 12.691 24.190 25.008 (1)
1.c. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Mulheres Quilombolas 
(Número) 0.00 1.100 1.118 5.569 13.628 24.492 35.365 35.969 (1)
1.d. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Homens Quilombolas (Número) 0.00 400 463 2.563 6.959 15.431 28.583 29.549 (1)
1.e. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Mulheres de Outros Grupos 
(Número) 0.00 963.300 990.557 1.461.188 1.461.676 4.701.667 7.078.828 7.221.621 (1)
1.f. Famílias que são mantidas acima da linha da extrema pobreza, conforme definida pelo programa, com financiamento do projeto- Homens de Outros Grupos 
(Número) 0.00 233.000 244.528 372.997 370.557 1.487.930 2.752.888 2.842.799 (1)
2. Apoio à renda média recebida com financiamento do projeto por famílias como proporção da renda no momento da solicitação (Porcentagem) 0.00 55% 55% 51,74% 56,43%
54,54% [exclusive benefício 
extraordinário]
75,07% [inclusive benefício extraordinário]
53,32% [exclusive benefício 
extraordinário]
75,84% [inclusive benefício extraordinário]
52,76% [exclusive benefício 
extraordinário]
75,53% [inclusive benefício extraordinário]
(1)
Mitigar os riscos de efeitos econômicos negativos decorrentes da COVID-19 no capital humano de famílias pobres
3. Crianças entre 6 e 17 anos que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto cuja frequência escolar está sendo monitorada pelo programa(Porcentagem) 0.00 85 88,48%
[SICON-média anual 2019] - - - 70,56%
[SICON-3º período de 2022]
78,05%
[SICON-5º período de 2022] (2)
3.a. Crianças entre 6 e 17 anos que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto cuja frequência escolar está sendo monitorada pelo programa- Indígenas 
(Porcentagem) 0.00 85 90,03%
[SICON-média anual 2019] - - - 63,32%
[SICON-3º período de 2022]
73,25%
[SICON-5º período de 2022] (2)
3.b. Crianças entre 6 e 17 anos que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto cuja frequência escolar está sendo monitorada pelo programa- Quilombolas 
(Porcentagem) 0.00 85 90,62%
[SICON-média anual 2019] - - - 76,30%
[SICON-3º período de 2022]
84,34%
[SICON-5º período de 2022] (2)
3.c. Crianças entre 6 e 17 anos que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto cuja frequência escolar está sendo monitorada pelo programa- Outros 
grupos (Porcentagem) 0.00 85 91,06%
[SICON-média anual 2019] - - - 70,61%
[SICON-3º período de 2022]
78,06%
[SICON-5º período de 2022] (2)
4. Crianças com menos de 7 anos de idade que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto e cuja conformidade com checkups de saúde está sendo monitorada 
pelo programa (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 65,54%
[SICON-média anual 2019] 21,77%
45,78% 
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
45,78%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
45,32%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 1º período de 
2022]
54,45%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 2º período de 
2022]
(3)
4.a. Crianças com menos de 7 anos de idade que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto e cuja conformidade com checkups de saúde está sendo 
monitorada pelo programa - Indígenas (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 67,08%
[SICON-média anual 2019] 27,61%
44,37%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
44,23%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
45,24%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 1º período de 
2022]
57,40%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 2º período de 
2022]
(3)
4.b. Crianças com menos de 7 anos de idade que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto e cuja conformidade com checkups de saúde está sendo 
monitorada pelo programa - Quilombolas (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 63,25%
[SICON-média anual 2019] 30,46%
59,35%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
59,46%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
59,81%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 1º período de 
2022]
69,67%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 2º período de 
2022]
(3)
4.c. Crianças com menos de 7 anos de idade que se beneficiam de CCT com financiamento do projeto e cuja conformidade com checkups de saúde está sendo 
monitorada pelo programa - Outros grupos (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 64,31%
[SICON-média anual 2019] 21,73%
45,45%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
45,67%
[Sicon - Resultado global - 2º período de 
2021]
45,18%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 1º período de 
2022]
54,26%
[Sicon-Resultado global - 2º período de 
2022]
(3)
Indicadores de Resultados Intermediários por Componentes
Nome do Indicador Linha de base Meta Final Ref.: JANEIRO/2021 Relatório Julho 2021 / Ref: folha 
PBF junho 2021
Relatório Final Fev 2022 / Ref: 
folha PBF Dezembro 2021
Relatório Final jul 2022 / Ref: 
folha PAB junho 2022
Relatório Final Dezembro 2022 / 
Ref: folha PAB novembro 2022
Relatório Final Dezembro 2022 / 
Ref: folha PAB dezembro 2022
Transferências de Renda Condicionada para famílias na pobreza e extrema pobreza 
5. Beneficiários de programas de rede de segurança social (CRI, Número) 0.00 2.900.000 2.900.000 4.394.542 4.470.161 13.680.084 20.252.936 20.671.499 (4)
5.a. Beneficiários de programas de rede de segurança social – Mulheres (CRI, Número) 0.00 2.320.000 2.320.000 2.553.867 2.597.938 7.906.624 11.556.819 11.792.912 (4)
6. Casos do mecanismo de reparação de queixas do BF resolvidos em 30 dias (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 100 100 95,28% (5)
6.a. Casos do mecanismo de reparação de queixas do BF resolvidos em 30 dias - Indígenas (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 100 100 100% (5)
6.b. Casos do mecanismo de reparação de queixas do BF resolvidos em 30 dias - Quilombolas (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 100 100 100% (5)
6.c. Casos do mecanismo de reparação de queixas do BF resolvidos em 30 dias - Outros grupos (Porcentagem) 0.00 60 100 100 95,26% (5)
7. Adoção e aperfeiçoamento de estratégias de comunicação com canais específicos para grupos vulneráveis do BF que aumentam o conhecimento da existência do Fala 
BR para queixas relacionadas com o BF (Sim/Não) Não Sim Sim Sim Sim
(5) O número de casos (atendimentos) e a percentagem de deles atendidos em 30 dias considera somentes aqueles recebidos pela plataforma Fala.br durante o periodo de janeiro a junho de 2022.
(2) O cálculo dos indicadores relativos às condicionalidades da educação não foi possível de ser realizado devido à suspensão do acompanhamento da frequência escolar, por parte do Ministério da Educação, causada pela pandemia do Covid-19 instalada no Brasil desde março de 2020, 
mês, a partir, do qual foi descontinuado o acompanhamento. Neste relatório apresenta-se os dados do primeiro acompanhamento realizado pós-pandemia, referente ao 3º bimestre de 2022 (julho/julho 2022), bem como, o último período de 2022, referente ao 5º bimestre 
(outubro/novembro).
(3) Vale mencionar os dados de acompanhamento no período afetado pela situação pandêmica já demonstram recuperação ao longo dos dois períodos de 2022, no entanto, ainda sem antingir os patamares pré-pandemia.
(1) Conforme acordado com o Banco Mundial, foram consideradas, no cálculo dos indicadores, as famílias que entraram no Programa Bolsa Família a partir de março de 2020. Em comparação à folha de pagamentos PBF de JUNHO/2022, esse número totalizou 6.269.044 famílias. Esse 
aumento substancial é consequência do número de famílias na folha de Junho/2022 (18.154.897 famílias), o qual é significativamente maior que o total de famílias na folha de Março/2020 (13.058.228 famílias). E na folha de NOVEMBRO/2022 o indicador reflete outra expansão do PAB, 
atingindo 21.534.293 famílias, resultando em uma diferença comparativa de 9.959.838 famílias em relação a março de 2020.
Marco de Resultados
Brasil: Apoio à Renda dos Pobres Afetados Pela COVID-19 no Brasil
Objetivo(s) de Desenvolvimento do Projeto
O Objetivo do Projeto é mitigar os efeitos econômicos negativos associados ao COVID-19 sobre a renda e os riscos de prejudicar o capital humano das famílias pobres.
(4) Utilizou-se o mesmo critério do indicador 1. O indicador apresenta o número de beneficiários (pessoas) que compõem as 10.195.769  famílias descritas no indicador 1. O indicador 5a utiliza o mesmo raciocínio restrigindo o número de beneficiários apenas às mulheres.
<<<PAGE=72>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 68 of 71 
   
 
ANNEX 6. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ON SELECTED SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS 
 
1. This annex provides additional information on BF, its successor programs,  AB and the new BF, 
as well as AE and BE. Figure 6.1 summarizes the timeline of the benefits discussed in this section. 
Figure 6.1. Timeline of Main Social Assistance Benefits Discussed in this Annex  
 
 
2. In April 2020, the GoB introduced a new benefit, the Auxílio Emergencial (AE), to mitigate the 
social and economic impacts caused by the COVID -19 pandemic. AE provided cash transfers to people 
outside formal wage employment but not eligible for social assistance, such as informal workers and self-
employed individuals. The benefit covered adults not receiving a formal source of income or pension and 
declared to be either self-employed, unemployed, or informal in a household with earnings less than 0.5 
times the minimum wage per capita or living in a household with a total income  three times below the 
minimum wage. The AE provided five monthly transfers of R$ 600 (US$114) and four monthly payments 
of R$ 300 (US$57) to a maximum of two eligible adults in households without a formal income. Single 
mothers were eligible for a double benefit, and an exception was made to the age requirement of 18 
years, so that under -age mothers in single -parent households could also qualify for the benefits. BF 
beneficiaries were automatically enrolled to receive a portion of AE on top of BF, up to the amount they 
would have received without BF (which was the case for about 90 percent of families in BF). AE ended in 
October 2021 after 16 months of operation, only interrupted between January and March 2021, and at 
its peak, it reached nearly half of Brazilian families.  
3. While working on the creation of AE, in Marc h 2020, the Government chose to expand the BF 
program. At the time of appraisal, BF had long -standing, well-established, and effective operational and 
institutional arrangements. The PAD and POM contain a detailed description of the BF delivery process.34 
Since Cadastro Unico’s creation in 2001, the GoB had also invested in continuous improvements in terms 
of policy and legal framework, procedures, and technology, including with nearly continuous World Bank 
support. Before the pandemic, Cadastro Único contained information on about 26 million families and 40 
 
34 Municipalities are responsible for the identification of families and their registration in Cadastro Único through Social Assistance 
Reference Centers. The MoC assesses the eligibility of the applications to the BF based on information declared in CadU and after 
verification in other public registries.  After the benefit is authorized, the Caixa Economica Federal makes the payments, which 
are withdrawn by benefici ary families using a dedicated debit card.  Once they are enrolled, families must comply with the 
education and health co -responsibilities to continue benefitting from the BF.  These are verified through the ‘Siscon’, an inter -
ministerial database that perio dically cross-checks information on school attendance and health check compliance and shares 
them directly with the MoC. Cadastro Único is Brazil’s National Social Registry.  
Bolsa Família 
first roll out
Bolsa Família 
Expansion Auxílio Emergencial 
(for new poor and 
top-up to BF)
Auxílio Brasil 
replaces BF, 
+ Benefício 
Extraordinário 
top-up to AB
Beneficio 
Complementar 
(replaces Ben. 
Extraordinario)
New BF replaces 
AB and its top-up
January 
2004 
March 
2020 
April 
2020 
December 
2021 March  
2023 
August 
2023
<<<PAGE=73>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 69 of 71 
   
 
percent of the Brazilian population. During the pandemic, BF suspended the application of sanctions for 
noncompliance with conditionalities. Such suspension was already foreseen in the original 2003 law of 
the BF progr am and later reprised in the 2021 AB L aw. It relieved beneficiaries from interruption of 
benefits in case of unexpected interruption or unavailability of health and education service provision and 
eliminated the financial penalties for municipalities normally in place for failing to track compliance. The 
suspension was renewed several times35 and ended in April 2022.   
4. With the pandemic coming to an end, AE was phased out in November 2021, and, as part of this 
transition, the BF program was replaced in December 2021 with the creation of the AB. AB had very 
similar goals to BF, but it exhibited new parameters that made it larger by design and with a few design 
optimizations. The main changes included an upward revision in the poverty and e xtreme poverty 
threshold lines and the generosity of benefits; a simplification of the benefit structure, with the 
elimination of the basic benefit, absorbed by a higher ‘benefit to overcome extreme poverty ’; the 
extension of a variable benefit for youth b etween 18 and 20 years with a new conditionality of being 
enrolled in secondary school or having completed it; and extension of a conditionality for children ages 
4−5 to attend preschool if locally available. The higher eligibility threshold allowed AB to absorb many of 
the new poor generated by the pandemic, formerly receiving BE, in addition to carrying over all the 
beneficiaries of BF.  
Figure 6.2. Beneficiary Families in BF and its Successor Programs (January 2020 −May 2023) 
  
Source: Authors based on data published by the Ministry of Social Development in June 2023. The data for the 
number of families receiving only AB but not the Beneficio Complementar top-up between July 2022 and February 
2023 is not available, but this is expected to be very low, given that very few families would receive more than R$ 
600 from AB without the support of Beneficio Complementar (AB average benefit is about R$ 220).  
 
35 portaria mc nº 682, de 6 de outubro de 2021. 
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
20,000,000
25,000,000
Bolsa Família only Auxílio Brasil only
Auxílio Brasil + Benefício Extraordinário Auxílio Brasil + Benefício Complementar
Bolsa Família + Auxílio Emergencial
<<<PAGE=74>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 70 of 71 
   
 
 
5. In December 2021, the Provisional  Measure no. 1.076 (converted into Law no. 14.342/2022) 
introduced the BE for families enrolled in AB.  This benefit provided an additional cash payment so that 
at least R$ 400 would be transferred to each beneficiary family. It is worth noting that out of the 14.5 
million families enrolled in the AB, 13 million previously received less than R$ 400. (BE1) A second 
Constitutional Amendment no. 14,284 introduced Beneficio Complementar, right at the time when BE was 
expiring and with a new design that would ensure all families enrolled in AB receive from August 1, 2022, 
to December 31, 2022 , a minimum transfer of  R$ 600, by providing a top -up to AB for the equivalent 
amount. The value of the transfer was an important benchmark for the incoming government, which set 
an average benefit value for the new BF of at least R$ 600 per family.  
6. In March 2023, the incoming government launched the new BF program, replacing AB. The new 
BF has introduced guarantees that no family will receive less than R$600 in benefits and raised the income 
eligibility threshold to R$218 per capita. It also includes the Protection Rule (Regra de Proteção), allowing 
uninterrupted financial support for up to 24 months with 50  percent of the original benefit am ount to 
beneficiaries whose income goes above the threshold up to half a minimum wage. The program also 
reenforces the focus on early childhood development by expanding the Early Childhood Benefit (Benefício 
Primeira Infância) from 0 to 3 to 0 to 6 years a nd increasing the benefit amount from R$130 to R$150. 
Table 6.1 compares the main parameters of BF, AB, and the new BF program.  
Table 3.1 Eligibility Criteria and Program Rules for BF, AB, and New BF 
Program Benefit Component Monthly 
Benefit in R$ 
Threshold 
(Per Capita 
Income) 
Conditionalities 
BF 
Children between 0 and 15 
years 41 178 Education: 
Children between 6 and 17 years 
need to be enrolled in school. 
School attendance must be at 
least 85 percent for 6–15 years 
and 75 percent for 16–17 years. 
Health: 
Children under 7 years need to 
get recommended vaccines. 
Weight, measure, and growth 
must be monitored every 6 
months. 
Mother of children between 
0 and 6 months 41 178 
Pregnant woman 41 178 
Adolescents ages 16–18 
years 48 178 
Basic benefit 89 89 
Families in extreme poverty Overcoming poverty 
Gap with 
extended 
poverty line 
89 
AB 
Early Childhood Benefit (BPI) 
 
Children between 0 and 3 
years old 130 
Poverty 
(R$210) or 
extreme 
poverty 
(R$105) 
 
Health: 
Children under 7 years need to 
get recommended vaccines. 
Weight, measure, and growth 
must be monitored every 6 
months. 
Family composition benefit 
(BCF) 65 Poverty 
(R$210) or 
Education:
<<<PAGE=75>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 71 of 71 
   
 
Program Benefit Component Monthly 
Benefit in R$ 
Threshold 
(Per Capita 
Income) 
Conditionalities 
Payments made to each 
member (up to 5) who falls 
into the following category: 
Pregnant women, nursing 
mothers, children between 
ages 3 and 17, and youth 
ages 18 to 20 
extreme 
poverty 
(R$105) 
 
Children between 4 and 17 years 
need to be attending basic 
education.  
Youth 18 and 20 years need to be 
enrolled in secondary school or 
having completed it. 
 
Health: 
Pregnant woman needs prenatal 
care. Nursing mothers and 
children 0−6 need to be under 
health monitoring. 
Benefit for overcoming 
extreme poverty (BSP) 
 
Payments made to each 
family member with no 
limitation on the number of 
family members 
65  
Extreme 
poverty 
Equal or 
lower than 
R$105 
Families in extreme poverty 
New BF 
(made a 
commitment 
that no 
family will 
receive less 
than R$600) 
Each family member 
regardless of age 142 
218 
The conditionalities were mainly 
kept as before:  
 
Education: Children 4−5 years, a 
minimum school attendance of 
60% and 75% for beneficiaries 
ages between 6 and 18 years who 
have not completed basic 
education. 
 
Health: Prenatal care, follow the 
national vaccination calendar, 
monitor children’s nutrition for 
those younger than 7 years.  
Additional amount for 
families with children 0−6 
years 
150 per child 
Additional amount for 
pregnant woman 50 
Additional amount for 
families with children and 
adolescents 7−18 years 
50
<<<PAGE=76>>>
The World Bank  
Brazil: Income Support for the Poor affected by COVID-19 (P174197) 
 
 
  
 Page 72 of 71 
   
 
ANNEX 7. SELECT ADVISORY SERVICES AND ANALYTICS  
 
1. This annex provides a selection of published analytical products  produced by the Social 
Protection and Poverty Global Practices during project execution and previous years.  
2. The select studies that preceded the project on Bolsa Familia and Cadastro Único are as follows: 
• De la Brière, B enedicte; and Kathy A. Lindert. 2005. “Reforming Brazil’s Cadastro Único to Improve 
the Targeting of the Bolsa Família Program.” World Bank, Social Protection Unit and DFID.  
• Lindert, Kathy; Anja Linder; Jason Hobbs;  and Benedict de La Briere. 2007. “The Nuts and Bolts of 
Brazil’s Bolsa Família Program: Implementing Conditional Cash Transfers in a Decentralized Context.” 
World Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper 709.  
• Morgandi, Matteo; Liliana D. Sousa ; Alison Far ias; and Fabio Cereda. 2019. “The Reform of Bolsa 
Familia: Evaluation of the Proposals Debated in 2019.” Social Protection and Jobs Discussion Paper 
2009, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.  
3. Select studies produced for the Government of Brazil during the Project: 
• Ed, Malín; Alejandro Gonzalez; and Renata Ferreira. 2023. Towards Shock Responsive Social Protection 
in Brazil: Assessing the Adaptiveness of Brazil’s Social Protection System. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
• Fietz, Katharina Maria; Tiago Falcao Silva; Maria Concepcion Steta Gandara ; and Matteo Morgandi. 
2021. “Balancing Stability and Transition: A First Assessment of Regra de Permanência in Bolsa 
Familia.” Policy Note no. 162843, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.  
• Lara De Arruda, Pedro; Marina Lazarotto De Andrade; Tiago Falcao Silva; Diana Teixeira Barbosa; and 
Matteo Morgandi. 2022a. Sharing Lessons Learned from Brazil's Social Protection Response to COVID-
19: The Auxílio Emergencial Program. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
• Lara De Arruda, Pedro; Marina Lazarotto De Andrade; Tiago Falcao Silva; Diana Teixeira Barbosa; and 
Matteo Morgandi. 2022. “Coverage Profile of Brazil’s Auxílio Emergencial and Special Design Features 
for Protecting Women and Other Vulnerable Groups : Lessons from Brazil’s Auxílio Emergencial”. 
Washington, DC: The World Bank Group. 
• Morgandi, Matteo; Katharina M. Fietz; Gabriel Lyrio; Luiz Henrique Superti; Tiago Falcao; and Raquel 
Tsukada. 2023. The Profile of Brazil’s Working Poor and Implications for Economic Inclusion Programs. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
• World Bank. 2021. Enhancing Resilience of Low Income Workers in Brazil: Financial Instruments and 
Innovations. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
• Morgandi, Matteo; Raquel Tsukada; Malín Ed; Asta Zviniene; Luiz Paiva; and Barbara Barbosa. Social 
Protection for Brazil of the Future: Preparing for Change with Inclusion and Resilience (English). World 
Bank Group. 
• Morgandi, Matteo; Katharina Fietz; Luiz Henrique Superti. 2023a. Duration of stay in Bolsa Familia 
and determining factors: the role of individual and community characteristics. Washington, DC: World 
Bank Group.