<<<PAGE=1>>>
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
Africa’s Public Service Delivery and Performance Review 
ISSN: (Online) 2310-2152, (Print) 2310-2195
Page 1 of 9 Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Author:
Dhikru A. Yagboyaju1 
Affiliation:
1Department of Political 
Science, Faculty of the Social 
Sciences, University of 
Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria
Corresponding author:
Dhikru Yagboyaju, 
aswaj2003@yahoo.com
Dates:
Received: 13 Sept. 2018
Accepted: 16 Feb. 2019
Published: 27 May 2019
How to cite this article:
Yagboyaju, D.A., 2019, 
‘Deploying evidence-based 
research for socio-economic 
development policies in 
Nigeria’, Africa’s Public 
Service Delivery and 
Performance Review 7(1), 
a247. https://doi.org/  
10.4102/apsdpr.v7i1.247
Copyright:
© 2019. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
Growth and development require, in their tangible and intangible forms, viable and implementable 
policies. Policy-makers are the persons bestowed with the power, either by the society as a whole 
or by a group of people in society, to make such critical decisions (Nzuki, Hassan & Mbilinyi 
2013:1–5). They are, according to Sambo (1999:293), ‘the authorities who engage in the daily affairs 
of a political system’, on which they take decisions that are accepted, ‘… as binding most of the 
time by most members (of the society) as long as they act within the limits of their roles’. Evidence-
based research has become a compelling policy input because of the ever-increasing complex 
nature of man and his relationship with environment, as well as societal regeneration, which is a 
product of this relationship. With this critical input, policy design in most countries, where it is 
popular, has become more relevant and their results delivering desired effects in diverse areas of 
life. Why are research-based policies often not popular in Nigeria and many parts of the less 
developed world (see Ajakaiye & Falokun 2010:871–894)? How and why is this interconnected 
with Nigeria’s failure to realise its full potential despite the country’s great human and material 
endowments? What better effects can education and knowledge production make in the country’s 
development aspiration? What better use could be made of research in the policy processes? 
These are the questions that this article sets out to address.
The article’s primary objective, which is to analyse Nigeria’s policy-research nexus and its effects 
on the country’s development process since independence, draws from the aforementioned 
study questions. Broader objectives of the study include identifying the progress made in 
evidence-based and scientific researches, articulation of challenges encountered and ascertaining 
derivable lessons from missed opportunities all of which form the basis of the article’s 
recommendations. The rest of the article is divided into four main sections, namely, definitional 
or theoretical issues and review of the literature on policy; Nigeria’s development plans 
Background: Society’s socio-economic development process, which covers ways and means of 
ensuring the well-being and self-actualisation of the generality of the citizens, requires viable 
and implementable policies. 
Aim: This article analyses the interconnections between evidence-based research, adequate 
policies and societal advancement in many parts of the developed world, as well as the 
underperformance in societies with obvious research–policy gaps. 
Setting: Using Nigeria as country of study, it focuses attention on how evidence-based research 
could be deployed more effectively for improved livelihood. 
Methods: Data are drawn from historical and contemporary documentary secondary sources. 
This is complemented by the analyses of selected documented interviews and special reports 
on aspects of society, economy and politics in the country. The article’s framework of analysis 
draws strength from a combination of role and ecological theories, though it adopts an 
interpretative research methodology. 
Results: It finds out that the ecology of public policies in Nigeria plays a critical role in the 
gap that exists between policy formulation and implementation. 
Conclusion: In its conclusion and recommendations, the article draws examples of best 
practices from around the world.
Keywords: Socio-economic development; evidence-based research; research–policy gaps; self-
actualisation; Nigeria; success-prone policy; sustainable development; societal advancement; 
public good.
Deploying evidence-based research for socio-economic 
development policies in Nigeria
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
<<<PAGE=2>>>
Page 2 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
in historical perspectives; lessons in best practices from 
outside Nigeria and recommendations and conclusion.
Definitional or theoretical issues 
and review of literature on policy
There are many prominent definitions of public policy 
(Anderson 1975; Dye 1976; Eyestone 1971; Goodin, Rein & 
Moran 2011). Thus, it may be futile trying to construct an 
ultimate definition or one that is universally acceptable. 
However, at a broad level, public policy will, according to 
Eyestone (1971:18), refer to the ‘relationship of a government 
unit to its environment’. For Dye (1976:1), public policy is 
typified by ‘whatever governments choose to do or not to 
do’. Public policy can also be associated with purposive 
behaviour (Anderson 1975; Friedrich 1963). In this regard, 
public policy is specifically viewed by Anderson (1975:3) as a 
‘purposive course of action followed by an actor or set of 
actors in dealing with a problem or matter of concern’. From 
the many prominent studies such as Easton (1965), Lasswell 
(1951), Meier (1991), Goodin et al. (2011) and Howlett and 
Cashore (2014), some distinguishing elements of public 
policy can be isolated. They are as follows:
• public policy is a purposive or goal-oriented action rather 
than a random or chance behaviour
• public policy consists of courses or patterns of action by 
governmental officials
• public policy is what governments do, not what they 
intend to do or say they are going to do
• public policy involves some form of overt government 
action on some matter on which governmental involvement 
is sought
• public policy is based on law and is authoritative. In other 
words, public policy has an authoritative, potential 
legally coercive quality that the policies of private 
organisations do not have (Anderson 1975:3–4).
It is important to note that public policy processes and 
their operations involve far more than the simple 
straightforward steps that could be conjured in view of the 
aforementioned elements. For example, a success-prone 
policy formulation process is more than likely to consider 
certain pertinent questions. According to Nzuki et al. 
(2013:1–4), in a study conducted for Tanzania Knowledge 
Network (TAKNET), these questions can be clustered into 
three broad groups. The first set revolves round an 
understanding of the policy issue at hand. What problems 
shape the issue? How big is the major problem and is it 
bigger now than before? Has the nature changed from the 
previous one? How well can the condition be defined and 
measured? What are the probable causes, consequences 
and effects? Defining a policy problem is not an easy task 
as it involves a multitude of questions and, therefore, 
requires the ability of policy-makers ‘to define clearly 
and understand the problem or condition they are facing 
and for which they are expected to develop a response’ 
(Nzuki et al. 2013:1).
The second cluster of questions focuses on what has taken 
place previously in the form of purposive action or policy 
on the particular condition or problem. What programmes 
or projects have previously been initiated to address the 
problem? How successful were these interventions? Did 
the previous efforts address the same condition or problem 
as it currently exists or was it different? If it was different, 
of what nature was it? If it was the same, why are additional 
efforts necessary? What are the interest groups involved? 
What may explain the need for a possible policy change? 
Finally, the third cluster focuses more on what is known of 
previous efforts and their impacts that would help one 
choose among present-day options. According to Nzuki 
et al.  (2013:2), consideration of trade-offs ‘is a common 
option at this level’.
The linkage between the study of politics and policy studies 
comes to bold relief when theoretical approaches adapted to 
the analysis of the policy-making process are examined. 
Theories and theoretical approaches in the study of politics 
and the study of policy offer separate ways of thinking 
about these study areas and even suggest some of the 
general causes and consequences of public policy in 
particular (see Dye 1997). Decision-making is a component 
of policy-making, but it is important to note the distinction 
between theories of policy-making and decision-making 
theories. Although decision-making involves the choice of 
an alternative from a series of competing alternatives, 
policy-making is typically all about a pattern of action, 
extending over time and involving many decisions, some 
routine and some not-so-routine. The dominant theories of 
public policy can broadly be classified into macro- and 
micro-theories. Systems, group, elite and radical Marxist 
theories typify macro, while micro-theories are typified by 
rational-comprehensive theory, incrementalism and mixed 
scanning (see Sambo 1999).
Public policy theories can, in general, be descriptive and 
prescriptive, but the aforementioned micro-theories are 
essentially decision-making theories. Still on theories, it is 
important to note the relevance of role and ecological theories 
as they provide the plank upon which the framework of 
analysis of this study is rested. Role theory is a theoretical 
framework devoted to the study of behaviour using the 
notion of role. Each social role is a set of rights, duties, 
expectations, norms and behaviours that an individual 
faces or fulfils. Several prominent studies (Banton 1965; 
Biddle 1979; Mead 1934; Sekhri 2009) have documented the 
main propositions of role theory about social behaviour. 
These include division of labour in society, which takes 
the form of interaction among heterogeneous specialised 
positions that are called roles, and social roles, including 
‘appropriate’ and ‘permitted’ forms of behaviour, guided 
by social norms which are commonly known. Also, roles 
are occupied by individuals who are called ‘actors’ and 
change conditions can render a social role outdated or 
illegitimate, in which case social pressures are likely to lead 
to role change.
<<<PAGE=3>>>
Page 3 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
The adoption of role theory in political science is widely 
traced to Ole Holsti’s seminal essays on foreign policy and 
international relations in the 1970s. In subsequent works, 
such as Holsti (1989:15–43) and Sekhri (2009:423–432), the 
argument is built around formulations that draw analogies 
between individuals (in a society) and a state. In other words, 
the roles ascribed to individuals in the society are applied 
in the explanation of the behaviour of the state. For this 
study, focus is on the roles of policy formulators, those who 
implement, and policy researchers.
Fred W. Riggs (03 July 1917 – 09February 2008) pioneered 
the adoption of the ecological approach to administrative 
theory. In support of his propositions, Riggs (1961, 1962 and 
1964) borrowed the concepts from subjects such as biology, 
physics and sociology in explaining the ecological approach 
to public administration and comparative administrative 
systems, as well as the influence of the structural–functional 
approach. The main thesis in this and other prominent 
works that have adopted the ecological approach or even the 
theory of prismatic society is that every public administrative 
system, which includes the policy process, is a product of the 
peculiar social, cultural, historical, economic, geographical 
and political milieu within which it operates.
Many studies, especially on democracy’s third wave (see 
Diamond et al. 1997; Huntington 1991), have documented 
evidences that increased development planning strategies in 
areas such as trade and financial policy reforms, health and 
education, power and energy, industrial policies and other 
development aspirations often constitute the hallmark of 
democratisation. Of course, this can be attributed to the 
liberalisation of the political climate, as well as the increase in 
the legitimate demand for attention by individuals and 
constituent groups. Simmons (1971), Nzimiro (1971), Sanda 
(1980) Diejomaoh (1982, 1988), Almeida and Bascolo 
(2006), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) (2007), Ajayi and Osafo-Kwaako 
(2007) and Morandi (2009) have also provided documented 
evidences. Nigeria, since the 1999 return of civil rule, can also 
be classified in this group, and this is supported by responses 
in the series of interviews to mark the 60th anniversary of 
Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research (NISER), 
in 2010. The document (see NISEREEL 2010) is selected here 
as part of the special reports for analysis.
Despite this increase, most of the aforementioned works 
raised issues around and about the not-so-cordial relationship 
between research outputs and policy formulation, especially 
in Nigeria and many parts of the less developed world. There 
have been growing disappointment and dissatisfaction with 
the content and quality of curriculum, research orientation 
and relevance, both in universities and designated research 
institutes. According to Olomola (2005), the research and 
policy community in Nigeria work at cross-purposes, with 
every possibility of a worsening condition, except if addressed 
on time and purposively. Olomola (in Ajakaiye & Falokun 
2010:875) links Nigeria’s problem of ‘policy inconsistencies, 
confusion and instability’, which are the bane of development 
in the country, to this ‘working at cross-purposes between the 
research and policy communities’.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, in its concept paper on the realisation of the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which transformed 
in 2015 to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), also 
noted the effects of the lack of a strong commitment to a 
more dynamic and better integrated research policy nexus 
on the normative significance such a relationship should 
generate. This argument, for Edwards (2005), is more about 
the complexities that fill the policy environments. Again, but 
specifically, even with policy-relevant research, the results 
may not have clear policy implications or be conveyed in a 
way that highlights policy relevance. Apart from this, 
some policy-relevant researches are ‘driven by a combination 
of academic logic’, while others focus on particular 
challenges because their policy issues are ‘crosscutting 
and involve multiple sectors’ such as health, environment, 
transportation and education (Morandi 2009 in Ajakaiye & 
Falokun 2010:875).
Ajakaiye and Roberts (1995:1–22) provide evidence of the 
potentials in the research–policy relationship in a review of 
prominent journals in the social sciences. The reviewed 
journals are classified into four broad groups, namely, 
philosophy of social science; methodological issues; other 
basic researches and action or policy researches (see Ajakaiye 
& Falokun 2010:878). The list of prominent journals cited in 
the review consists of Economic and Financial Review , 
published four times in a year by Central Bank of Nigeria 
(CBN); African Journal of Economic Policy (AJEP), by 
Department of Economics, University of Ibadan; Nigerian 
Journal of Economic and Social Studies (NJESS), by the Nigerian 
Economic Society (NES); Quarterly Journal of Administration 
(QJA), by the Institute of Administration, Obafemi Awolowo 
University; Annals of the Social Science Academy of Nigeria 
(ASSAN), by the Social Science Academy of Nigeria and 
Research for Development, by NISER.
There are, of course, many other prominent journals in 
departments and faculties of diverse backgrounds from 
across Nigeria’s universities, as well as other tertiary 
institutions, agencies and specialised research institutes. 
Similarly, there are seminars, workshops, conferences and 
even training programmes in which papers and research 
findings are presented for discussion and further analyses 
(e.g. monthly policy paper presentation at NISER, and 
periodic departmental seminar presentations at University 
of Ibadan (UI). The author has been external reviewer at 
NISER’s presentation, while he coordinates the latter for 
UI’s Department of Political Science). These attempts to 
systematise knowledge production for the improvement of 
the living conditions of people have also involved civil 
society organisations (CSOs) and, sometimes, they promote 
non-technocratic forms of expertise. Health- and education-
related issues have always benefited from the activities of 
volunteers and CSOs, while the 20-year period of Nigeria’s
<<<PAGE=4>>>
Page 4 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
Fourth Republic, since 1999, has also provided evidence 
of the capacity of CSOs in election and governance-related 
issues.
Theoretically, roles have been played in Nigeria’s public 
policy processes, but they have not caused the realisation of 
sustainable development aspirations and goals. For this 
article, the implied high rate of development policy attrition 
and failure is essentially a function of the policy environment 
in the country. Public policy is, of course, largely affected by 
the nature of society. As postulated by students and scholars 
of political culture, politics or policy ‘is grounded in the 
nature of the society in which it takes place’ (Osaghae 
2002:16). The article returns to the adaptability of this 
framework of analysis in the next section where specific 
illustrations are drawn for the case of Nigeria.
Nigeria’s development plans 
in historical perspectives
Nigeria has, since its attainment of flag independence in 
1960, made attempts to transform its sociopolitical and 
economic life with the introduction of development strategies 
and policies. According to Usman (2010:843), the country 
adopted as early as 1945 development planning as ‘a primary 
instrument for achieving economic growth and social 
progress’. Subsequently, the country had four National 
Development Plans, namely, 1962–1968; 1970–1974; 1975–
1980 and 1981–1985, excluding the regional development 
programmes of the colonial period of 1945–1960. For 
Usman (2010:844), each of them consisted of ‘deliberate and 
conscious efforts’ to raise the planning horizon and, through 
institutional transformation, ‘broaden consultation and 
improve plan preparation and implementation’. Specifically, 
the first plan, upon which subsequent ones rested, was, 
according to Ajakaiye and Falokun (2010:871), aimed at 
‘jumpstarting the development of the nation through private 
sector initiatives’. The plan was structured to make the 
private sector the engine of economic growth and, therefore, 
public policies were designed to encourage the development 
of a broad-based and progressive private sector (see Ajakaiye 
1990; Ayo 1988; Ayodele & Falokun 2003).
The serious economic distortions in the country’s Second 
Republic (1979–1983), which partly accounted for its 
collapse and which the succeeding military regime could 
hardly resolve, led to the abandonment of a planned economy 
and control policies. In 1986, a Structural Adjustment 
Programme (SAP) was adopted. Essentially, a market-
oriented arrangement, it focused on wide-ranging reforms in 
the economy, especially in the areas of trade, exchange, social 
and financial systems. However, the broad objectives of SAP 
and other complementary policies, except for the methods of 
realisation, were not completely different from those of 
the regulation era of 1960–1985. For example, the objectives 
spanned production and consumption diversification, 
dampening inflation pressures, stimulation of the external 
sector performance, increasing financial deepening through 
interest and exchange rate stabilisation, stimulating output 
and employment growth, infrastructural improvement, and 
poverty alleviation (see Olukoshi 1993).
Nigeria’s sociopolitical and economic decline from the mid-
1980s to the late 1990s did not go unnoticed. It attracted the 
attention of writers and scholars as to what the causal factors 
were and in terms of policy recommendations on the way 
out. Studies by Lewis (1996) and Joseph (1996) located the 
decline within the military regimes of the two decades, while 
Osaghae (2002:311) identified ‘the abortion of Babangida’s 
bogus transition programme and the execution of the Ogoni 
activists’, under the Abacha regime, as the catalysts. However, 
locating the origin of the conversion and exploitation of state 
offices into instruments of private accumulation both for self 
and for constituent and kin groups (prebendal politics), a 
phenomenon, widely believed to be a root cause of Nigeria’s 
sociopolitical and economic problems, obviously requires 
tracing back to the country’s immediate post-colonial era 
(see Joseph 1996).
In view of this level of decline, it did not come as a surprise 
that the reintroduction of civil rule in 1999 was accompanied 
with a lot of expectations for a new beginning in Nigeria. The 
new administration quickly adopted the National Economic 
Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS I and II). 
National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy, 
according to the government, was aimed at correcting the 
social, political and economic decay in the country. It was 
envisaged to consolidate the achievements of the first 4 years 
(1999–2003) of the civilian government, by reinforcing 
the expected solid foundation for sustainable poverty 
reduction, employment generation, wealth creation and 
value reorientation (National Policy Commission 2004). 
With its distinctive feature of a vast array of programmes 
and areas covered, NEEDS was structured into two parts. 
National Economic Empowerment and Development 
Strategy I was planned for 2004–2007, while NEEDS II was 
expected to run from 2007 to 2011.
This plan changed as soon as the tenure of the initiator 
ended in 2007. Notwithstanding the commonality of 
political party affiliation, the administration which 
commenced in May 2007 jettisoned NEEDS, and introduced 
the 7-point agenda and Nigeria 20:2020 programmes. The 
programmes continued, but the then President Umar 
Yar’Adua died in 2010, before the expiration of his first 
term, leaving his deputy to take over as president. Again, 
party commonality and joint presidency notwithstanding, 
President Goodluck Jonathan, who was also re-elected in 
2011, discontinued the programmes he inherited and 
introduced the Transformation Agenda , which operated till 
2015 when another administration came on board. For 
more than 3 years after its inauguration in May 2015, the 
current administration has operated the Economic Recovery 
and Growth Plan (ERGP). A distinctive feature in all of this 
is the usual discontinuity of policies and plans by successive 
administrations.
<<<PAGE=5>>>
Page 5 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
The relatively high number of policy research and specialised 
training institutions established across Nigeria – more 
than 80 as of 2018 (see Ajakaiye & Falokun 2010:888–892; 
Department for International Development 2007; National 
Planning Commission 2018) – gives an impression that the 
importance of the research–policy nexus is recognised. In 
addition, especially under successive military regimes, there 
were executive directives that led to the setting up of ad hoc 
committees, special panels and commissions on various 
aspects of important sociopolitical and economic issues. Yet, 
Nigeria’s level of development, using indicators by United 
Nations Human Development Index (HDI), Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation Index of Africa Governance (IIAG) and World 
Bank annual reports, among others, is at variance with 
expectations.
A compendium of interviews granted, in 2010, by past 
Directors General of NISER, in commemoration of the 
institute’s 60th anniversary celebrations (see NISEREEL 
2010) provides some tips on issues often raised in connection 
to policy attrition and failure in Nigeria. Those interviewed 
are Profs H.M.A Onitiri (the pioneer Director), V .P . Diejomaoh, 
A.O. Phillips, D.O. Ajakaiye and S.O. Akande (the then DG). 
The commonest point of convergence in their responses is 
that policies in the country are hardly research based, while 
many research outputs are merely ‘hit and run’ as they lack 
strong evidence of rigour. Such outcomes would complicate 
the confusion and uncertainties that often typify policy 
conception in the country.
Similarly, several leading studies, including Akinwowo 
(1971), Ake (1979), Ajakaiye and Roberts (1995, 1997) and 
Ajakaiye and Falokun (2010), posit that social scientists, in 
particular, have been confronted by the problem of relevance 
of their research outputs to public policy. For many of 
such researchers who seem unconcerned with the policy 
implications of their work, focus is more on their ‘own 
interests, and basic understanding of issues’. For them, and 
in the words of Nzuki et al. (2013:2), research has become ‘an 
industry in itself’, working ‘independently in some cases’.
The point made earlier can, in a way, imply lack of confidence 
in local research outputs or, using a buzzword, lack of 
political will on the part of policy-makers and authorities to 
develop a policy agenda which recognises local contents for 
local problems. Hirschman (in Sambo 1999:305) puts it aptly 
as the ‘introduction of policy solutions from elsewhere’, 
while Ake (1981:32–33) placed this problem in the context 
of post-colonial societies that are still largely economically 
dependent on their colonial masters, the fact of political 
independence notwithstanding.
In the same token, a report by the Department for International 
Development (DFID) in 2007 emphasised the lack of political 
will and on the other hand, limited political value of research 
in the policy process. From a broader perspective, this 
problem, according to Myrdal (1990), may not be totally 
unconnected to the problems of ‘soft states’. Such states are 
known for features of personal rule, including acute social 
indiscipline, corruption, arbitrary enforcement of the law 
and general abuse of power and privileges. Thus, it is no 
surprise that policy inputs are also selected arbitrarily. Also, 
this raises the issue of research institutes that are seen as 
mouthpieces of the government of the day. In other words, 
they are not supposed to be critical of government policies. 
This limits the capacities and resources of these institutions 
to conduct proper researches.
The point being made here distinctively featured in the 2010 
compendium of interviews by past DGs of NISER. It also 
resonated in this author’s personal interaction with a research 
professor in NISER, on 05 January 2018. This challenge is, 
without prejudice to regime types, more prevalent under 
military dispensations for obvious reasons that are connected 
to personal rule. For example, it was common under 
successive military regimes in the country to concentrate on 
the research units of Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
(MDAs). Thus, many leading research institutes were 
abandoned and denied required funding. Meanwhile, as 
reported in studies by Adamolekun (1983), Ayo (1988) and 
Usman (2010), many of the researches by the MDAs suffered 
a lack of technical skills because they were mostly conducted 
by generalist administrators. Examples of such research 
outputs include SAP that the Babangida regime promoted, 
the Vision 2010 by the Abacha military regime of 1993–1998 
and several feasibility studies on the downstream oil and gas 
industries, refineries, cement, fertiliser, iron, steel and paper 
production.
The factors of education, enlightenment, exposure and 
technology cannot also be underestimated in the mutually 
reinforcing relationship of policy inconsistency and 
sociopolitical and economic underdevelopment in Nigeria. The 
country has a poor culture in this regard as many communities 
hardly understand why the most informed should represent 
them in the critical areas of policy formulation. Twenty years 
after the commencement of its Fourth Republic, which coincide 
with two decades into the 21st century, Nigeria’s encounter 
with the development conundrum can hardly be separated 
from this lack of knowledge-driven political representation, 
policy formulation and governance, in general.
Funding is another critical factor that featured in the 
2010 NISER 60th  anniversary interview with past DGs and 
the institution’s DG at that time. It also resonated in this 
author’s conversation with a prominent research professor 
in the institute on 05 January 2018. Inadequate funding 
for any human development programme is inimical, but 
portends greater danger when it involves education. 
This largely accounts for the general demotivation and 
demoralisation for researchers in many parts of Nigeria. 
For example, the whole of the country’s education sector 
has never had beyond 10 % annual budgetary allocation in 
the 20-year-old Fourth Republic (Yagboyaju 2016:99–131). 
This is a far cry from the 26 % benchmark recommended
<<<PAGE=6>>>
Page 6 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
by UNESCO. The practice in Nigeria is, according  to 
Olukotun (2014:64), also at variance with the prevailing 
condition among its peers ‘in the world’s emerging centres 
of industrial and economic prominence such as Malaysia, 
Singapore and South Korea’, and even in African countries 
such as Kenya, South Africa and Rwanda where for almost 
a decade since 2010 ‘about a quarter of annual budgets is 
consistently allocated to education’.
Even for NISER that is classified as Nigeria’s think tank in 
terms of policy research, as well as other prominent 
research institutes that are under direct supervision of the 
National Planning Commission, inadequate funding is 
also a problem. In some of these cases, funding is accessed 
from non-governmental organisations, especially from 
outside the country, but this is incommensurable with the 
amount of research the country requires. It is even more 
worrisome, according to Kew (2004:101), because most of 
the external funding comes from the same sources such as 
‘Ford Foundation, British Council, USIS and Swedish 
NGO Foundation’. This could promote a kind of unhealthy 
rivalry rather than competition among the major actors as 
they seek access to such research funds. Nonetheless, 
aspects in NISER’s compendium (see NISEREEL 2010) 
emphasised the criticality of the cooperation with foreign 
agencies, such as the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), United Nations (UN) and United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), because these 
agencies require reputable researchers who can respond to 
their research needs in connection with their activities in 
Nigeria.
In all, 58 years after Nigeria’s flag independence in 1960, a 
critical issue that summarises the challenge of policy attrition 
and failure in the country, and which calls to question the 
relationship between research and policy processes in the 
country, has been raised by Akande and Roberts (2010:1–29). 
Nigeria, once a major exporter of agricultural commodities 
and great promise in other sectors, is today a net importer of 
practically everything.
Lessons in best practices from outside Nigeria
Singapore, Malaysia, China and Kenya are selected for 
lessons in best practices for various reasons. Firstly, 
Singapore and Malaysia were for long classified as peers of 
Nigeria after the flag independence of these countries 
around and about the same time in the 1960s. Secondly, and 
in the case of China, population that is sometimes pushed 
as a limiting factor for Nigeria’s development aspirations 
has obviously not hindered development in the world’s 
most populated country. Thirdly, Kenya is not only an 
African country like Nigeria, but attained flag independence 
at about the same time as Nigeria. Both countries also share 
a lot of similarities in terms of the coming together of diverse 
ethnic nationalities, abuse of official positions and such 
corruptive tendencies, whereas Kenya is not as endowed as 
Nigeria in terms of natural resources. Fourthly , the selected 
countries have distinguished themselves in their various 
regions for consistency.
In Singapore, development planning efforts backed by 
evidence-based research are widely acknowledged as quite 
impactful when compared to those of other ASEAN countries. 
According to Usman (2010:843–870), although the country 
has relied more on the market mechanism, Singapore has 
formulated several development plans from ‘the first plan 
of 1960–1965, to the seventh development plan, and the 
1991–2000 Strategic Economic Plan’. In addition to the 
broad overview in the Seventh Plan, there are a number of 
complementary and supplementary plans, including the 
national technology plans, the manpower plan, social plans 
in the areas of health, education and housing. By the mid-
1990s, Singapore became one of the world’s most prosperous 
economies, with the highest per capita gross domestic 
product (GDP) in Asia outside Japan. The country has 
remained consistent and, according to the studies by Obadan 
(2003) and Usman (2010), it also has long-term economic 
and social development plans providing mechanisms for 
opportunities to clear bottlenecks or to troubleshoot potential 
problems.
Malaysia is a multiracial society probably more variegated 
than Nigeria. It inherited at independence a highly skewed 
income distribution, with high and widely spread poverty. 
This affected all ethnic groups, but, according to Dholakia 
and Dholakia (1994:57), the incidence of poverty was 
‘disproportionately high among the Bhumiputras’, and 
other rural areas. Malaysia’s New Economic Policy (NEP) 
was launched in 1971, and it showed evidences of rigorous 
research. It accorded the highest priority to poverty 
eradication and, in particular, reduction of racial imbalance 
in income, and enhancement of employment and ownership 
of assets. As planned, economic growth and the growing 
prosperity of the 1990s has not only been sustained, but has 
also helped in minimising political discontent across 
Malaysia. Evidences supporting Malaysia’s consistent 
economic growth are available in a report by World Bank 
Malaysia Economic Monitor launched in July 2018 and in 
which a 5.4% growth forecast was made for Malaysia in 2018 
(The World Bank 2018).
China is another example of evidence-based research 
outcomes. With a population of 1.4 billion as of 2016, China 
is the world’s most populous country, and the third largest 
globally in terms of land area. In the 1970s, China was, 
according to Usman (2010:859), ‘a poor, centrally-planned, 
overpopulated country, hostile to outsiders and opposed 
to radical reform’. Things changed and, as of 1995 after 
overcoming the effects of the self-inflicted economic 
disasters of the Great Leap Forward of 1958–1960 and the 
Cultural Revolution of 1966–1979, China, according to 
Cleaver (2007:47), had a GDP that was ‘almost five times 
greater than Russia’s and its income per capita 
reached 60%’. It is important to note the phenomenal rise 
because two decades before 1995, China’s economy was
<<<PAGE=7>>>
Page 7 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
‘half the size of Russia’s and its income per capita 
represented only 15 %’ (Usman 2010:859).
China’s GDP was $12.24 trillion as of 2017, with an annual 
growth rate forecast of 6.9 % in the same year (The World 
Bank 2018). It is important to note that China’s re-emergence 
as a global superpower, especially since the turn of the 21st 
century, cannot be separated from the country’s educational 
and research policies that have also witnessed fundamental 
transformation. These include the Rejuvenation Action Plan, 
2003–2007, curricular reform and system innovations, which 
Li (2017:133–141) has put in clear perspectives. These reforms 
are usually introduced in a pilot or experimental fashion, and 
usually in restricted localities where results can be observed 
and lessons learned. Also, ends are usually not confused with 
means in the Chinese model, and violations are strongly and 
openly reprimanded and punished if necessary. The UN’s 
2016 HDI and World Development Indicator of 2016 reported 
an unemployment rate of less than 4 % for China despite the 
country’s huge population.
Kenya is, as noted, part of the African continent like Nigeria 
and both have had a series of development plans just as they 
both adopted SAP at some points in time. The major points 
being made here centre on Kenya’s integrated approach to 
planning, with evidences of research backings, and the 
country’s policy consistency, in particular. For example, 
Kenya’s sixth development plan was formulated on the 
framework provided by the perspective plan for 1984–2000. 
This is outlined in Sessional Paper No. 1  of 1986 and the 
country’s Economic Management for Renewed Growth. The 
basic development philosophy of this plan was consistent 
with the one contained in Sessional Paper No. 10 of 1965 on 
African socialism and its application to planning in Kenya. 
According to Dholakia and Dholakia (1994:58–59), these 
objectives were social justice; human dignity; freedom from 
want, disease and exploitation; equal opportunities for all; 
and high and growing per capita. Kenya, like Nigeria, 
performs poorly in international rankings such as the UN 
HDI. For example, in the 2016 report, Kenya and Nigeria 
were placed in 145 and 152, respectively, out of the 188 
countries in the survey. However, Kenya without as much 
resource endowment as Nigeria, consistently improves its 
ranking.
It is necessary to return to the research questions set at the 
beginning of the article before concluding. The first and 
second questions are on the failure to embrace research-
based policies, despite the existence of research centres 
in Nigeria. These questions are necessary because of the 
developmental problem of frequent policy attrition and 
failure to achieve objectives. The third and fourth questions 
focus on the roles of education and knowledge production 
on the realisation of the developmental goals and reinventing 
of policy processes in Nigeria. This is important in view of 
the broad and deep relationship between education and 
transformation. The article’s recommendations are based on 
the questions raised earlier.
Conclusion
Deploying evidence-based research for socio-economic 
development policies in Nigeria is a compelling need. 
Evidences from around the developed and even emerging 
economies support this. For example, research is an aspect of 
the general body of knowledge acquired through education. 
Education and social transformation are interconnected 
as one constitutes the extent and level of realisation of the 
other. However, while the role of policy formulation and 
implementation is variously performed in Nigeria, several 
factors in the ecology of the country’s public administrative 
system hinder rigorous research inputs in the policy 
processes.
Recommendations
In view of the dangers that a long-term lack of evidence-
based research policy processes portend for Nigeria’s socio-
economic development, there is an urgent need to purposively 
pursue the following:
• Greater emphasis on clear policy research implication: 
Government research institutions, as well as tertiary 
training and learning centres, especially those classified 
as think tanks in Nigeria, must emphasise research results 
with clear policy implications for government actions or 
future actions. This will improve government capacity to 
recognise and absorb research outcomes.
• Adequate funding of researches and research institutions: 
Inadequate budgetary allocations and, worse still, 
budgetary releases without cash backing have for long 
crippled research efforts, and this must be effectively 
addressed for improved results and impact. In addition, 
donor-driven researches must be managed in accordance 
with best practices.
• Timeliness and priority of demand-driven research: If research 
findings are to influence policy, then they must do so at 
the appropriate time and, importantly, they must be 
driven by demand. The relevance of demand-driven 
research is in its capacity to remove the problems of lack of 
awareness among politicians and bureaucrats concerning 
the existence of policy-relevant research. In essence, rather 
than creating parallel research groups, universities, 
polytechnics and Nigeria’s think tanks should be challenged 
from time to time and required to make the necessary 
input regarding policy questions policy questions that 
confront the government. By doing so, quality time is 
being devoted to thinking ahead. In addition, research 
centres must collaborate with others in monitoring and 
evaluating policies for realising economic inclusion, 
social development, political participation, democracy 
and trust building for effective governance and decision-
making. Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) of 
South Africa is a relevant example that can be emulated.
• Addressing the disconnection between policy team and society: 
It must be ensured that both researchers and policy-
makers are vitally connected to the society for which the 
research findings and subsequent policies are intended.
<<<PAGE=8>>>
Page 8 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
Indeed, this is the basis for evidence-based research 
because a research outcome is as good as its applicability 
to the society. Prominent CSOs have a role to play in this 
culturally related goal.
• Improving techniques for communication and dissemination 
of research result: The adequacy of research infrastructure, 
including funding, will combine to improve the techniques 
for communicating and disseminating research results 
and, ultimately, improving the quality of policies.
• Above all, Nigeria is unlikely to have effective policies as 
a ‘soft state’. Therefore, the autonomy and functionality 
of the state must be restored by making its institutions 
independent and less personalised.
Acknowledgements
The author is appreciative of the enabling research 
environment provided by the University of Ibadan.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced him 
in writing this article.
References
Adamolekun, L., 1983, Public administration: A Nigerian and comparative perspective, 
Longman, Lagos.
Ajakaiye, D.O., 1990, Public enterprise policies in Nigeria: A macro-economic analysis, 
NISER, Ibadan.
Ajakaiye, D.O. & Roberts, F.O.N., 1995, ‘Social research in Nigeria: Which way 
forward?’, Annals of the Social Science Council of Nigeria 7, 1–22.
Ajakaiye, D.O. & Roberts, F.O.N., 1997, ‘Social research in Nigeria: The problem of 
policy relevance’, Journal of Humanities and Social Science 8(2), 249–268.
Ajakaiye, D.O. & Falokun, G.O., 2010, ‘Policy research Nexus: Its impact on 
socioeconomic development’, in S.O. Akande & A.J. Kumuyi (eds.), Nigeria at 
50-accomplishments, challenges and prospects, NISER, Ibadan.
Ajayi, K. & Osafo-Kwaako, P ., 2007, Research and trade policy formulation: The case of 
Nigeria’s adoption of the ECOWAS Common External Tariff, Latin American Trade 
Network, Hamburg.
Akande, S.O. & Roberts, F.O.N., 2010, ‘Nigeria: Profile of a giant in the sun’, in S.O. 
Akande & A.J. Kumuyi (eds.), Nigeria at 50 – Accomplishments, challenges and 
prospects, NISER, Ibadan.
Ake, C., 1979, ‘Social science, dependence and underdevelopment’, presented at the 
National Workshop on the Impact of the Social Sciences on Policy in Nigeria,  
NISER, Ibadan, June 04, 1979, pp 1‒20.
Ake, C., 1981, ‘The political context of indigenization’, in A. Adedeji (ed.), 
Indigenization of African economies , pp. 50‒65, Hutchinson & Co. Publishers 
Ltd., London.
Akinwowo, A.A., 1971, ‘Linkages between social science research and decision makers 
in Nigeria’, The Quarterly Journal of Administration 2, 217–227.
Almeida, C. & Bascolo, E., 2006, ‘Use of research results in policy decision-making. 
Formulation and implementation: A review of the literature, Debate S7’, Cadernos 
de Saúde Pública 22, 57–533.
Anderson, J.E., 1975, Public policy making, Praeger, New York.
Ayo, E.J., 1988, Development planning in Nigeria, Ibadan University Press, Ibadan.
Ayodele, S.A. & Falokun, G.O., 2003, The Nigerian economy: Structure and pattern of 
development, JODAD Publishers, Ibadan.
Banton, M., 1965, Roles: An introduction to the study of social relations, Basic Books, 
New York.
Biddle, B.J., 1979, Role theory: Expectations, identities and behaviours , Academic 
Press, New York.
Cleaver, T., 2007, Understanding the world economy, Routledge, Abingdon, UK.
Department for International Development (DFID), 2007, Research strategy (2008–
2013) consultation, Africa Country Report for Nigeria, Department for International 
Development, Abuja.
Dholakia, B.H. & Dholakia, R.H., 1994, Economic and management planning: Case 
studies of some commonwealth countries , The Commonwealth Secretariat, 
London.
Diamond, L., Plattner, M.F., Chu, Y . & Tien, H. (eds.), 1997, Consolidating the third 
wave democracies, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Diejomaoh, V.P ., 1982, ‘Social science research priorities for national development’, 
Research for Development 2(1), 7–19.
Diejomaoh, V.P ., 1988, ‘Building and developing the Nigerian nation: The role of 
positive social science’, Annals of the Social Science Council of Nigeria 1, 5–13.
Dye, T., 1976, Policy analysis: What governments do, why do they do it and what 
difference it makes, University of Alabama Press, Birmingham, AL.
Dye, T., 1997, Understanding public policy, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Easton, D., 1965, A framework for political analysis , Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ.
Edwards, M., 2005, Social science research and public policy: Narrowing the divide , 
National Institute of Governance, University of Canberra, Canberra.
Eyestone, R., 1971, The threads of public policy: A study in policy leadership , Bobbs–
Merrill, Indianapolis, IN.
Friedrich, C.J., 1963, Man and his environment, McGraw Hill, New York.
Goodin, R.E., Rein, M. & Moran, M. (eds.), 2011, Overview of public policy: The public 
and its policies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Hirschman, A.O., 1963, Journeys toward progress: Studies of economic making policy 
in Latin America, Twentieth Century Fund, New York.
Holsti, O.R., 1989, ‘Models of international relations and foreign policy’, Diplomatic 
History 13(1), 15–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7709.1989.tb00042.x
Howlett, M. & Cashore, B., 2014, ‘Conceptualizing public policy’, in I. Engeli & 
C.R. Allison (eds.), Comparative policy studies , pp.200‒201. Palgrave Macmillan, 
London.
Huntington, S.P ., 1991, ‘Democracy’s third wave’, Journal of Democracy 2(2), 12–34. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.1991.0016
Joseph, R., 1996, ‘Nigeria: inside the dismal tunnel’, Current History 95(601).
Kew, F., 2004, ‘The third generation of civil society: The rise of non-governmental 
organizations in the 1990s’, in A. Agbaje, L. Diamond & E. Onwudiwe (eds.), 
Nigeria’s struggle for democracy and good governance , pp. 196‒200, Ibadan 
University Press, Ibadan.
Lasswell, H., 1951, ‘The policy orientation’, in D. Lerner & H. Lasswell (eds.), The policy 
sciences, pp.1‒5, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Lewis, P .M., 1996, ‘From prebendalism to predation: The political economy of decline 
in Nigeria’, Journal of Modern African Studies 34(1), 79‒103. https://doi.org/  
10.1017/S0022278X0005521X
Li, J., 2017, ‘New trends of educational policies in China: Transcending localization 
and globalization’, Chinese Education & Society 50(3), 133–141. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/10611932.2017.1330992
Mead, G.H., 1934, Mind, self and society, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Meier, G.M., 1991, Politics and policymaking in developing countries: Perspectives on 
the new political economy, International Center for Economic Growth Press, San 
Francisco, CA.
Morandi, L., 2009, Essential Nexus: How to use research to inform and evaluate public 
policy, National Conference of State Legislatures, Denver, CO.
Myrdal, G., 1990, The challenge of world poverty, Vintage, New York.
National Planning Commission (NPC), 2018, List of research institutes in Nigeria , 
viewed n.d., from https://sites.google.com/site/gidiviews/new-page
National Policy Commission (NPC), 2004, National Economic Empowerment and 
Development Strategies (NEEDS), NPC, Abuja.
Nzimiro, I., 1977, The crisis in the social sciences: The Nigerian situation , Third World 
Forum Occasional Paper,  No. 2, Third World Forum Coordinating Secretariat, 
Mexico.
Nzuki, M., Hassan, A. & Mbilinyi, A., 2013, Bridging the research policy gap: The 
impact of research on policy process and practice , Tanzania Knowledge Network 
(TAKNET) Policy Brief Series, No. 019-2013, pp. 1–4, Tanzania Knowledge Network 
(TAKNET), Dar es Salaam. 
Obadan, M.I., 2003, National development planning and budgeting in Nigeria: Some 
pertinent issues, Broadway Press Ltd., Lagos.
Olomola, A.S., 2005, An analysis of the research–Policy Nexus in Nigeria, paper for the 
International Conference on African Economic Research Institutions and Policy 
Development: Opportunities and Challenges, Dakar, January 28–29.
Olukoshi, A.O. (ed.), 1993, The politics of structural adjustment in Nigeria , James 
Currey, London.
Olukotun, A., 2014, ‘For a change, a burst of excellence’, The Punch (Lagos, Nigeria), 
June 20, p. 64.
Osaghae, E.E., 2002, Nigeria since Independence: Crippled giant , John Archers, 
Ibadan.
Riggs, F.W., 1961, The ecology of public administration , Asia Publishing House, 
India.
Riggs, F.W., 1962, ‘Trends in the comparative study of public administration’, 
International Review of Administrative Sciences 28(1), 9–15. https://doi.org/  
10.1177/002085236202800102
Riggs, F.W., 1964, Administration in developing countries: The theory of prismatic 
society, P . Houghton Mifflin & Co., Boston, MA. 
Sambo, A., 1999, ‘What is public policy?’, in R. Anifowose & F. Enemuo (eds.), Elements 
of politics, pp.305‒309, Sam Iroanusi Publishers, Lagos.
<<<PAGE=9>>>
Page 9 of 9 Original Research
http://www.apsdpr.org Open Access
Sanda, A.O., 1980, ‘Social science and policy: The Nigerian experience’, Africa 
Development 4, 49–59.
Sekhri, S., 2009, ‘The role approach as a theoretical framework for the analysis of 
foreign policy in third world countries’, African Journal of Political Science and 
International Relations 3(10), 423–432.
Simmons, R.J., 1971, ‘Making social science relevant to development change problems: 
The communication of research findings’, Quarterly Journal of Administration 2, 
207–216.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2007, 
Social development: From research to policy action, Draft Concept Paper, Revision 
2, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris.
World Bank, 2018, World development indicators, World Bank, Washington, DC.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2016, Human development report, 
viewed 24 December 2017, from http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_
human_development_report.pdf
Usman, S., 2010, ‘Planning and national development’, in S.O. Akande & A.J. Kumuyi 
(eds.), Nigeria at 50 – Accomplishments, challenges and prospects , pp. 710‒724, 
NISER Research Seminar Series (NISER), Ibadan. 
Yagboyaju, D.A., 2016, ‘Human capital and social sector development’, in D.A. 
Yagboyaju (ed.), Reflections on politics, governance and the economy in 
contemporary Nigeria, pp. 74‒85, Ibadan University Press, Ibadan.